Outlining & Structure
The Writer’s Missing Manual
IRE 2021
Matt Apuzzo

How I Used to Write (Or, How Not to Write)
I’d come back from a meeting, or fresh from the cop shop, or finally finished with my piece of
enterprise. I’d sit down at the computer, sip my coffee and say, “Let’s do this!” I had my perfect
anecdotal lead, or maybe I knew I wanted to gut-punch a hard news top. I’d get my big sexy
reveal way up top. Killer quote. Get in that to-be-sure graf and a quote from the other side.
And then … Oh, right. I’ve got this document and that needs to go — hmm — here, I guess.
And looking through my notes, I see I haven’t introduced this guy yet. So let’s do that. Here?
Actually… That jams up my transition a bit but no worries. I can tack it on at the end of this
sentence here and — oh no. I need to add this anecdote from a few years ago. And, holy hell,
how am I at 1,000 words already?
More Coffee. How am I going to end this story? Hmm. I’ll just tack my second-best quote to the
end! What did I forget? A lot. Hmm. I can stick that stuff in the story …. here, and and here and
here. Perfect! It all holds together!
I had just built, painted and furnished a house all in one step, with no blueprint. And when
your editor gets it, she can’t touch anything. “Don’t move the sofa! It holds up that wall!” Edits
become draining, emotional affairs. Your stories run long. You grouse to your colleagues that
your editor “is slow with edits” or “makes stories worse.” You conclude that you are cursed with a
crappy editor.
The problem is not your editor. The call is coming from inside the house.

Storytelling Has Rules
Good stories share certain characteristics. They have Beginnings, which hook the readers,
signal what the story is about, and explain why they should read. (Too often we think “I read
1,000 pages of court records and did 20 interviews!” explains why people should read. It does
not).
Stories are best understood when told chronologically. If you’re messing with time, do it with
care. When in doubt, lean on chronology.
Stories are about people, and conflict. The higher the stakes the better.
And finally, good endings often speak to the beginning, either in harmony or dissonance.

The Bullet Outline
If you are the kind of writer who writes 200 words, reworks, writes more, reworks, gets stuck,
goes for coffee, checks email, revises, gets sucked back into notes…. This process could be for
you.
The Bullet Outline is a down-and-dirty way to map out a story. Mine usually include about a
half-dozen bullets and track the major news or emotional twists of the story. In a spot story, it
might look like this:
----

Intro: Fatal shooting. Mistaken identity.
Stakes: Leaves behind wife/daughter. Brings city shootings to XX. Terrorizes crime-plagued
neighborhood. Mayor has failed to make good on tough-on-crime promise.
Details: Police report facts, witness quote
Accountability: Other shootings in neighborhood. Where’s the mayor?
Ending: Family or cops?
---What I’m doing at this stage is writing notes to myself about what’s important. I’m not looking at
my notes. I’m focusing on the big picture. The stakes bullet is important. It’s going to become
your nut graf. It may even inform or become your lead. This matters!
The rest of the story flows from and revolves around this graf(s). See how the stakes in this
outline serve as a roadmap for the other things I’m going to cover in the story? You have to tell
yourself why you’re writing the story before you can tell others why they should read it.
If your story is going to track a character arc, bullets can mark key moments in the emotional
journey. Example: For this story about how the world missed the symptomless spread of
Covid-19, the Bullets looked like this.
----

Intro: Introduce Roche and her discovery. HIGH STAKES. Lay out our findings.
Race to Warn the World: Ends with Publishing in NEJM. Ends on a high note! Yay science!
Pushback from Rivals: Uh oh. Introduce rival team here. Follow cascade of criticism. Ends on
down note. Roche is discredited and distraught.
Bureaucracy: WHO refuses to acknowledge the mounting evidence. Governments resist travel
bans, mask wearing. But evidence is growing.
The Dam Breaks. Mounting scientific evidence forces acknowledgment of asymptomatic
transmission. Roche was right but look at the cost? Ends on down note. (but bittersweet for her?)
---That’s it! It was a 3,000-word story, but the bullets are short and sweet. From here, I move to:

Chunking
On anything other than a very short daily story, once I have my bullet outline, I get to “chunking.”
I put the bullets in a document, and I start to write over the top of them. But I’m not writing a
story. I’m writing about what I’m going to write about. It can be choppy, incomplete. If you feel
inspired to write a graf, fine. Let it out. But no writing/revising. We’re just doing blocks here.
For the story above, my first chunked-out top looked like this:
----

MUNICH -- Start in the hospital? Camilla swabs a 33yo businessman. A colleague had been
infected but it’s probably not coronavirus because asymptomatic people don’t transmit. Jan 27.
Set up the infection scene, the business meeting? Four people in a room, one of them from China.
What’s important here: He should not have been infected!
Hours later, call; Coronavirus confirmed. WTF?. Camilla is epidemiologist, not virologist. But
she’s pretty sure this means cronavirus can spread without symptoms.
[Nut graf here]. That seemingly healthy people can spread ncovid-19, is now widely accepted.
Significant. But slowness to understand it or accept it has worsened the pandemic: nurses and
doctors who didn’t know they were sick contributed to spreads in hospitals. Seemingly health
visitors and nurses spread covid in nursing homes. It’s why so many health officials now say we
should wear masks.
The reveal. Scientists were slow to accept that reality, even in the face of evidence. Global health
leaders downplayed risk, overly confident in assumptions. Pushed misleading/confusing info. The
denialism was fueled by scientific bias, academic rivalry and a reluctance to accept draconian
measures would be needed.
---This sorta looks like the top of a story. But it’s not! There’s no writing stress. It’s a mix of ideas,
notes to myself about what I intend to say, etc. What’s most important is intentionality. What
facts need to come through? What emotions? I’m following my outline, but I’m not lost in crafting
sentences. I’m laying bread crumbs for myself.
When you need to drop in some stats, just write: “STATS HERE.” Don’t go digging into your
notes for stats. That’s just going to slow you down. Keep chunking!
Once the story is all chunked out, read it. Does it make sense? Does it have the right shape?
Does it all build off your “why” graf? Or do you lose the plot? It’s much, much easier to slash and
burn at this stage. You’re not in love with your words. You’re not emotionally invested. CUT!

Now, The Scary Part
On any piece of enterprise, consider sharing your chunk draft with your editor. Why? She can’t
line edit it anyways, so there’s no risk of heartache. Better that she tells you now to get to the
point quicker or move stuff around. It’s WAY easier to fix that stuff now.
“But my editor is too busy! He doesn’t want to see my outline.” That might be true. But consider
the time it takes to edit a weekend piece of enterprise cold. Wouldn’t he prefer to see the
blueprints? Wouldn’t you like an easier edit?

Connect the Dots
Writing from scratch is hard. But writing off a chunked-out, well-organized outline is painting by
numbers. You know what you need to say and where. You can focus on the writing part, the
sentences and paragraphs. Write from point A to B to C to Done.

Revising
When you’re done writing, consult those early outlines. Have you gone astray? Does your story
follow the logical or emotional arc you charted? Perhaps you have broken free from the
gravitational pull of the nut graf and you are now drifting in space?
Now is the time to cut and reshape and refocus.

Stray Thoughts
It sounds like a lot of work, but in my experience, solid outlining saves time and makes
everything smoother on the back end.
This is just what works for me. Find what works for you. Ditch the rest.
None of this guarantees you won’t make structural changes in the editing process. But making
those changes to a well-organized draft is so much easier, and such changes rarely lead to
cascades of problems.
This process works well in team writing. Everyone can suggest structural changes early without
drama. Dividing up sections of the story to write separately is much easier when everyone
follows a detailed chunked-out outline.

