Tips for mining your beat for the bigger stories
#IRE21
General tips:
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

Have lots of “irons in the fire.” Have numerous public records requests out at once,
including some specific or complex enough that it will take some time to process. As you
finish one investigation, you will already have a head start on your next.
Keep a record of your dates (in a spreadsheet, in a calendar, etc! Write in your calendar
when you did your request, when the 10 days are due and the timeframe you have to
appeal.
Be able to crunch a spreadsheet and, better yet, scrape a database. Lots of public facing
databases have interesting story angles waiting to be reported on. Know how to run a
PivotTable and identify trends and outliers -- especially on the fly for when breaking news
happens). Compare your jurisdiction to others. Are they ahead or falling behind?
Keep an idea file. It doesn’t need to be exact story ideas, but it could even be things like
“Joe Smith told me that…..” or “everybody keeps saying x is happening...wonder if it’s
true?”
End every interview with questions like “what else is going on?” or “what other things do
you think I should be looking into?” or any similar questions that could prompt that
person to open up about something you hadn’t planned to talk about
If you don’t have the bandwidth for a “project,” publish your findings on a rolling basis.
This also typically brings tips rolling in, too, that might benefit your later stories.
Look back in time at what a government elected or appointed body (such as a city
council) has done. How many times have they repeated the same subject? How often
are the members absent? How much of what they promise comes to reality?
Put reminders on your calendar for dates when officials say something is going to be
done (like release of data or a report) or when there are big deadlines (such as a date
when applications are due for a government program)

Tips for making the most of your human sources:
● Be kind and sometimes personal with them, even when this sounds obvious, you would
not regret it.
● Always ask about any subject before you start recording, try not to touch the subject until
it is needed. Sometimes good statements are lost in the first small talk that is not being
recorded.
● You have to give in order to get. Keep sources apprised of the progress of the story.
This can pay off in the future. Creating a dialogue and feedback loop, as opposed to
holding the information close to the chest, builds trust and ensures you aren’t viewing
the information through a lens too broad or too narrow.
Using FOIA/public records laws in unique ways:
● Request officials’ emails and/or text messages
● Request other people’s FOIA request letters (what have they been asking for?)
● Request settlements and court claims from govt agency
● Follow the money -- budgets, spending records, revenue records, etc.
● If you have problems ASK! There is an organization almost in every state that helps you
with the appeals of a FOIA request.

●
●

Background every source by requesting police reports involving them from local law
enforcement agencies where they’ve lived and disciplinary records, if available.
Request database layouts, then ask for a cut of the data based on the fields provided.

Finding bigger stories off breaking news:
● Get to know what data is available in your area ahead of time -- local, state, federal
level? -- on big things that tend to happen, such as car accidents, fires, workplace
accidents, plane crashes, floods, hurricanes, tornadoes. Know where to get it or request
it regularly so that you have it on hand, and if possible, spend some time getting to know
the data without the pressure of a deadline.
● Consider tracking events yourself if there isn’t data readily available. At the Star Tribune,
we started tracking people killed in encounters with police back in 2016. It has been
extremely valuable the last couple of years. When we first built it, we researched
incidents back to 2000.
● Not only history repeats itself but some breaking news will be a constant too… Try to
look for that DATA
Using data on your beat:
● Find the data that is routinely collected for topics related to your beat and/or the
agency(s) you cover. School graduation rates? Workplace safety violations? Restaurant
inspections? Campaign finance contributions? There are way too many to include here.
● Another approach is to look at the questions you want to answer and think about
whether there might be data available to answer. For example: How does the Twin Cities
theater scene compare to other big metros? Are Millenials buying houses in the exurbs?
Should the Vikings defense be ranked #1 again next season? How many non-profits are
spending more on administrative expenses than on the cause they are supporting?
● If you’re new to working with data, start small. Either a small topic or a small dataset or
only a couple years’ worth of data, etc.
● Look carefully at government and non-profit reports for where they got the data from.
Check out the methodology section.
● When interviewing human sources and they cite some number(s), ask them for details
on where they got that. Ask for the data that was used to compile that number.
Tips for managing your time:
● Make yourself to-do lists. Keep them as detailed as possible. Instead of something
vague like “call sources”, write down more detailed items like “call John Smith” or “find
that report from 2019 about x” or “file public records request for x”. Smaller tasks are
ones you are more likely to jump on when you have a few free minutes.
● Try to carve out the first 30-60 minutes of your day to work on your enterprise stories,
before you get sucked into the daily grind. Even 15 minutes could be helpful.
● Keep a diary of what you’re doing so that you can quickly refresh your memory about
where you left off the last time you worked on it.
● Use a transcription service for audio recordings
● Use a text macro software for email blast
● Use a spreadsheet to keep track of all your contacts
● And another to keep track of FOIA requests

Tips for interns:
● Rather than try to uncover a new problem in an unfamiliar area in a short period of time,
report on the people trying to fix existing problems, and whether those solutions are
working. Search news clips, press releases for announcements of new government
programs, grants, and other initiatives from the past couple years, and follow up on the
progress of them. These efforts/programs are often rolled out with fanfare and lofty
expectations, but have not been scrutinized after the initial headlines. Are they working?
Tips for sports reporters:
● Sports are fun, but the business of sports is often ugly and more important. College
sports is ripe with abuse, corruption and debt. Cover the enterprise, not just the games.
Follow the money - request people’s contracts, financial disclosures, building contracts,
agreements with academic side of campus, local law enforcement, text messages, etc.
Talk to the people who conduct oversight - faculty, students, legislators. Huge profits =
huge incentive for bad actors to do bad deeds.
● Background check every source. As you’re covering an interesting story or featuring an
interesting personality, put in public records requests for police reports filed against the
person or people involved, search their names in court databases, and check for past
disciplinary records. Most people will come back clean, but you may be surprised about
what you can uncover just by being the one who took the time to look.

Tips for consumer reporters:
● Work ahead, use reminders for deadlines of applications like FEMA, SBA loans and
unemployment
● Every single federal office has a stats link on their web pages, look for data there!
● Explaining the law is always a story
● Explaining the flaws in the law is always a story too

MaryJo Webster
Star Tribune
maryjo.webster@startribune.com
Twitter: @MaryJoWebster
Ana Cecilia Méndez
Telemundo 40
ana.mendez@telemundo.com

Twitter: @aceciliamendez
Instagram: @anaceciliamendeztv
Kenny Jacoby
USA TODAY
kjacoby@gannett.com
Twitter: @kennyjacoby

