Coping with Trauma Tipsheet
IRE 2021
Dr. Elana Newman, Research Director, Dart Center for Journalism & Trauma and
McFarlin Professor of Psychology, The University of Tulsa
Naseem Miller, The Journalist’s Resource

Self-care
● Self-Care Tips for News Media (Dart Center): “These tips are offered as
suggestions only, to assist in fostering healthier newsrooms and better
journalism. They are based on research findings on well-being and resilience and
the practical experience of news professionals in the field.”
● Safety and Self-Care Strategies for Every Beat (Dart Center): Video, where a
“panel introduced safety, security and self-care strategies that should be in every
reporter's toolkit, for assignments ranging from neighborhood beats to disasters,
mass shootings, and investigative projects.”
● Mindfulness Training for Journalists (Dart Center): On September 10, 2015,
“the Dart Center hosted a special half-day workshop on mindfulness practice, led
by teachers from the monastic community founded by poet, author and activist
Thich Nhat Hanh.”
● Chair Yoga for Journalists (Dart Center): “This 11 min. chair yoga by former
foreign correspondent Kimina Lyall, Deputy Director, Dart Centre Asia Pacific is
for media practitioners working at their desks or working from home. You do not
need to be a yoga practitioner.”
● How journalists can take care of themselves while covering trauma
(Poynter): “Journalists can't properly cover trauma if they're suffering themselves
— here's a guide to self-care.”
● Under Pressure: Coping with stress, and knowing you’re not alone: A
tipsheet compiled by Ken Armstrong, senior reporter at ProPublica.
● 6 tips for protecting your mental health when reporting on trauma
(International Journalists’ Network): “The following techniques may help
journalists build [their] own resiliency and learn how to report sensibly on
trauma-related issues.”

Getting help
● Choosing a Psychotherapist (Dart Center): A guide for journalists seeking
therapy for personal or work-related issues.
● The Journalist Trauma Support Network: A pilot program training therapists to
help journalists.
● U.S. Journalism Emergency Fund and Black Journalists Therapy Relief
Fund (International Women’s Media Foundation): “The International Women's
Media Foundation (IWMF) is partnering with the Black Journalists Therapy Relief
Fund for this joint effort to provide emergency funding to Black journalists.”
● AAPI Journalists' Financial Assistance for Mental Wellness: “This fund,
created in partnership with AAJA, is designed to provide financial assistance
specifically for AAPI journalists to help you get the support you need during this
time. There are no therapists designated for this fund, so the money can be used
at your discretion, whether it’s to continue seeing your current therapist, to see a
therapist for the first time, or to pay for your medication.”

Apps and online tools for self-care
● Insight Timer: A free library of thousands of guided meditations
● PTSD Coach: Developed by the VA, the app provides education about PTSD,
information about professional care, self assessment and tools to manage
stresses of daily life with PTSD.
● Mindfulness Coach: Developed by the VA, the app has been shown to be
effective in reducing stress, increasing self awareness and helping with anxiety
and depression.
● Insomnia Coach: Developed by the VA, the app is based on Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia.
● COVID Coach: Developed by the VA, the app supports self-care and overall
mental health during the pandemic.
● Provider Resilience: The app is designed to help users to stay emotionally
healthy while remaining productive. Although it’s designed for health-care
providers, it can be useful for journalists.

Resources for managers
● Tips for Managers and Editors (Dart Center): “These tips are for managers and
editors to help them prepare and support the reporters who do this difficult and
important work.”

● Leading Resilience: A Guide for Editors and News Managers on Working
with Freelancers Exposed to Trauma (Dart Center): “A collaboration between
ACOS Alliance and Dart Centre Asia Pacific, this guide is designed to help
editors and managers understand and support their teams. It is divided into five
sections covering both general information and specific suggestions and tips for
working with freelancers.”
● Managing Stress & Trauma on Investigative Projects (Dart Center): “A tip
sheet from [Dart’s] Executive Director Bruce Shapiro, originally released at the
2005 Investigative Reporters & Editors Annual Conference.”
● How to add well-being to a newsroom natural disaster plan (RTDNA): “Here
are five strategies that are musts for any news team.”
● Newsroom depression: Warning signs and strategies (RTDNA): “News
directors, you have a stressful enough job to deliver ratings, hire the right people
and do the best you can to manage up every day. Pay attention. Here is a
checklist of some of journalists’ vulnerabilities to emotional illnesses.”
● Are you ready for trauma in your newsroom? New research may help
(RTDNA): “Managers who may have never experienced large-scale shocking
events may lack needed experience to successfully navigate staff through
unexpected emotional landmines. In Oklahoma City the [news] leaders learned
[these lessons.]”

Harassment
● Online Abuse: A Self-Defence Guide (Dart Center): “Online abuse and
harassment come in many forms, from borderline incivility all the way up to
systematic attacks that are engineered to inflict real psychological harm. This
guide offers some thoughts on managing their potential impact.”
● Maintaining Boundaries with Sources, Colleagues & Supervisors (Dart
Center): “This tip sheet, drawing on interviews with nine leading women in
journalism and other sources, offers strategies for recognizing, mitigating and
addressing sexual harassment and other predatory behavior while reporting.”

How our work affects us
● Covering Trauma: Impact on Journalists (Dart Center): “An overview of
current research on the occupational hazards for journalists covering traumatic
events, the risk factors that aggravate those effects, and some suggestions for
mitigating those factors.”
● How journalists’ jobs affect their mental health: a research roundup (The
Journalist’s Resource): “Journalists report on complex and difficult topics,

including natural disasters, political violence and human suffering. We’ve
summarized studies that look at how occupational stress affects journalists'
mental health.”
● Journalists are under stress. What’s the solution? (The Journalist’s
Resource): “A large body of research shows how journalists' jobs can pose a risk
to their mental health. We searched these studies for tips on preventing and
addressing the stress and trauma of reporting the news.”
● News managers are traumatized, too (RTDNA): “Terror attacks, natural
disasters, and other deadly events send shockwaves of trauma throughout
newsrooms and entire organizations. Managers can feel guilt, regret, and
secondary stress reactions when the journalists they manage suffer from
traumatic events.”

Additional resources
● Trauma & Journalism handbook (Dart Center): The handbook distills the
expertise of international trauma experts.
● Mental health and journalism (International Journalists’ Network): A six-part
podcast series featuring interviews with reporters and mental health experts.
● Journalism and Trauma (self-directed course on Poynter): “This course will
teach you how traumatic stress affects victims and how to interview trauma
victims with compassion and respect… [and] how to take care of your own health
after covering a traumatic event.”
● Covering Mass Tragedies: Tips, story ideas, resources and words of
encouragement by members of ‘Journalists Covering Trauma’ Facebook group.
● Covering Sensitive Issues and Coping with Trauma: Moderated by Pulitzer
Center Campus Consortium Coordinator Hana Carey, the panel focuses on
reporting on sensitive issues and recuperating from traumatic experiences in the
field.
● Mental Health for Journalists (Journalist’s Toolbox): “This page features
resources for journalists with mental health needs and also links for covering
mental health.”
● When the News Breaks the Journalists (J-Source): “Journalists are coming out
and talking honestly about mental illness.”
If you have resource suggestions, please DM Naseem Miller on IRE21 Slack.
You can also find this tipsheet on Google Docs: https://bit.ly/3vAaHfF

