Using data and voters’ voices to show who would be affected
by changes in voter access: Tipsheet
Where do I get data? Local and state election officials are a great first stop, and many post
useful datasets (especially concerning voter turnout, election results and voting
methods) on their websites.
Keep in mind that voting and election data can be messy!
● Every state has a voter file. They don’t all contain the same fields (for example, some
include race and others don’t) and they vary in how easy or hard they are to obtain.
Many, but not all, are free. The U.S. Elections Project has a good state-by-state overview
here: http://voterlist.electproject.org/home
● The U.S. Election Assistance Commission administers the Election Administration and
Voting Survey, state-by-state data that touches on most facets of election
administration. Find past surveys here, along with the survey instrument and other
information: https://www.eac.gov/research-and-data/studies-and-reports
● The Stanford-MIT Healthy Elections Project posts useful datasets:
https://healthyelections.org/data
● The Center for Public Integrity has location data for polling places used in many states
for the 2012, 2014, 2016, 2018 and 2020 general elections, for use by reporters. Here’s a
story explaining how reporters assembled the data, and why:
https://publicintegrity.org/politics/elections/ballotboxbarriers/data-release-sheds-lighton-past-polling-place-changes/. We’ve used it to report on which voters are affected by
the movement and closure of polling places.
● Vote-by-mail: Does your state allow you to request the list of mail ballot requestors? This
can be a great dataset for stories both in advance of an election and afterward.
● Your local elections officials likely track all sorts of data that isn’t required by law, such as
the number of people using different drop boxes. Source them up and start asking about
what they track.
● Your state might allow you to see actual ballot images, or signatures, or have access to
mail ballot envelopes.
● Commercial voter files are available from companies that put together info from various
sources, including proprietary ones. These can be super expensive — but useful.

Some things to keep in mind

● Always think about voting as a right, don’t only frame questions of access in terms of
turnout and partisan electoral impact.
● Voter behavior can be complicated. Talk to political scientists about what we know and
don’t know — and how confidently we can say things.
● Even small amounts of friction can turn voters away from voting. Things like a change to
a polling place or an extra form to sign to deter voters, even if they seem small. But
motivation can vary by election, so keep that in mind, too.
● Voter files/rolls are designed to be somewhat bloated. For example, voters can stay on
the rolls even after moving away. Be careful with your denominators when calculating,
e.g. voter turnout, especially in high-turnover areas such as college campuses.
● Some states are required to include voters’ race, but others aren't. Be careful how you
interpret that data.
● Talk to elections administrators to understand how the data is collected and updated.
For example, some counties may update the “registration date” every time a voter
updates their info, so it would be inaccurate as an actual registration date.
● Be careful using vote history data — understand how the database is updated if a voter
moves away and comes back, for example. They may have voted in those elections in
other states and not been logged. Or they might be removed from the rolls and
re-registered as a new voter altogether.
● Precinct boundaries change. If you want to use precinct-level results — which you
should, they’re the most granular geography we have! — you want to make sure you
have the right shapefiles. This can get tricky for past elections.
Some things you can do right now
● Request the voter file for your state. If it’s free/cheap and your elections officials are
friendly, ask them whether you can get voter files from the past — say, 2012, 2016, and
2020.
● Start talking to your local and state elections officials. Ask them to walk you through
their election timelines — when do they begin preparing for an election? When do
things really get overwhelming? When do they finish with an election? — and their
staffing and budgets. Talk to them about how registrations, ballot applications, and votes
are processed. Find out what their pain points are. (Ask them about funding and what
they would do if they had more money!)
● Download the EAVS data from the past few elections and explore it: How do your
counties compare to the rest of the state? How does your state compare to the rest of
the country? How has that changed over time? Can you identify a place that’s gotten
better or worse?
● See whether you can request the list of people who requested mail ballots in 2020.

● Ask elections officials for the list of voters whose ballots were rejected, why they were
rejected, and as much other detail as possible. This is where you can start to figure out
where some real problems are. Talk to those voters! Did they even know their ballot was
rejected?
● Ask for the list of voters who used provisional ballots and any other details, including
whether the ballot was ultimately accepted or rejected. Does provisional ballot use
cluster in one geography? Does one particular reason jump out?
● Request statewide precinct-level results from past elections. Make sure to get the
shapefiles, too. You can find all sorts of stories there, as well as prepare for the next
election.

