ENCRYPTED COMMS FOR BEGINNERS (JULY 2020 EDITION)
[CC BY 2.0] By M
​ artin Shelton​, Freedom of the Press Foundation: h
​ ttps://freedom.press

Chat safety basics
There are two types of data we need to consider:
Content and metadata​. The content of your calls
(e.g., what you say with your voice or texts) is
available to most chat services. Metadata is data
about the conversation, such as who participates,
and when.
Metadata is a fact of life​. By necessity, nearly all chat
services (e.g., Wire, WhatsApp) still retain

Use encrypted channels
Text, voice, and video chat with Signal or​ W
​ ire​. Note
Signal does not keep metadata, while Wire does.
The trade off: Signal requires a phone number to
register. ​https://freedom.press/news/
signal-beginners/​+ ​https://wire.com/
For video calls on your computer, consider Jitsi Meet.
Jitsi Meet is end-to-end encrypted for 1:1
conversations. With more users, it is not
end-to-end encrypted. It doesn’t require
registration.​ h
​ ttps://meet.jit.si

If your device is compromised,
encryption may not protect your
conversations. Protect your device
Turn on full-disk encryption​ on all your devices. iOS
devices have it turned on by default.
● On MacOS it’s F​ ileVault​.
● On Windows it’s ​BitLocker​.
● On Linux it’s ​LUKS​.
● On Android it’s called ​device encryption​.
Lock your screens automatically​ after 2-5 mins. Use a
strong PIN or passphrase. Fingerprint or face

information about your contact list. One of the few
exceptions is Signal, which retains no metadata
about your conversations.
Look for end-to-end encrypted chat. M
​ ost popular
services (e.g., Google Meet, Zoom, Slack) are fine
for ordinary conversations, but for truly private
conversations, you want e
​ nd-to-end encryption​.
This means the service provider can’t read your
messages.
Apple fans: iMessage and FaceTime are end-to-end
encrypted, but only with other Apple users.​ Messages
with Android users are not encrypted. If you use
iCloud, your messages can be read by Apple. Open
settings in iMessage and disable iCloud backup.
WhatsApp requires extra work​. While WhatsApp is
end-to-end encrypted, it retains a lot of metadata
and shares it with its parent company, Facebook. It
requires extra work to lock down. Read this to
learn how to upgrade WhatsApp’s security:
https://medium.com/@mshelton/upgradin
g-whatsapp-security-386c8ce496d
unlock on iOS is okay, but turn it off before
sensitive encounters like borders or protests.
http://interc.pt/1OizirG
Always install software updates immediately.​ S
​ oftware
updates protect your device from malware.
Antivirus software isn’t guaranteed to help.
Be cautious what you install.​ Every piece of software
is a potential vulnerability. PDFs & Office software
are particularly risky. View PDFs in Chrome or use
Google Docs instead. Even browser extensions
introduce risk. Only install what you need.

To learn more about chat safety and other security concerns​, check out these resources:
For g
​ eneral safety advice​: h
​ ttps://securityplanner.org​and h
​ttps://ssd.eff.org
For j​ ournalists, media activists​: h
​ ttps://freedom.press/training

