IRE20 Mentorship Program Instructions & tips
Welcome to the IRE20 Mentorship Program! At this virtual conference, we’ll have
a kickoﬀ meeting instead of a breakfast, but otherwise things will look similar:
IRE will still match mentors and mentees, and you’ll still have an opportunity to
set up one-on-one meetings on our virtual conference platform. Connections
made during these meetings can grow and develop organically long after the
conference.

How to connect with your mentor or mentee
We encourage you to set up a one-on-one video chat with your match
during the conference. This is easy to do within the IRE20 Conference website,
no exchange of personal information or Zoom rooms necessary.
Step 1: At the top of the homepage, go to the Networking tab, and choose
Schedule Meeting.

Step 2: From the meeting setup page, click on New Member and search for
your mentor or mentee’s name.

Step 3: Check the provided calendar to see when your mentor or mentee
might be free during conference week. The calendar blocks out time when your
match has added sessions or private meetings to their calendar. You can set up
a meeting time at any hour from Sept. 21-25. Click on the calendar to choose a
time.

Step 4: Fill out the details and Send Invitation to your match. They will receive
a notiﬁcation of your invitation via email and within Pathable.

Step 5: The private meeting will appear on your personal agenda and look much
like a session to join. To ﬁnd it, go to Schedule > My Agenda. It will be set up in
a Zoom meeting room where you and your match can chat. With only two
people in the chat, you have unlimited time.

Goals of the mentorship program
The mentor relationship should be mentor-led but mentee-driven: The mentor
guides the relationship, but it’s up to the mentee to keep the train rolling.
Work together early on to set clear, realistic goals and expectations. Some good
questions to start the conversation: What are your goals? How can I help you
stay accountable? Are there speciﬁc skills you’d like to learn? What are some
projects you’d like to work on? What’s blocking your progress?

We encourage participants to schedule regular check-ins afterward — by phone,
email, Slack, whatever works — to discuss progress and work through
roadblocks. Just come up with a schedule that suits you both and stick to it.
IRE’s mentorship program is meant for building skills, not necessarily for
advancing careers. Participants should focus on working through reporting
problems rather than strictly networking or job-seeking.
Discussions between mentors and mentees should be conﬁdential unless both
parties agree otherwise.

Tips for mentors
● Listen actively. Your role is to help your mentee deﬁne and achieve their
goals, not to dictate them.
● Keep the war stories to a minimum. Career anecdotes can be useful to
illustrate a point, but you’re not here to impress anyone.
● Be proactive. Sometimes, your mentee will be hesitant to “bother” you
with “minor” questions. Check in with them regularly: How are you coming
along on your project? Is there anything I can help you with? Etc. Keep the
lines of communication open and encourage your mentor to contact you
if they need help.
● Meet them where they are. Mentees come to this program with varying
degrees of experience and knowledge. Set realistic expectations and work
with them at their level.
● You’re not a therapist. Keep the focus on work problems, not life
problems.

Tips for mentees
● Respect your mentor’s time, but don’t be afraid to ask for help. Your
mentor wants to help you succeed! In addition to regular check-ins, you
should feel comfortable reaching out to your mentor to ask for help on
speciﬁc problems as they arise.
● Don’t expect your mentor to write your story/pitch your editor/ﬁle your
FOIA. Your mentor is there to help guide your work, not do it for you.

● Expect to be challenged. The goal of this program is to help you learn and
grow as a journalist. This will mean stretching your wings a little.

