Making Numbers Count
Jaimi Dowdell, Reuters
Jennifer LaFleur, Investigative Reporting Workshop

11 tips for making
journalism math easier

#1 Break your numbers down into simple terms.
Take the Michael Bloomberg example. Rather than thinking
about millions: Consider $500 among $327 people. That works
out to $1.52 - even if you multiple both numbers by 1 million,
it’s still just $1.52.

#2 Per capita
Per capita means PER PERSON. You’re a capita, I’m a capita,
every ONE’s a capita. With things where most people have
more than 1, per capita works:
Jaimi has 3 cupcakes per person or per capita
Amigo has 10 treats per “catita”

#3 Per capita
part B
It doesn’t work when something is rare. You can’t have
murders PER PERSON. If you do, you have something
very troubling going on in your community. That’s why we
report these figures as per 100K or 10K people. It adjusts it
by the population, but you can still talk about whole
numbers. We see this a lot with COVID numbers.

#4 Percent change versus percentage points change
The General City
Fund increased 20
percent. As a
proportion of the
budget it went up 1
percentage point.

#5 Margins of error in polls and surveys

When you report the
results, make sure you
consider the margin of
error and the unknown.

#6 Comparing relative size - keep it simple

Amigo = 20 lbs

*Numbers have been rounded

Stanley = 10 lbs*

Which is correct:
● Amigo is 100 percent
heavier than Stanley?
● Amigo is 200 percent of
Stanley’s weight?
● Amigo is twice Stanley’s
weight?

#7 More versus As
40.22/14.1 is 2.9
Baltimore is almost 3 times
the rate of the U.S., not 3
times higher.
Baltimore is 26.12 points
higher than the U.S. So it’s
almost 2 times higher.

#8 Tiny Ns or BOOP
Beware when you’re dealing with tiny Ns or What Holly Hacker refers to
as BOOP (Blown out of Proportion).
Example: When the number of murders in a city goes from 1 to 2 and a
reporter writes: MURDER DOUBLES.
In such a case, it would be better to just report the raw numbers.
Tiny N -->

N

#9 Average versus Median
They are not the same! While both work to describe a set of numbers...

The median is the middle value and the average is the sum of all of
the values divided by the number of numbers. Beware the outliers!

#10 More about percent
Deciding which number is the denominator can sometimes mess us up. Just
because a calculation *looks* correct doesn’t mean it is.
Percent of total: When calculating the percent of total, think of it like this: The part
divided by the whole. If it helps, draw a pie chart to visualize the “part” and the
“whole.”
Percent change: Figure out which number is the more recent, or “new” number,
and which number is the “old” or original number. Then, take the new value
minus the old value and divide that number by the old value. (N-O)/O

#11 Don’t get all fancy pants
Likely: It comes from probability measures. If a community has 10%
infection rate, it doesn’t mean that people there are 10% more likely to
develop a disease. Keep it simple and just say what the percent is.
Significant: An actual statistical measure, avoid it when referring to
numbers unless you’re writing about statistical significance.

Wait. There’s more?!

Bonus tips!
●
●
●
●
●
●

If something doesn’t feel right, listen to your gut.
If you’re not sure, run it by a colleague. Don’t be embarrassed. We ALL do it.
Use real-life examples, like household items, to break down the math and make it
simpler.
Don’t put too many numbers in your story! A common theme for the best “numbers”
stories is you can’t tell that they are “numbers” stories.
Ask smart questions when given numbers from studies, surveys, etc. that are
completed by others.
Don’t be afraid to use more advanced math, just don’t do it on deadline! Talk to
experts, friends and colleagues to make sure you’re getting it right.

Resources
●
●
●
●

IRE’s Numbers in the Newsroom by Sarah Cohen
A Mathematician Reads the Newspaper by John Allen Paulos
How to Lie with Statistics by Darrell Huff
How not to be wrong by Jordan Ellenberg

Us:
jaimi.dowdell@tr.com and @JaimiDowdell
jlaﬂeur@irworkshop.org and @j_la28

Questions?

