IRE 2020 -- How To Be A Better Health Care Watchdog
John Hillkirk, KHN
Kathleen McGrory, Tampa Bay Times
Liz Lucas, KHN
Shefali Luthra, The 19th*

Health care datasets at your fingertips:
Hospital Inspections
Provided by AHCJ, a database of inspections reported to the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) -- includes any hospital that bills to Medicare or Medicaid (the vast
majority)
Hospital cost reports
Annually hospitals must report metrics about their operations and finances to CMS
Hospital Compare
Includes quality measures, information on hospital infections and readmissions, some financial /
payment data, and more.
Nursing Compare
Includes inspections, citations, staffing, and general information about all skilled nursing
facilities that bill Medicaid or Medicare (the majority)
Open Payments​ (​Dollars for Docs​)
Pharmaceutical companies and device manufacturers are required to report any money they
pay to physicians and teaching hospitals, for royalties, conferences, consulting, speaking,
etc.
Medicare Provider utilization and payment
Starting in 2012, CMS reports the total amount billed by and paid to individual physicians for
each HCPC / CPT code, including the number of services, by year.
NPPES NPI Registry​ (National Plan and Provider Enumeration System)
An up-to-date database of health care providers.
FDA Adverse Events Reporting System (FAERS)​ for drugs
These are voluntarily submitted reports on adverse events related to drugs. They are useful for
seeing what kinds of issues doctors and patients are reporting related to certain drugs, but
they are voluntary, incomplete, and at times duplicated.
FDA Manufacturer and User Device Experience (MAUDE)​ is adverse events reporting for
devices

Similar to FAERS, MAUDE captures adverse events related to medical devices. Like FAERS it
is voluntary reporting and does not capture the whole universe of adverse events. KHN also
recently uncovered that ​many MAUDE reports had been kept secret​.
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP)​ from the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ)
A national survey of hospital discharge data; this online tool allows you to look at hospital
discharges by diagnosis, outcome, patient demographics, cost, and more.
State hospital discharge data (depends on the state if you can get it)
Examples:
Florida
California OSHPD
Illinois Dept of Publi Health

Advice
Talk to people. Most people are aware of their own health, and everybody interacts with the
health care system in some way. Individual experiences often provide a gateway into some way
the system is not functioning well. When you’re dealing with patients, print out HIPAA waiver
release forms for the hospital and maybe major insurance companies for them to sign; the forms
give the patient’s permission for providers to talk about their case.
Think in terms of equity. Access, care and outcomes vary dramatically, and the “social
determinants of health” -- such as race, income, environment, education -- greatly influence
health.
Health is more than just health care. Health care - doctor’s visits, hospital visits, medications are just one piece of the assembly line of health. Disease prevention, vaccinations, diet, and
environment are just as important (if not more important) than treatment.
Follow the money. A lot of money flies around in health care (while public health is starved) and
there’s plenty of fraud and abuse. There’s a wealth of data on hospital financials, what doctors
bill Medicare, and what pharmaceuticals and medical device companies pay providers (see the
list of databases above). Looking for False Claims Act cases is a good place to start.
Whenever you’re dealing with databases that use medical coding (HCPC and/or CPT codes),
talk to coding experts about what you’re looking for. These codes are often used in conjunction
with other codes, and the codes change from year to year. CPT codes are also copyrighted by
the American Medical Association, so you can’t automatically get access to information about
them or their history.

Other resources
Charlie Ornstein’s health data tipsheet

