IRE 2020 - Virtual

The Shape of a Sonic Series - Tip Sheet
You’ve got some good tape, interesting findings and potential for your story to make
a great podcast. Now what? Here’s some tips we’ve learned ourselves, been told by
people who are quite good at this, and try to practice in our work. Use what works
for you and pass it on :)
Kameel Stanley, USA TODAY, kmsjourno@gmail.com
Chip Brantley, University of Alabama, chip.brantley@gmail.com
Ike Sriskandarajah, Reveal from the Center for Investigative Reporting

●

●

●

●

●

Prioritize people over numbers.​ Many investigations are about abuse and power.
Audio is already an intimate medium, so lean in even further and let us ​hear t​ he
abused, powerless as well as the policy/people being held accountable
Don’t make your story a list of numbers.​ We get it. We’re investigative reporters and
we loveeee data and numbers. Guess what? Our ears don’t. Save your 121 findings
for the companion web piece. For the audio story, zoom in on the most important 1-3
numbers, data points and make your story about reinforcing those.
Things don’t have to be linear, but they do have to make sense. ​You don’t have to tell
a story in chronological order, but that can help listeners hang on throughout a long
piece.
Turn documents into tape by revealing docs to interested parties. ​Often as
investigative reporters there comes a moment when we “reveal” findings to subjects
and ask for a reaction. Record this interaction, and don’t just do it with a target of the
investigation. Take it to the person affected, and record that as well.
Always record interactions with public information officials because…
○
○
○
○

●
●
●

a) you never know when that’s the only tape you will have of the agency.
b) radio is a glimpse into how we do our work. Showing those battles makes
you transparent and is also interesting.
c) your tape adds a level of public accountability.
d) Taped interactions may be useful for other reasons….

FOIA audio just like you would documents.​ (memos, video tape, webinars - anything
that may have sound)
Always be recording.​ Like - do it.
Keep everything in one place.​ Create a Google Drive (or Dropbox or whatever) folder
for the project. This central folder is where everything lives. Documents, recordings,
notes, etc. (And, depending on the complexity of the project, you may want different

folders within that central folder.) It's helpful to have a consistent naming convention
for files.
●

Keep a project journal.​ When you start a project, create a Google Doc called "[project
subject] Journal." Any time you work on the project, open this doc, write the date and
then log all your work that day. You made these calls and this is what you learned
from them. You searched these archives and this is what you learned from them
(include links to articles, search-results pages, etc.). You scanned these docs and this
is what they told you. Whenever possible, put the thing you've recorded, read,
scanned into your project folder on Drive and then link to the thing from your project
journal. If you work on a project for a long time, your forgetful future selves will thank
your past selves for keeping track of everything you've done. When it's time to
structure/write, this doc will remind you how you came to know what you know. This
doc will serve as a timeline for your reporting process and will come in handy for
future collaborators who join the project well after you've started.

●

●

●

Keep a character spreadsheet.​ You're probably already doing something like this, but
when you start a project, create a Google Sheet called "[project subject] Character
List." Any time you come across a name of someone who's possibly involved in the
story—living or dead—log their name in the character spreadsheet along with
columns for their affiliation, whether they're alive/dead, any contact info you can
quickly find, and any notes you need to make about them over the course of the
project.
Record yourself telling someone about your reporting.​ After an interview or an
important finding or an encounter, record yourself telling someone else about it.
Record the other person's end, too. You may not use any of these recordings, but
they're helpful to have when you're trying to remember how you felt/thought about
the story at that point in the reporting process. This can influence the
structure/writing of the story. And, for certain stories, your process and the evolution
of your thinking really matter to the story.
Avail yourself of genre tricks.​ Without being (too) manipulative, take advantage of
the mystery writer's genre tricks. Unspool the story, hold off on resolution, use
cliffhangers. Trying to figure out how many episodes your series should be? Think in
terms of story moves. Write each move down on an index card. How many cards do
you have? The number of cards you have is probably close to how many episodes
you should have. Index cards / Post-it Notes and a clean wall are also helpful when
laying out the structure of the series, especially if you can leave them up on the wall
for the many months you're working on the project.

