36 COVID-19 Story Ideas in 30
Minutes
By Rachana Pradhan, Kaiser Health News and
Marshall Allen, ProPublica

Resources
1. Inspection reports for hospitals. ProPublica used them in the early
days of the pandemic to show infection control failures in hospitals.
Hospitalinspections.org.
2. Inspection reports for nursing homes.
a. ProPublica’s Nursing Home Inspect.
b. Association of Health Care Journalists’ Medicare inspections
data.
c. KHN’s Nursing Home Inspection project, one of the first
stories we did in the early days of the pandemic.

Resources (continued)
3. ProPublica’s federal contracts database. Tracks federal purchases to
fight the coronavirus. The federal government is spending billions of
dollars to combat the coronavirus. Use this tool to explore who the
U.S. is buying from, what it’s buying and how much it’s paying.
4. OSHA Spreadsheet of closed and valid COVID-19 complaints
a. KHN dug into OSHA inspections to find how many had been
closed even in places where health care workers died.

Resources (continued)
5. State level OSHA complaints and inspections. Here’s an example
from Nevada.
6. Records requests to public agencies:
a. We used them at ProPublica to reveal the confusion and
conflicting guidance for state and local officials trying to sort out
their response to the pandemic.
b. Kaiser Health News used records to show what was going on
behind the scenes as states made important decisions on
shutting down and reopening

Resources (continued)
7. HHS data on who is getting bailout money from the Provider Relief
Fund. KHN recently did an analysis finding how much funding
multinational dialysis corporations received despite having robust
balance sheets.
8. Treasury Department data on small business loans under the
Paycheck Protection Program
9. CMS Nursing Home COVID-19 infections data.
10. Create your own callouts for crowdsourcing. ProPublica’s launched
with our first coronavirus story.

Clinicians
11. The pandemic has exposed the longstanding gap between hospital
administrators and their frontline clinicians. This is happening all
over the country and clinicians in your community will tell you all
about it. Here’s a story ProPublica published about a nurse whose
hospital didn’t supply her and her colleagues with PPE, but then
suspended her when she brought in her own.
12. Doctors and nurses feel pressure to get back to work even after
getting sick, and the physical/mental health consequences of it.

Clinicians (continued)
13. First responders could be considered the forgotten front lines of the
medical community. We did a story that featured their risks and how
they’re often overlooked when it comes to distributing resources.
This is true throughout the country.
14. Health care workers getting infected with COVID-19. See this study
by the CDC.
15. Hospital acquired COVID-19.
16. Deaths of health care workers - Kaiser Health News is digging into
these.

Clinicians (continued)
17. Rural hospital finances, which were already strained before the
pandemic and have only gotten worse. Additional closures will
further exacerbate disparities in rural access to vital health care
services.
18. COVID’s spread inside correctional facilities. Prison and jail workers
often get overlooked in efforts to document deaths and infections.

Testing
19. White House Coronavirus Task Force reports for each state. These
are presented to states privately as frequently as every week. The
Center for Public Integrity has a big effort underway to make these
reports public. Their contents can easily be localized.
20. The limitations of contact tracing between states. Here’s a story from
Marshall about contact tracing limitations and Las Vegas. The
Atlantic recently published this as well.

Testing (continued)
21. Expansions of rapid COVID testing and their shortcomings. Millions of
these tests are flooding the market in the coming weeks.
a. KHN wrote about this from the angle of nursing homes.
b. Looking at the federal distribution plan for distributing the tests
it bought -- this includes 150 million from Abbott alone. How is
HHS allocating them?
c. Cost of out-of-network COVID testing. The CARES Act requires
insurers to pay out-of-network providers at whatever rate they
post on their websites. Some providers are also adding other
services to the bills.

Disparities
22. The costs of COVID treatment for the uninsured, who may not be
getting the federal help they were promised. The New York Times
examined that issue.
23. Vaccines: who is going to actually administer them?
24. Vaccines: who will be prioritized for receiving them once they are
available?

Disparities (continued)
25. Intersection of poverty, risk of infection and transportation needs:
e.g., how does someone without a car get a drive-through COVID
test? A vaccine?
26. How do authorities educate/communicate with non-English speaking
populations about COVID vaccinations?
27. Limited diversity in clinical trials for vaccines.

Regulators/official response
28. Localized and fragmented response - some go back to school, some
do not. Some universities meet, some do not. Do a side-by-side
comparison of the guidance and recommendations made by
institutions in your community. Chances are you will see big
differences.
29. KHN looked into the historical breakdown of public health
infrastructure. This story could be told in almost every community
across the country.

Regulators/official response (continued)
30. Shoddy emergency preparedness plans - Local agencies are supposed
to have plans in place for how to address any type of public health
emergency, including a pandemic. Often these plans are nothing
more than a few pieces of paper, not something detailed. Why is this
the case?
31. What are federal and state governments paying for PPE and other
crucial supplies (e.g., ventilators). Is there price gouging? Here’s an
example from KHN.

Regulators/official response (continued)
32. Teachers at risk: The gap between school administrators and
teachers has led to reports of some educators getting disciplined for
bringing in their own cleaning supplies.
33. Has any congregate facility (a nursing home, a university) managed
to open safely, and if so, how did they do it? The Washington Post
reported on how the University of Arizona relied on wastewater
testing to prevent outbreaks.

Regulators/official response (continued)
34. Are asymptomatic people being tested? This continues to be a
problem even though it’s clear asymptomatic testing needs to occur
in order to successfully contact trace and stop spread. Recent
changes to CDC guidance on testing is causing even more confusion
about who should get a test. Here’s a story from ProPublica.

Inﬂuencers
35. Misinformation and COVID-19. Check to see if the information being
provided by your local schools or government are consistent with
what’s known about COVID-19. In some cases, you can expose
propaganda. Here’s a story ProPublica did about the movie,
“Plandemic.”
36. The biggest players in the room -- who has the ear of your governor,
your city council, your county executives? And how are they
influencing local decisions on masks, social distancing and
reopening? This Politico profile of Scott Atlas is an example.

THE END

