Navigating Public Records IRE 2020 TIP Sheet
Section I: General overview of public records
*Understand your state’s public records’ laws. Each state has its own public records statute. Be
familiar with your state’s public records laws. Get familiar with it to understand timelines, what
records the law applies to, costs and what your options are if your request is denied. In many
states, court records may have their own statutes. Get to know those as well.
*Beyond the learning the statute:
*Understand your state and jurisdiction’s records’ retention schedule. It identifies and
describes a state agency's records and the lengths of time that each type of record must be
kept (just google your state or county and records retention schedule and you should get a
listing.)
*Find data dictionaries. What is a data dictionary? It is a collection of names, definitions,
and attributes about elements that are being used or captured in a database or information
system. Many agencies have their data dictionaries online, but if not, you can request them.
Using the codes can help you be more specific about your request when you are requesting
large data sets, so the IT tech who is responsible for filling your request knows what you are
talking about. They are especially useful in criminal justice reporting.
*Think about what you what to get out of your request before you start writing. Is your request
targeted or exploratory? A targeted request means you may be looking for a specific document
or email. Exploratory requests often have the purpose of searching for an avenue to investigate.
You may be looking for large data sets or for hundreds of documents.
Section II: Best practices for writing a public record’s request
*Before you file your request, know who keeps the records you’re looking for. Each state, city or
federal agency has its own FOIA coordinator typically. You don’t want to put a FOIA in for health
records with the state police department. Make a call before you file the FOIA to try to double
check the records are kept with that corresponding agency.
*Do you even need to file a FOIA? Sometimes you might not even need to file a FOIA request,
the information may be either publicly available on the site or sometimes the agency might just
offer them at no cost. This might not be the case with a hostile state agency, but it’s worth a try.
Wording Matters:
*Request through date of fulfillment, not date of request
*Instead of saying you want records for a certain start date to the current date, consider
asking for a certain start date through the date they actually fill your request. Depending on the
agency, scenario (like lags with the pandemic), etc., it could be quite a while before you get
records - and there could be developments/updates in the records or data during the time period
you’re waiting. It may take a little longer in the longrun to compile more records… but they’ve
already started the process, so it’s simple to add additional days.
*Ask for release of partial records ready sooner

*In requests, I like to add wording like: “If any portion of the responsive records is
available sooner than others, please release it immediately.” An agency could make you wait for
everything at the end - but there might be an initial story to do if you get what’s available NOW
while you wait for the rest.
*Be specific and abandon your ideas of good writing. Many PIOs and government agencies will
deny a request if it’s too broad because some portion of it is not a public record. Be as specific
as possible to what you are requesting. Sometimes the wording specificity lends itself to what
might seem like wonky writing, but don’t
*Write each request separately. Even if you are requesting records from one agency and
records that might be on the same subject matter, write each request – no matter how big or
small – separately. This can help you from getting your entire request denied.
*Think about what form the records may be in. Are the records available electronically? Paper?
CD? In your FOIA request, try to specify what you want. Which one better illustrates the records
you’re seeking?
*Spreadsheets vs. PDFs:
*Spreadsheets are useful for numbers, raw data and statistics. PDF copies are OK for
emails and similar records. Spreadsheets make it easier to sort, clean and analyze data. Some
agencies will claim they prefer PDFs to avoid document manipulation. Don’t be afraid to push
back. These are public records.
*Costs: Be prepared. Public records can be costly.
*Always ask for a fee waiver or reduced cost because the request may be granted.
Within your FOIA request, you can ask for a waiver, citing that the information being sought is
for public consumption.
*When crafting your FOIA, request for the agency to contact you before proceeding with
fulfilling your request.
*Know your local laws. Costs should be reasonable. Not extraneous. What happens
when you’re hit with an outrageous FOIA bill?
*What are your options? Negotiate, refine request, challenge costs via appeal or FOIA
ombudsman. Consider writing about it. Last option? Sue.
Section III: Navigating public records during the pandemic:
*Legal Changes: Deadlines & Communications:
*Check/verify an agency’s “excuse” for delays or denials
*Make them aware you’re calling their “bluff”
*Put challenges in your reporting
*In Texas during the pandemic, agencies can suspend the rules of the state’s Public
Information Act for two weeks (usually required to respond in ten business days). Skeleton
crews or closed offices could come into play - but agencies must submit a catastrophe notice

with the Attorney General. That should be posted or available publicly. Some agencies that
claim this exemption haven’t followed the rules.
https://www.kxan.com/investigations/covid-19-could-dampen-access-to-public-recordsmeetings/
*Record Denials: Putting on Pressures:
*Report on your challenges
*During the pandemic, while other states showed more transparency with records
surrounding COVID-19 cases at nursing homes and assisted living centers, the State of Texas
broadly used privacy arguments and HIPAA claims to block requests for such information instead only releasing composite information like case totals. We created a landing page for this
coverage to make it easy for viewers to understand what was released and why more
information would be crucial. Nursing home case tips became our #1 subject in viewer emails so we worked to independently verify and report those cases, creating an interactive map that
we updated regularly. Additionally, we monitored other states’ transparency to point out the lack
of cooperation from the State of Texas. Our reporting and diligence - along with other outlets
facing the same hurdle - was mentioned nationally, even by Congress, when addressing this
issue. It helped push for the release of federal data (which had its own set of issues) and the
eventual release of case locations in Texas by the state. It was important to show our work and
remind viewers of the ongoing struggle - part of the watchdog mindset that can help shape
policy or change government practice.

https://www.kxan.com/news/coronavirus/nursing-home-investigations/
https://www.kxan.com/investigations/kxan-continues-tracking-and-mapping-covid-19-incentral-texas-senior-facilities/
https://www.kxan.com/investigations/hhsc-must-release-names-of-nursing-homes-withvirus-cases-says-freedom-of-information-foundation-of-texas/
Section IV: General challenges with public records and how to overcome them
*Question Denials: Don’t Assume Agencies Are Right
*For record denials, ask which statute they are citing or why they plan to ask for an
attorney general opinion. For instance, when working on a story about man who hid a gun in his
waistband and fatally shot himself in the head in the back of a police cruiser while under arrest there were a lot of questions about how he was able to pull a trigger while handcuffed behind
his back and where the bullet entered. The medical examiner said ‘no’ to photos from the
autopsy, when requested. I asked for the statute they were citing… and later pointed out they
failed to notice the next part of the statute that said photos from autopsies when someone dies
in law enforcement custody must be made public. They apologized and released the photos. I
didn’t use them in a story - but it gave proof and context for future interviews.
*For data problems, ask to speak directly with the analyst to better understand how to
interpret the information or get what you actually want. PIOs aren’t always data experts.

*If all else fails, file a complaint - but let the agency know first. It may pressure them to
release something and avoid possible lawsuits from the state, etc.

*Understanding Exemptions
*For Example: Deaths in custody - some states have carved out exemptions that will
prevent this. While the George Floyd case played out, the Austin area had something similar
with the death of Javier Ambler. It allowed us to re-focus coverage on why police were denying
public access to certain evidence in this case - the ‘dead suspect loophole’ to the state’s Public
Information Act. It gives law enforcement agencies the discretion to withhold information in
cases where a suspect has died in their custody… because legally, they’re only obligated to
release information if someone has gone through the court process in Texas. Dead people will
never go to trial. Reporting on this can add pressure, and our coverage has already prompted
state legislation in the past that came close to passing - and would have eliminated this
loophole. With renewed attention on this subject area, it is looking likely again - and even more
promising in the next legislative session.

https://vimeo.com/343112736
https://www.kxan.com/denied/series/
https://www.kxan.com/denied-evidence/
*Next Steps: Who Else Holds the Records You Want?
For example: Usually, law enforcement agencies are either required or highly expected
to have an outside organization or agency investigate when a death in custody occurs. If the
original agency won’t release details, try to understand who else might hold those same records
- and would they release them? This goes for any type of record that could be held (even a copy
for some reason) by another agency - not just deaths in custody. As part of ongoing coverage,
we investigated a Travis County inmate’s death - that the sheriff’s office (and associated
agencies) claimed was natural… but using this tactic, we were able to obtain evidence denied
by the sheriff’s office. It led to a clinical investigation, changes in policy, a dozen stories, a
statute nearly changing, and a mother finally having answers about what happened to her son.
Other tips and tricks:
*Get to know the PIO. Sometimes (and we stress the word sometimes) it’s helpful to develop a
relationship with the PIO. Call them before you file your request and ask them about any issues
or potential redactions they might make or any ways that you might be able to adjust your
request to avoid a flat denial.
-Consider creating a “FOIA diary.” It can be used to track when you filed request, received
response, costs and more. Staying on top of my FOIA diary can lead to a reduction in fee
amounts or getting your records back in a quicker time period. EX: An agency slashed the fee
amount in half because I was able to point out that they failed to respond as required by state
law.
When you are denied, request the correspondence (emails or texts) concerning your public
information request. (I can talk more about this with examples)
Links to other good resources:

A few good resources that can help you get started:
MuckRock: https://www.muckrock.com/
National Freedom of Information Coalition: https://www.nfoic.org/
The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press: https://www.rcfp.org/
You can also reach out to us anytime!
Kat Stafford: KStafford@ap.org , Twitter: @kat__stafford
Josh Hinkle: Josh.Hinkle@kxan.com , Twitter: @hinklej
Anita Hassan: anita.hassan@nbcuni.com, Twitter: @anitasnews

