Tip on speeding up FOIL requests in New York
Chris Bragg, The Buffalo News
A major problem with Freedom of Information Law requests in New York is the amount of time
government agencies take to complete them.
There is a simple tool in the law that can help. I generally haven’t needed a lawyer’s help in filing these,
and it usually only takes a couple minutes.
The FOIL law provides for what is called a “constructive denial” appeal. You’re arguing in such an appeal
that a New York government agency’s delays are unreasonable, as is its possible return date. When such
an appeal is filed, it triggers a legal requirement for an agency to either
a) fill the request within 10 business days or
b) have an appeals officer write a letter giving a detailed explanation as to why the request cannot yet be
filled.
In other words, by filing this appeal, you are making an agency decide about whether to do the extra
work of writing the letter, or if it’s easier to simply fill your request. Also, if the agency’s explanation for
delay is notable or unreasonable, you potentially can write a story about their response and apply more
pressure that way.
A couple notes on legal standing:
-You have standing to file a constructive denial appeal every time an agency sends you a letter delaying a
given request, which would typically be once every 20 business days. So if you want, you can file the
same exact appeal over and over again for the same request, and make the agency appeals officer keep
writing response letters.
-When a FOIL is first filed, if an agency fails to acknowledge the request within five business days, as
legally required, you have standing to immediately file a constructive denial appeal
-To my understanding, this appeal can be filed with any level of NY government that is subject to FOIL,
not just on the state level
When Andrew Cuomo was governor – and I did not feel has administration was always acting in good
faith concerning FOIL – I filed these appeals constantly. For requests with Gov. Hochul’s administration, I
use this tool a bit more strategically for requests that I feel are more pressing.
Here is a template of such an appeal that could be filed with the state Department of Health:
Dear Records Access Officer:
This is an appeal of DOH’s determination on May 25, 2021, regarding request #2021-0000 (attached).
DOH has constructively denied my request. The possible return date of Oct. 1, 2020 -- more than five
months after the request was filed – is unreasonable, given the narrow scope of the request, which
would at most return only a few pages.

Because of this appeal, DOH is required by law to provide specific reasons within 10 business days
explaining why this request cannot be filled, or else, must provide the records sought.
According to the Committee on Open Government, if a government entity acknowledges that a request
has been received, but has failed to grant access by the specific date given beyond twenty business days,
or if the specific date given is unreasonable, a request may be considered to have been constructively
denied (see §89[4][a]). In such a circumstance, the denial may be appealed in accordance with
§89(4)(a), which states in relevant part that:
“...any person denied access to a record may within thirty days appeal in writing such denial to the head,
chief executive or governing body of the entity, or the person therefore designated by such head, chief
executive, or governing body, who shall within ten business days of the receipt of such appeal fully
explain in writing to the person requesting the record the reasons for further denial, or provide access to
the record sought.”
I, on behalf of The Buffalo News, am requesting either you fill this FOIL request, or else provide a full
explanation as to the reason for the denial, as required by law, of this public record.
Sincerely,
Chris Bragg
Reporter, The Buffalo News

