USING SOLUTIONS JOURNALISM IN INVESTIGATIONS
“In the past there were many stories that pointed out the problem, but none used what was working
elsewhere to remove the many local excuses that were preventing the conversation from moving from what
we can't do to what we can.
The only thing that ever came of previous stories was a politician or two talking about how bad the problem
was.” — Brie Zeltner, Cleveland Plain Dealer

EXAMPLES
How Baltimore Cut its Infant Mortality Rate: Saving the Smallest Cleveland Plain Dealer
“They Saw Me and Thought the Worst” NOLA.com on racially abusive policing
Look at Brazil New York Times magazine on HIV/AIDS medicines
Stanching the Longest-Running Oil Spill You’ve Likely Never Heard Of 60 Minutes
When Dangerous Strains of Salmonella Hit, the Turkey Industry Responded Forcefully. The
Chicken Industry? Not So Much ProPublica

WHY ADD A SOLUTIONS COMPONENT TO AN INVESTIGATION?
It strengthens your investigation by taking away the excuses of people behaving badly. It
shows that it’s possible to do better — so why aren’t we? The problem goes from unavoidable
to unacceptable.
It investigates models for doing better. Societies need these models to be able to change, and
audiences want to know about them.
It also adds hope (with teeth) and excitement to an investigation, deepening engagement.
Investigative reporting destination sites, especially, need solutions to keep audiences from
feeling hopeless and tuning out.

WHEN SHOULD I LOOK FOR A SOLUTIONS ANGLE?
The problem you are investigating is widely shared — because then many places will have tried
to solve it. Some of those responses will be particularly innovative, successful or newsworthy.
The problem you are investigating touches people’s daily lives. It’s possible to find a solutions
angle for a corruption investigation. That’s done by looking at the system that allows corruption
to happen: for example, perhaps another city reformed its procurement processes to make
corruption much more difficult. But it’s much more natural and easier to find solutions
approaches for the “daily life” investigation, pedestrian deaths are rising, a wave of serious
illness caused by hospital-acquired infections, or an outrageous gap in school funding between
high-income and low-income neighborhoods.

1

HOW SHOULD I LOOK FOR A SOLUTIONS ANGLE?
Use a method called finding the “positive deviant.” State the problem. Then, using all the data
and research skills you know as an investigative journalist, look for who’s doing better against
that problem — or a place that’s experienced big improvement, even if they’re far from perfect
today.
Or, find a relevant smaller slice of the problem. Every problem is made up of dozens of
important small slices. Chances are that you’ve chosen a small slice to investigate. You probably
wouldn’t investigate the youth mental health crisis as a whole, for example — it’s too big a
subject. You’d choose a small slice, such as: schools don’t have enough guidance counselors.
Culturally appropriate care isn’t available. Mental health professionals don’t work in places that
most need them. Stigma keeps people from seeking help. Teachers don’t know how to
recognize and deal with children in trouble. Each of these slices could also be the subject of a
good solutions story.
It’s best to cover a response in a place that has the most similar resources and culture you can
find. That might mean it’s geographically close or socio-economically comparable.
Take a systemic approach. If you’re investigating police abuses, the solutions angle is NOT a
story about a police officer who isn’t abusive. It’s a story about a jurisdiction that had a big
police violence problem and cleaned it up.

HOW DO I NOT FALL INTO ADVOCACY OR PR?
No program is perfect, and you’ll have no credibility if you claim perfection. So, cover the
limitations. Always include what doesn’t work about the response.
Situate the response in a larger context. Spend a few paragraphs giving the landscape, briefly
mentioning different kinds of solutions being tried.
Be careful with language. Just show what the evidence says about success or failure. Don’t
predict the future or overclaim.

MORE RESOURCES
How Josh Hinkle and KXAN Blended Solutions and Accountability Journalism The Whole Story
Using Solutions Journalism in Health Investigations IRE magazine
From Classroom to Newsroom: How USA Today’s Solutions Reporting is Helping Change Policies
on Sexual Assaults and College Athletes The Whole Story
A Solutions Approach to Documentary Journalism Documentary magazine
Investigative Journalism Meets Solutions Journalism 5-minute video by Pulitzer-winning
investigator Brent Walth
Solutions Journalism Network
2

Solutions Story Tracker (database of links to 14,000+ published solutions stories, vetted,
summarized and tagged for search)
SJN Learning Lab (self-paced courses)
Tina Rosenberg
Liza Gross

3

