Excel macro Web scraping

IRE Tipsheet 2567

Page 1 of 6

Simple Web scraping by using macros in Microsoft Excel
Tommy Kaas, editor, Dicar, Danish International Center for Analytical Reporting

This exercise is about scraping web pages with statistical data on parishes in Denmark.
The method can be used for other pages like these.

Activate Microsoft Excel
Open an empty workbook (Excel-document) – give it a name and save it on the computer.
Be sure you have at least two spreadsheets – name them “Numbers” and “Data”

To rename the sheets: Rigth-click on the tab, choose “rename” and give write new names: “Numbers” and
“Data”
Make the workbook ready

Copy the numbers below to column A in the spreadsheet “Numbers”. Place the numbers in row 1 to row 9
Mark the data and copy data to the windows clipboard and paste it to Excel afterwards.
7444
7447
7448
7445
7446
7451
7452
9145
9080
It should look like:

Excel macro Web scraping

IRE Tipsheet 2567

Page 2 of 6

Go to the spreadsheet “Data”. Place the cursor in cell A1
Menu: Data – choose “Import external data” – “new web query”
Write or paste the following address:
http://www.sogn.dk/asminderoed/index.php?mod=sognside&func=sogneInfo&p1=7444
(This is an example of pages with statistics, we will use Excel to scrape off the web).
Click on the yellow arrow and choose, which table on the page, Excel should import. The ones you click turns
green. We want only the table with the data:

Click on the disk-symbol for saving the web query on your pc. Give it a name. E.g. “Parish”:

Excel macro Web scraping

IRE Tipsheet 2567

Page 3 of 6

Find the query and open the query in Notepad (right-click and choose Notepad)

This is the inside of the web query we just made:

Delete the number (7444) and replace it with hard brackets []

Save the query again.
Go back to Excel.
Delete the text on the spreadsheet “Data”. It’s ok, even if Excel tells you that the query you just made will be
deleted too.
Go to the spreadsheet “Numbers”. Click in A1

Excel macro Web scraping

IRE Tipsheet 2567

Go to the spreadsheet “Data”. Clik in A1
Menu – Data – Import external data – Import data
In the window “Choose datasource” – find the query you saved and altered minutes ago.

Open it
Say ok to import the data in the existing workbook:

Because we changed the number to [ ] we not is asked for a parameter:

We should write the address in which cell, Excel should find the number.
Write the address of cell A1 in the spreadsheet “Numbers”
In Excel we write it like this:
=Numbers!$A$1

Page 4 of 6

Excel macro Web scraping

IRE Tipsheet 2567

Page 5 of 6

Press OK
And we get the data we want in cells A1 to D16.
That’s fine, but we want data from all the pages in the same sheet.
One way of doing this is just to repeat doing web queries.
Lets create a macro, which does that.
First we’ll delete the data from the “Data” sheet and we’ll place the cursor in A1 again.
Then we start recording the macro:
Functions – Macro – Record new macro
Give the new macro a name (just one word without spaces) – decide which shortcut to use (for instance ctrl +
b) and just save the macro in this workbook.
Press the spreadsheet symbol in the little box, which appears.

That means that whatever we record, the references will be relative.
Now we are recording.
1. Do like we did before:
2. Menu – Data – Import external data – Import data
3. Choose the Parish-query and open it.
4. Say OK to the first dialogue box
5. Write the reference to cell A1 in the “Numbers” sheet =Numbers!$A$1 when you are asked for
reference
6. Before you press OK – copy the text: =Numbers!$A$1 by pressing ctrl + c
7. When data arrive in your “Data” sheet – move your cursor down to A20
8. Go to the other sheet by pressing on the “Numbers” tab
9. Delete the content in cell A1 by Edit – Delete… - and choose “Move cells upwards” – press OK

Excel macro Web scraping

IRE Tipsheet 2567

Page 6 of 6

10. Go back to the “Data” sheet by pressing the “Data” tab in the bottom of the screen
11. Stop the recording of the macro by pressing the square

Now we can run the macro by pressing ctrl + b
When the macro asks for parameters, press ctrl + v for pasting the reference to the cell with the actual
number.
You will see, that the data now are placed in the spreadsheet for every 20 rows.

