Installing Jupyter Notebook and Agate on your computer
github.com /mattwaite/JOUR407-DataJournalism/blob/master/Assignments/Installations/installing_jupyter_notebook.md
Find file
1. First, download and install Anaconda on your computer. You can download it here:
https://www.continuum.io/downloads WARNING: It will take up 845MB of your hard drive. Install the version
for Python 3.5.
2. Open your terminal (Mac) or Command Prompt (Windows) and type: conda list
3. If a big stream of text goes by, you've got Anaconda installed.
4. If you get an error or nothing happens, come find me. STOP HERE IF YOU GET AN ERROR MESSAGE.
conda update
5. Let's update Anaconda by typing in your terminal conda
want to update the packages.

and then type y when it asks if you

6. Now let's create an environment for us to work in. Type
conda create --name homework python=3
jupyter
into your terminal and say yes to the
installation. What this does is it creates a whole new python environment that won't interfere with any python
environments you have set up before (Mac users: Apple installs Python 2.7 in your system and messing with
it can have disastrous consequences for your machine. Thus, environments).
source activate
7. Activate your new environment by typing homework
activate
homework
on a Windows machine.

on a Mac/Linux and

8. Now let's install Agate, a python library for working with data in very data journalist friendly ways. To do that,
pip install
we'll use Pip, which is installed with Anaconda. Type agate
and wait for it to finish.
jupyter
9. Let's check if Jupyter Notebook is installed correctly by typing notebook
browser pops up with stuff in it. It should use your default browser.

and watching to see if a

10. On the top right of the browser, you should see a dropdown menu called New. Click that, and go down to
Notebooks and Python 3. Click Python 3.
import
11. In the new window, in the first cell, type agate

.

12. Underneath the Cell dropdown menu, you'll see a triangle pointing to the right into a line. Clicking that
executes your command (which you want to do). In the next cell, type `print("Hello World!") and click that run
button again.
13. Marvel at what you have done. You've created an entire virtual environment, installed software into it without
harming your computer, opened up a browser based code editor and executed some Python. Cool, eh?
14. Go to File > Close and Halt.
15. Go to your terminal and hit control C and say yes to shutting down he Jupyter server.
source
16. Your last step of the day: Type deactivate
on a Mac/Linux or deactivate on Windows. This
exits out of your environment and returns you to your normal computer. We will do that every time we use this

1/2

homework environment: We'll activate it when we start and deactivate it when we stop.

2/2

