How to avoid rookie mistakes
#NICAR16
MaryJo Webster, Tisha Thompson, Brent Jones, Matt Wynn

Basic best practices
Get to know your data first! Get documentation
Always make a backup copy!
No blank rows or columns
Don’t “mix” info in same column
Avoid deleting fields
Run cross-checks on your results

Not so good documentation...

Better….

Not such a good idea...

Avoid mixing information

Better….

Better....

So many problems!

Cleaning data
Look for dirty data. Don’t wait for it to find you!
Learn good data cleaning techniques/tools

How many ways can you spell “Northside”?

Bulletproofing your work
Keep a trail of your analysis
Find ways to automate your work so it is replicable
Repeat your analysis
Have a colleague review your analysis
Run your analysis by your sources

Catching your mistakes using a data log

“Count” your data and track it with a log
YOU WILL HAVE A RECORD
OF THE MISTAKES YOU
COULD HAVE MADE!!!

YOU WILL QUICKLY
FIND TIPS IN THE DATA

Counts force to double-check yourself

THE MEASUREMENTS
ARE ALL DIFFERENT!!! I
INITIALLY THOUGHT THE
“QTY” WAS A “UNIT” AND
NOT NECESSARILY A KG
OR MG OR EVEN LBS!!!

If you don’t count...you will make a HUGE mistake

This is the original “poop in the water data I
downloaded. I still don’t know what I did
wrong, but it has 105,046 lines of data and for
some bizarre reason I never did any counts!!!!!

Why someone else should always look at your work!

What did I do??????
I have no idea what I did wrong because I didn’t keep a log of my import. This was several weeks after I did
the work. I couldn’t even remember which dataset I imported!

If you have no one else, always replicate your imports and analysis from scratch

What do we mean by “automate”?
Simple: Keep list of your SQL queries so you can re-run them
Better: Learn a scripting language (such as Python) and write scripts to do
much of the heavy lifting - importing, cleaning, analysis and even some
visualization.

Data visualizations
Develop a style guide and/or templates (Sunlight Data Viz style guide)
Avoid being fancy for the sake of being fancy
Decide what your “mission” is
Avoid trying to do/show too much
Be kind to color-blind readers
Not everything can be visualized!

Too much? (Yes.)

Too much?
(Yes.)

Too much? (Yes.)

Strengthen your statistics/numeracy chops
Margins of error are important! (polls, census, etc)
Learn some basic statistical concepts (IRE tipsheets, “Statistics for people who
think they hate statistics”, online courses)
Census data - Learn how to check statistical significance. Great tool here.
Read the book: Numbers in the newsroom, by Sarah Cohen

Why statistical significance is important

Other things rookies need to know

Be willing to kill stuff! Speak up when something is wrong
Think carefully about what you put online
If you don’t have somebody around to help you, find someone/train someone

Other resources
A survival guide for data visualization
Quartz Bad Data Guide
ProPublica’s guide to bulletproofing your work
Sarah Cohen’s bulletproofing data guide
Statistics for the newsroom (tipsheet by Jennifer LaFleur & David Donald)

This slide deck: http://tinyurl.com/DataRookies
MaryJo Webster, maryjo.webster@startribune.com, @MaryJoWebster
Matt Wynn, matt.wynn@owh.com, @MattWynn
Tisha Thompson, tisha.thompson@nbcuni.com, @TishaOnTV
Brent Jones, bjones@stlpublicradio.org, @brentajones

