Tracking local employment and pay trends
David Knox, Akron Beacon Journal
dknox@thebeaconjournal.com
330-996-3532; 330-416-6552c

2007 IRE CAR Conference, Cleveland, Ohio
Workplace CAR panel

Goal: Go beyond the monthly unemployment numbers
Tracking how many people have jobs or are unemployed is easy. Numbers roll out every month, with
estimates for cities as small as 25,000 population. But finding out which types of businesses and
industries are hiring and firing and whether paychecks are getting bigger or shrinking can be frustrating.

Problem: Lack of detailed local data
The most-used economic surveys, including the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Current Employment
Survey, don’t produce data for communities smaller than metropolitan statistical areas. That’s a dealbreaker for local coverage because most counties aren’t part of metro areas. (More than half of Ohio’s 88
counties are left out.) Some larger news outlets have a flip-side problem: Their overall market is so big
that, while some counties are excluded, others are gerrymandered into two or more metro areas. What’s
needed is a source of job data for all counties, regardless of size. Fortunately, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics has an alternative database that meets that need.

Solution: Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
As the name implies, the QCEW (http://www.bls.gov/cew/) isn’t a survey; it's a full tabulation of employees
covered by unemployment insurance. The data is drawn from information businesses are required to file with
the states. The QCEW reports the number of employees, aggregate and average pay and counts of
business establishments, broken down by government and private industry sectors.
Because it's a census, there's no margin of error that grows as you drill down geographically. Unlike the
Current Employment Survey, the QCEW doesn't stop at metro areas. It provides comparable data for every
county in the nation.

Other advantages: More detailed
Because of its 100-percent counts, the QCEW can tabulate employment and wage data into much
smaller categories by type of business, using the meticulous North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS). Broader categories, such as “professional and technical services,” are broken down into
smaller components, such as computer system design, accounting and advertising. The limitation: If there
are only a few businesses in a NAICS category within a county, the data is suppressed because of
privacy concerns. A useful FAQ: http://www.bls.gov/cew/cewfaq.htm.
The NAICS system was adopted by the QCEW in 2001. But trends can be tracked to 1990 thanks to
comparable “reconstituted” data that provides a bridge from the previous Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) system. Caution: Watch out for dramatic changes in a single year. They may stem from corrected
numbers involving businesses miscategorized in earlier years. When in doubt, call the Bureau of Labor
Statistics or the equivalent state agency.

A big disadvantage: Not as timely
The QCEW comes out four times a year and there’s a considerable time lag – six to seven months after
the end of the quarter. The annual recap is released about nine months after the end of the year. That
means the final 2006 release won’t be out until October 2007.

Getting the data: Three ways
1. The labor bureau serves up the most popular national data from lists of prepared tables, broken down by
the NAICS for 2001 forward (http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?en) and by the SIC system, 1997-2000
(http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?ew).
2. For state, metro and county data, à la carte is the way to go, with custom tables created online using
Java-based front ends (http://www.bls.gov/cew/home.htm#data). But again, the NAICS and SIC databases
are accessed separately and can’t be directly compared.

Page 1 of 2

3. The all-NAICS statistics, using the reconstructed 1990-2000 data, are available only as flat text files,
which can be downloaded from the labor bureau’s ftp server (ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/). The
job is made much easier by shell files containing import specs for SAS, MS Access and Excel. The
document subdirectory also has code “map” text files that can be easily converted into lookup tables.

Using the data: Tracking local job trends
The Akron Beacon Journal first used the QCEW to determine what kinds of local businesses had
expanding workforces. The result was a four-section, 38-page special report, “Outlook: Our economy, our
jobs, our future,” published April 3, 2005.
Below is the sidebar on the retail and wholesale sector. More detailed tables showed employment and
average pay broken down into 15 type of establishments, such as food and beverage stores, department
stores, electronic/appliance outlets, etc.

Page 2 of 2

