Surveys: The bad, the ugly and the good
(your own, that is)
David Donald
Training Director

Investigative Reporters & Editors
Missouri School of Journalism
Columbia, MO 65211

Phone: 912-713-2728
Fax: 912-898-8240
E-mail: ddonald@ire.org

When I conducted surveys for the Savannah Morning News, I wrote a list of principles
that helped get buy-in. I had the managing editor sign off on them, which meant I
explained what I was up to so that he understood the process Here are the principles:
1. For public opinion research to work in the newsroom, there should be a belief that
it is essential for finding out about our communities. Polls can’t be seen as just a
curiosity or an add-on to more “serious” coverage.
2. Surveys are not just for election time. They are worth doing anytime you explore
social problems in-depth.
3. Polls do not replace traditional shoe-leather reporting. Polls discover truths (with
a small “t”) that traditional reporting can’t, just as traditional reporting discovers
its own truths unavailable to the pollster. The two compliment each other.
4. In an age of media overload, readers are demanding information that helps them
better understand the world and where they live. This increases the pressure on
journalists to dig below the surface to find out what’s going on. The scientific
rigor used in polling allows us to dig at a different level than we could before.
Here’s some advice I learned from conducting more than a dozen polls over six years
before becoming training director at IRE.
1. Collaboration with a university works well. I’m not talking about hiring the
survey arm often associated with some university institute. Such places often
charge upwards of $10,000 or more for a typical telephone survey. Instead, the
collaboration can be much smaller.
2. Work with a professor who knows the techniques and teaches them. Chances are,
he or she will have students who are studying surveying, who need money and
who are bright and easily trained. And the professor might be looking for a realworld experience to help in the classroom. That allows you to pay the university
researcher and the students at a rate that can bring the budget into the $2,000 to
$4,000 range. It includes two weeks of telephoning from a dozen to 30 students
working for you. You must be willing to do work evenings. As an AM paper, we
used newsroom phones that were available at those hours. That permits the
newspaper’s researcher and the university’s researcher to monitor the students
phoning in the newsroom and see that they do call-backs.
3. Think nontraditional departments, such as marketing. While political science and
sociology departments are logical choices, they may be at odds with newsroom

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

values. Marketing people understand the methods (which is what you’re hiring
them for) without worrying about your purposes.
Do not give up total control to the university researcher. You should have final
say on the content of the survey. The academic can help you craft good survey
questions, but only you can tell if the questions will get at the story you’re
covering.
Make sure you have a good random sample to base your results on. Work together
on developing the sample.
Telephone surveys bring the quickest results. While not as cheap as mail surveys,
you can still get a good response rate (although it gets harder all the time). Be
willing to go to campus ahead of time to train the students so that they’re ready to
go when you begin calling.
Learn how to do the data analysis yourself. That means knowing some basic
social statistics and the computer programs, such as SPSS, that allow you to
quickly find results. If you can do this yourself instead of relying on the university
researcher, you remain in control of the story. As a journalist, you most likely will
see what is newsworthy and what is worth exploring in the data.
Redefine what your research staff does. Encourage CAR reporters to learn
statistics and scientific polling.

Finally, if you don’t have the expertise, here’s where to start:.
Websites
“20 Questions A Journalist Should Ask About Poll Results,” posted by the National
Council on Public Polls: http://www.ncpp.org/?q=node/4
Odum Institute for Research in Social Science
http://152.2.32.107/odum/jsp/home.jsp
Books
Sheldon R. Gawiser and G. Evans Witt. A Journalist’s Guide to Public Opinion Polls.
Westport, CT.: Praeger, 1994.
Don A. Dillman. Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored Design Method: 2007 Update
with New Internet, Visual, and Mixed Mode Design. New York: Wiley & Sons,
2006.
Priscilla Salant and Don A. Dillman. How to Conduct Your Own Survey. New York:
Wiley & Sons, 1994.
Philip Meyer. Precision Journalism: A Reporter’s Introduction to Social Science
Methods, 4th ed. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002.

2

