About the
Center for Responsive Politics
The Center for Responsive Politics is the nation’s premier research group tracking money in U.S.
politics and its effect on elections and public policy. Founded in 1983, the nonpartisan, nonprofit
Center aims to create a more educated voter, an involved citizenry and a more responsive
government.
CRP’s award-winning Web site, OpenSecrets.org, is the most comprehensive resource for
money-in-politics research and analysis available anywhere.

OpenSecrets.org
OpenSecrets.org is the Center’s flagship Web
site and an essential resource for anyone
interested in researching the many ways that
money influences federal elections and policy.
As the online incarnation of a groundbreaking
project the Center launched nearly 25 years
ago, OpenSecrets.org currently provides freely
available, easy-to-use databases tracking:
• Campaign contributions and expenditures
• Lobbying and Washington’s “revolving door”
• Personal finances of government officials
• Privately sponsored congressional travel
The Center distinguishes itself by deeply
processing and analyzing the money-in-politics
data it collects. For example, CRP is the only
organization that standardizes both the
individual and employer for every campaign
contribution. This allows meaningful reporting
and comparison of the top industries, sectors
and individual contributors to all federal
candidates, political action committees, parties
and congressional committees. Profiles of the
major players, correlations between the money
and legislative votes and more are easily
derived from such a thorough system.

Major Foundation Funders

CRP is a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization.
Support comes from foundation grants, individual
contributions and research fees.
• Carnegie Corporation of New York
• Ford Foundation
• Sunlight Foundation
• Pew Charitable Trusts
• Joyce Foundation

Election 2006 Web Traffic
• On Election Day ‘06, traffic to OpenSecrets.org
surpassed the 2004 presidential election. The
site received the most hits ever in a single
day—more than 2.3 million—and delivered
436,000 page views to nearly 45,000 unique
users.
• In the week preceding the election, the site
averaged nearly 1.5 million hits, 366,000 page
views and 27,000 unique visitors per day.

Awards & Recognition
• Webby Award for Best Politics Site: 2006,
2002, 2001
• PC Magazine: Top 101 “Classic” Sites
• Forbes: Best of the Web
• Yahoo!: Daily Pick
• National Press Club: Distinguished
Contribution to Online Journalism

1101 14th St. NW, Suite 1030 / Washington, DC 20005
(202) 857-0044
www.OpenSecrets.org / info@crp.org

New Databases
Added in 2006/2007

PERSONAL FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
For richer, for poorer: Search the most recent reports for net
worth, major holdings, liabilities and transactions, as well as
sources of income, gifts, travel reimbursements, outside
positions and agreements for Members of Congress, the
president, vice president, presidential Cabinet and other select
officials.
REVOLVING DOOR
Spin cycle: Track the movements of well-connected
individuals between government and private interests in this
searchable database of more than 6,400 people. See which
influential lobbyists and firms have ties to the offices and
agencies they lobby. Learn which government agencies have
sent the most employees into the more lucrative private sector.
TRAVEL
If it's Tuesday, this must be Barbados: Want to know just
how far your congressman will go to get the job done? This
database allows searches of all senators, congressmen and
their staffers' trips, both domestic and abroad, by name, date,
destination, purpose, and by the private sponsors who paid for
them.
MEDIA CONTACTS:
Sheila Krumholz, Executive Director
skrumholz@crp.org
(202) 857-0044 x104
Massie Ritsch, Communications Director
massie@crp.org
(202) 857-0044 x111
Douglas Weber, Senior Researcher
dweber@crp.org
(202) 857-0044 x107

Core Databases
CONTRIBUTIONS
Who Gives?: Delve into a database of all individual
contributions to federal candidates, political action committees
and party committees since the 1990 election. Search for a
donor by name, state, ZIP code, employer or the recipient of
their check. Look also for soft money contributions from
individuals and companies to political parties.
527s
Taking issue: When there’s not an election going on — but also
when there is — the issue advocacy groups commonly known
as 527 committees take to the airwaves to try to influence public
opinion. Find out who is contributing big, unlimited money to
these often shadowy groups, and how that may be influencing
their message.
LOBBYING
The Price of Influence: Each year, industries and other
interests spend billions of dollars employing lobbyists to market
their positions in Washington. Find out which industries,
companies and organizations spend the most to lobby federal
agencies, and which issues are drawing the most money.
Search by spender, lobbying firm, individual lobbyist, the agency
lobbied or the issue in question.
PACs
The Big Bucks: Whether it represents a giant corporation, a
labor union, an industry or a single ideological issue, a political
action committee can pack a big political punch as it gathers
money from individuals to distribute to candidates. Search for
PACs by name or affiliated industry, search for individual
contributions to PACs and see which interests are backed by the
most money.

