Statistics for the newsroom
Jennifer LaFleur
The Dallas Morning News
jlafleur@dallasnews..com
With contributions from NICAR’s own David Donald

Before doing any analysis on your data, it’s best to

know what you have to work with. We hope this tip
sheet walks you through different types of data and
what you can do with them when it comes to statistical
tools.

What does your data look like?
You may have heard of the data ladder.
It’s a conceptual tool to explain
differences in data. We’ll start at the
bottom of the data ladder:

Categorical data
Categorical data comes in three flavors.
The basic, most simple is DICHOTOMOUS. This means
that the field has two choices: yes or no, 1 or 0, etc… Here
are the sorts of analyses you can do?
Frequencies
Yes
123
No
234

34%
66%

Crosstabs
Like Bush
Yes
No

Live in Texas
Yes
No
382
200
125
307

The second type of categorical data is that with more
than two possibilities such as age groups or race groups.
Frequencies
Race
Frequency
Asian
4766
Black
12807
Hispanic
9129
Native Amer
250
Multiple
1756
Unknown
3745
White
133915

Crosstabs
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Native
Amer
Multiple
Unknown
White

Ticket Type 1
1
0
0

Type2
3
15
21

Type 3
0
2
1

0
0
7
7

0
2
22
71

0
0
3
31

The third type, is ORDINAL. That means that the order
of the categories means something, but that the actual
values don’t. Sound confusing? Consider some examples.
School grade levels are categories. Four is definitely
higher than one, but four is not necessarily four times
one. Census age groups are ordinal as well (while age
itself would be in our next category).

Continuous data
You’ve reached the top of the data
ladder. You can perform math on this
data. You’ll often have so many
numbers, such as all the individual
incomes of people who applied for a
mortgage, that running frequencies is
impractical. Most continuous data is
ratio data, meaning it’s based on a scale that starts with
zero and you can say a $50,000 salary is twice as large as
a $25,000 income.
You have many analysis options with continuous data.
•

Mean – This is a type of stat that statisticians call a
“measure of central tendency.” While you should
never use that phrase in a story, it’s good to think of
the mean as an attempt to find the middle. The mean
is what we usually think of as “the average” a very
common stat you’ve probably already used in
stories. You calculate the mean by adding all of your
numbers (say incomes, ages or loan amounts) and
dividing the sum by the number of instances. For

In this case, an R-square of .83 says about 83 percent
of the poor test scores is related to the level of
poverty.

example, we say the average age is X by taking five
ages, summing them, and dividing by 5.
•

Median – Another attempt to find the middle, the
median is simply the middle number of all the
numbers you have. Another way of expressing it is
to say that half the numbers are above the median
and half below. The median is especially useful
when your data can be “skewed,” meaning that a few
really large numbers will make the average a less
reliable view of the middle. Think of this as the “Bill
Gates effect.” If you live in a neighborhood with a
bunch of houses that value about $100,000 each and
Bill builds a $26 million mansion in your
neighborhood, Bill’s house will affect the average a
lot but the median very little if at all.

•

Range – Simply the difference between the highest
and lowest values. If the highest mortgage loan in
your community was $200,000 and the lowest
$35,000, the range is $165,000. The range tells you
whether your numbers are spread widely or
clustered.

•

Rank: We’re used to sorting. Ranking is putting in
order based on a score or other measure.

•

•

It’s clear, though, that poverty and low test scores
and other continuous data can be related.
Correlation helps us see that relationship and the
nature of that relationship. Does one characteristic
increase as the other increases? Or are they inversely
related, with one decreasing as the other increases?
Even knowing the amount of correlation between
two characteristics can make us more comfortable
with our regression analysis. A Correlation Matrix
shows how many variables correlate to each other.
Dateline NBC wanted to investigate racial profiling.
It looked at traffic violations recorded by many
major city police departments and the race of those
getting the citation. Showing a correlation between
race and the violations helped make the point and
make the reporters more confident about further
analysis used for the story.

Regression- Some characteristics help predict
others. For example, people growing up in a lowerincome family are more likely to score lower on
standardized tests than those from higher-income
families. Regression helps us see that connection
and even say about how much characteristics affect
another.
To start, you need to determine which
characteristics are what we call independent
variables. These are the predictors. Next, the
characteristics they help predict are the dependent
variables.
When you run a regression, you get a result called
an R-square. That will help you see how much the
independent variable predicts the dependent
variable.

Correlation – But don’t get into the habit of saying
that the poverty CAUSED the lower test score.
Most social researchers, from sociologists to
political scientists, get hung up about causation –
and they should. While we can see that poverty
affects test scores, (The opposite doesn’t make
sense: We don’t become poor based on our test
scores.) we don’t know that it actually causes low
test scores.

Mixing it up
Mixed categorical and continuous: Sometimes you get
categorical data and continuous data, just as Dateline
did when it analyzed race and traffic violations. Race
and people’s incomes are likely to show correlation.
•

ANOVA, or Analysis of Variance, helps us look more
closely when your independent variable is
categorical and the dependent continuous.

Model Summary

Model
1

R
.911(a)

R Square
.830

Adjusted R
Square
.829

a Predictors: (Constant), PCTPOOR

Std. Error of
the Estimate
10.8330

ANOVA uses a number of tests to measure the main
effects the independent has on the dependent. It can also
look at the interaction effects of two or more
independent variables, say race and sex, on someone’s
income. How do the groups compare is a typical
question for ANOVA.

Categorical and continuous AND your
outcome is dichotomous
Clearly, you can do frequencies, crosstabs and the
calculations that you can do with continuous variables.
But when you want to look at how some variables affect
a dichotomous outcome, logistic regression is the tool.
That allows you to control for certain variables and
compare groups. The Boston Globe used logistic
regression on traffic stop data to be able to say that
whites were less likely to get tickets than minorities and
that men were more likely to get tickets.

people and races and their census tract. You can create
continuous data by aggregating by tract.

Understanding the nature of your data
Some notes about dealing with polls and surveys
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Those statements come from a fairly complicated
analysis. Below is an example of some of the output.
Look at the last column. This tells us that minorities
have more than 8 times the odds of getting stopped as
whites. You’ll need more information on logistic
regression to do one.

Don’t run with scissors
•

•
•

What it also let’s you do is control for other factors. For
example, in analyzing home loans a logistic regression
would let you see if minorities were more or less likely
to get loans and control for differences in income and
other factors.

Get the questionnaire and the methodology. If
they won’t give it to you, that’s a red flag
Beware of nonscientific methods: Web surveys,
man on the street or other self-selection
Know the sample size, which will give you the
sampling error
Again, know the source
Account for margin of error and non-response
or “don’t know” when drawing conclusions
If possible, run statistical tests on the data.
What may look significant to you, may not be.
When reporting, avoid false precision. Saying
52.18 percent of people think “blah, blah, blah” is
portraying an impossible accuracy to readers.

•

•
•

Make sure you know how many records you
should have and that you have them all. If you
or someone in your newsroom tells you they
have 65,536 records, be concerned. That is the
exact limit of Excel.
Double-check totals or counts. Check for
studies or summary reports
Consistency-checked all fields. Are all city
names spelled the same way? How about other
important fields?
Other basic checks: make sure all states are
included, all cities/counties are included, the
range of fields is possible (for example, check for
DOBs that would make people too old or too
young.)
Check for missing data or blank fields
Check your methodology (if necessary) against
other similar research

Safety First: Up and down the ladder
DOWN
Say you want categorical data and your data are
continuous. For example, you want age groups, but you
have ages. Recode you data into categories. Look at the
distribution to decide where to make the breaks.
UP
If you want continuous data, but you only have
categorical, the ONLY way to go up the ladder is to
aggregate to another level. For example, if you have

Consider your goal
Show Counts
Use frequencies and cross tabs. Check to see if there are
other tools, such as an index you should use. Find out
how that data is typically reported.
Change/growth
Make sure that some underlying factor does not account
for the increase. Let’s take an example of an increase in
measles among people 65 and older in New Jersey:

-

Use a rate, raw numbers could simply mean that the
65+ population has increased
Check how the data is reported. Could reporting
changes account for the increase?
Has anyone else studies this?

Rank
Are you using the right variable to rank. If you are using
sample data, be careful, the ranks may change within the
margin of error. Make sure that what you’re ranking on
doesn’t mimic some other factor (otherwise you may
need an index). For example, an increase in rich Asians,
could just mean an overall income increase.
Correlate
Use your statistical software to run a correlation matrix.
Keep in mind that things may correlate, but not
necessarily explain each other. For example, there is a
correlation between the number of taxis in a city and the
number of pigeons – why? Bigger populations in both,
but no meaning.
Show how much of a factor is explained by other
factors: Regression
If you’re working with a continuous outcome variable,
you’ll use linear regression. If it’s dichotomous, you’ll
want to use logistic regression.

Some examples from the beats
Education

Sports
•

The Pittsburgh Tribune-Review analyzed NFL data
to look at player injuries. They also looked at the
effect of players in certain positions being injured.

Business
•

Chris Schmitt, then of the San Jose Mercury News
used the Herfindahl-Hirshman Index, which
measures competition in a market, along with
regression to show that the NASDAQ stock market
was not as competitive as it was supposed to be and
that because of that, investors lost money.

Politics
•

In analyzing polls and voting results, news
organizations have used statistics to look at who
votes particular ways.

Indexes
An index is used to simplify the measurement of
movements in a numerical series or to compare a set of
numbers and is usually on an understandable scale (0-1
or 0-100). Indices also can be used to combine several
variables.

•

The Dallas Morning News used linear regression to find
schools that scored much higher than expected on
tests. This lead to stories about potential cheating

Indexes are all around us: The Dow Jones Industrial
Average or the FBI’s crime index.

•

Several newspapers have used demographics and
test score data to what factors impact whether
scores go up or down and then use those factors to
see who is doing as they should, taking those things
into consideration.

A good example of an index that combines several values
is the consumer price index (CPI). The CPI represents
all goods and services purchased for consumption by
urban households. We have classified all expenditure
items into over 200 categories, arranged into 7 major
groups.

Crime and justice
•

The Boston Globe and Dateline NBC used logistic
regression to examine traffic stop patterns.

•

The Dallas Morning News used logistic regression to
show that blacks were more likely to be struck from
juries by prosecutors.

•

Several newspapers have used linear regression
along with local crime statistics to show what
factors drive crime rates.

You could come up with your own sort of CPI,
depending on what you needed to look at. Let’s say
you’re supposed to look at costs for skiing at various
resorts. Rather than just comparing lift tickets, you
might realize that skiing is more than just the price of a
lift ticket. Your Cost-of-skiing index might be made up
of the cost of a lift ticket, ski rental, transportation and
an after skiing drink. That would give you one number
to compare across all ski areas.

Measuring Diversity
If Washington reporters can be accused of pack political
journalism, CAR reporters can be accused of pack
nerdiness. One particular index hit its hey-day after the
2000 Census – the Diversity Index, a cool tool
developed years earlier by Philip Meyer and Shawn
McIntosh for USA Today. The index measures the
probability that two people pulled at random from a
given area would be of a different race. The higher the
diversity, the more likely the two would of different
races.
“The USA Today diversity index solves this problem with a
probability-based index. The index has a range from 0 to 1, and its
value represents the probability that two people chosen at random
from the study population will differ along at least one ethnic
dimension.” (International Journal of Public Opinion Research,
Spring 1992).
Here’s the formula to calculate the Index of Diversity:
Step 1:
Probability that two persons chosen from a population
at random will be members of the same racial group: PR
= (A2+B2+C2+D2) where A, B, C & D are the proportions
in the population of whites, blacks, native Americans,
and Asians or Pacific islanders. (Using the single-race
total as the base.)
Step 2:
Compute the probability that two persons chosen from
a population at random will either be both Hispanic or
both not Hispanic. This is a separate value because
Census questionnaires ask Hispanic origin in a different
question from race. Therefore it is possible to be both
white and Hispanic or black and Hispanic.
PH=(H2+N2)
Step 3:
Calculate the probability that two randomly chosen
persons are the same in both race and Hispanic/nonHispanic status: PR * PH
Subtract the result from 1: 1-( PR * PH)

The Gini coefficient
First of all, it’s not every day that you get to use a big
word like “coefficient.” But other than impressing your
nerdy friends, the Gini is a useful tool. This tool was
developed by Mr. Gini (Italian economist Corrado Gini)
in 1912 to estimate the inequality of incomes and wealth.

Special tools are needed to measure income inequality
because standard income measurements, such as
median, don’t give you the whole picture.
Let’s consider two income distributions:
County 1 County 2
100
18000
888
19001
1000
19300
1200
20000
48800
30000
50000
31600
51800
32000
70000
34000
The median for both of these is $25,000; however, the
range is significantly different. County 1 has incomes at
extreme ends of the spectrum, while county 2 tends to
be in the middle.
Because I didn’t have time to come up with a good tool
to measure inequality and Mr. Gini had already done
some all the work, I used a spreadsheet to use the Gini
formula. (which J.J. Thompson had developed at the
University of North Carolina and provided to students
in an advanced NICAR boot camp a few years ago thanks J.J.!)
The data used for the Gini is categorical income data
such as that provided in Census figures. For example:
500 people in the $10,000 to $14,999 category and so
on... By multiplying the midpoints of each category by
the number of people in the category, you can derive the
weighted income and therefore the other parameters.
The result of the Gini is one number you can use to
compare your county to other counties or to your county
over time. Here’s the formula:
Gini=1-SUM(Xi-Xj)(Yi+Yj)
Where:
X is the cumulative proportion of recipients
Y is the cumulative proportion of income
i is a particular income category
j is i-1 (the previous income category)
This is repeated for all the income categories and then
totaled so you end up with one number for the county or
whatever area you’re calculating. You can calculate that
same number for other counties to compare
geographically or to other years to compare over time.

Competition
When he worked for the San Jose Mercury News, Chris
Schmitt wanted to look at market competitiveness in

the NASDAQ, which claimed to be more competitive
because of the computerized system it used. Schmitt
did some research and started talking to experts.
He used a tool used by economists, the HerfindahlHirschman Index. This index is based on market shares
of the players in a particular marketplace. Viewing the
dealers who trade a particular NASDAQ stock as a
marketplace, the Mercury News applied this measure to
the market shares held by each dealer in that stock. The
HHI index is calculated as the sum of the squares of the
market shares held by each market participant. Index
values are interpreted as follows:
<1,000 Competitive
1,000-1,800
Moderately Concentrated
>1,800 Highly concentrated
The H index is obtained by squaring the market-share of
each of the players, and then adding up those squares.
For example:
(%Share of company1)+(%share of company2)+…
The higher the index, the more concentration and
(within limits) the less open market competition. A
monopoly, for example, would have an H index of 1002,
or 10,000. By definition, that's the maximum score. By
contrast, an industry with 100 competitors where each
has 1 percent of the market would have a score of 12 + 12 +
12+ ...12 or a total of 100.
What Schmitt found:

NASDAQ is supposed to keep investors' costs low
through spirited competition among the firms that
execute your orders to buy or sell stocks. But
NASDAQ frequently doesn't operate that way, a San
Jose Mercury News examination shows. Often,
trading of a company's stock is concentrated in the
hands of only a few dealers. And when that
happens, the transaction costs for investors are
higher.

which are you? The socially acceptable thing is to say
that you’re pro-environment, even if you’re not.
One way is in a survey to ask a bunch of questions on a
scale, such as whether more material consumption
makes happier people. You ask on a scale of 1-5 if you
agree or disagree with the statement.
Say you ask seven questions along this line. Then you
can see if they correlate. For your index, you want some
correlation but not too much. No correlation means your
questions are not measuring the same thing. Too much
correlation and there’s no need for the different
questions. So a Pearson Correlation or “r” between .2
and .5 is good between the questions.
Next, take the questions that correlate and run
something called Alpha, which shows how much effect
each question has on the others. You want the score to
be above .7 at least, .8 is better. If you find that to be met,
then you can average the scores on the seven questions
(or however many correlate) and come up with one
score that measures your difficult concept.
Using that, the Savannah Morning News showed that
those who are most pro-development were lower
income people, those who had been left out of the
American Dream. Material success apparently allows
you to become more pro-environment.
For more information…
Numbers in the Newsroom: Using Math and Statistics in News by
Sarah Cohen for Investigative Reporters and Editors,
Inc.
Precision Journalism, 4th ed., by Philip Meyer. Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers: Lanham, MD, 2002.
News and Numbers by Victor Cohn. Iowa State University
Press, Ames. 1989.
How to Lie with Statistics by Darrell Huff. W. W. Norton
& Company, New York. 1954 (renewed 1984)
Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences by
John Allen Paulos. Vintage Books, New York. 1990.

Your own index
(From David Donald, IRE/NICAR)
Sometimes, you want to know something but no one has
a ready-made index to measure what you’re looking at.
You can create your own index.
When looking at people’s attitudes toward prodevelopment versus pro-environment, no index
measures this. And it’s hard to ask people up front,

A Mathematician Reads the Newspaper by John Allen Paulos.
Anchor Books, New York. 1995. (Also, check out the
tape from Paulos keynote address at NICAR 2002 in
Philadelphia)
The Journalist and the Gini Coefficient: A Statistical Approach,
by J.J. Thompson. Master Thesis, University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill School of Journalism.

