Home Mortgage Disclosure Act: Working with new race/ethnicity categories
Paula Lavigne - The Des Moines Register
NICAR 2007 – Cleveland
One of the most popular uses of HMDA data is to measure lending variations by race and
ethnicity. In the last few years, the race/ethnicity reporting requirements and tabulations
have changed. They offer more detail, but with that comes more headaches.
What’s new:
Reporting – Lenders for first-origination loans are required to collect race and
ethnicity data, including in interviews with applicants over the phone.
Race/ethnicity information is options for institutions that buy loans in the
secondary market. (In the “action” field, these are under code ‘6’.)
Tabulation – Just like the U.S. Census, race and ethnicity are two separate
questions and there are options for multiple race selections. There are 12 fields
total, including:
APP_ETH 1 (applicant's ethnicity)
1 -- Hispanic or Latino
2 -- Not Hispanic or Latino
3 -- Information not provided by applicant in mail,
Internet, or telephone application
4 -- Not applicable
5 -- No co-applicant
COAPP_ETH1 (co-applicant's ethnicity)
1 -- Hispanic or Latino
2 -- Not Hispanic or Latino
3 -- Information not provided by applicant in mail,
Internet, or telephone application
4 -- Not applicable
5 -- No co-applicant
APP_RACE1 1 (race of the applicant)
1 -- American Indian or Alaska Native
2 -- Asian
3 -- Black or African American
4 -- Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander
5 -- White
6 -- Information not provided by applicant in mail,
Internet, or telephone application
7 -- Not applicable
8 -- No co-applicant

APP_RACE2, APP_RACE3, APP_RACE4,
APP_RACE5, and (for the coapplicant)
COAP_RACE1, COAP_RACE2, COAP_RACE3,
COAP_RACE4 and COAP_RACE5 follow using
the same codes.
Define a minority loan: I’ve defined a loan as a minority loan if either the
applicant or the co-applicant is anything other than white, non-Hispanic.
Depending on the program you use (SPSS, MySQL, Access, etc.) you
would write this in any number of ways, but basically what you want is
the following (in plain English).
MINORITY LOAN: APP_ETH is 1 or COAPP_ETH is 1 or
APP_RACE1 is 1, 2, 3, or 4 or APP_RACE2 is 1, 2, 3, or 4, (same for
APP_RACE 3-5), or COAP_RACE1 is 1, 2, 3, or 4, (same for
COAP_RACE 2-5).
Use this to create a new field called MINORITY and tell it to record a Y
(or whatever) in each row that fits the above criteria, and N in rows that
don’t. Rows with Y then would be minority loans.
At this point, you can’t simply say that all other loans are non-minority
applicants, because many loans are missing information. You should set it
up to include loans where there is at least one human applicant whose race
and ethnicity are known. (Remember the codes for not-applicable and
information not available.) You decide how limiting you want to be, but
my scenario might exclude some loans that others would want to include.
NONMINORITY LOAN: MINORITY is N, APP_ETH is 2, APP_ETH is
5. This includes any case where the loan is clearly not a minority loan and
where there is a main applicant who is not-Hispanic and who is white.
‘Not applicable’: If you’re looking at first-origination loans and the code
‘4’ for ethnicity or ‘7’ for race is entered, that likely means the applicant
was not a person and was a business or limited partnership instead. These
codes can show up often for secondary market purchases (action code ‘6’)
where race/ethnicity information is not required. In origination loans, ‘Not
applicable’ entries are rare when you limit your loans to those for singlefamily, owner occupancy.
You could further limit your MINORITY and NONMINORITY
categories by filtering out any records in which ‘Not applicable’ or
‘Information not provided’ shows up in either the APP_ETH,
COAPP_ETH, APP_RACE1, or COAP_RACE1 fields.

My suggestion is to tally your records both ways to see if accounting for
the ‘Not applicable’ and ‘Information not provided’ has a significant
impact on your totals.
You also could see whether there is any correlation between census tracts
with high percentages of ‘Not applicable’ or ‘Information not provided’
and the percentage of minorities or of a certain income group in those
tracts. My own experience, and that from others who’ve tried this, is that
there is no strong correlation.
Keep track of your methodology so you can explain it to your editors and
to your readers.

