NICAR 2007 Conference

Using Instiki
Instiki is wiki software written in Ruby and available at www.instiki.org. It runs on any
platform and doesn’t even require a web server.

Installation and Setup
At this writing, Instiki’s latest version was release 0.11, which is substantially different
than version 0.10.0. Instiki runs on Windows, OS X, Linux, Unix, pretty much anything
that Ruby runs on.
Chances are you don’t have the only prerequisites installed, which are Ruby version
1.8.4 or greater (there is a Ruby installer file for Windows at
http://www.instiki.org/show/Installation) and the cross-platform database SQLite 3.3.4,
available at www.sqlite.org. You can also use other databases, including MySQL, by editing the database.yml configuration file (see
http://www.instiki.org/show/Instiki+and+MySQL). Once you start Instiki, remember that it
runs on port 2500 rather than port 80 (the default), although you can proxy it via Apache
so your users don’t have to type in www.yoursite.com:2500.

Features
Instiki’s greatest feature is its ease of use. A simple design and the ability to host multiple wikis on a single install make Instiki a great choice for those seeking to get off the
ground right away. Because it also has its own web server, it’s possible to run Instiki
from just about any computer in your newsroom, which may mean less reliance on IT for
setup. It also exports to HTML, offers a powerful search and generates basic RSS
feeds.
Each Instiki wiki can be customized to a certain degree, including its look and feel and
the addition of a password. When you start Instiki for the first time, you’ll create a master password. If you forget it, it’s stored in the database.

Maintenance
If you’re the person who sets up the wiki, guess what? You own it. Users who come to
rely on it will rely on you for troubleshooting and if the wiki isn’t running. On Windows,
you can set up Instiki to run as a service
(http://www.instiki.org/show/Running+as+a+Windows+Service) so that it automatically
restarts after a reboot. You need to be an administrator on the machine in question to do
this.
Since wiki content is stored in a database, it’s a good idea to perform regular backups in
case the unthinkable happens. Ideally you should be backing up the database to another PC.

