Wiki Panel Handout and Notes - Reporting Cookbook

1 of 3

http://forjournalists.com/cookbook/index.php?title=Wiki_Panel_Handou...

Edit |

Wiki Panel Handout and Notes
From Reporting Cookbook

Contents
1 The Word on Wikis
2 Nuts and Bolts
3 Maintenance
4 Extending your wiki
5 Advice for getting started

The Word on Wikis
MaryJo Webster, St. Paul Pioneer Press and Derek Willis, washingtonpost.com
NICAR 2007

Nuts and Bolts
What to consider when you're going to choose and setup a wiki.
The best role for wiki software is to store and organize vast amounts of textual information. The web pages it
creates are generally very simple, without photos or graphics. The pages are much like Word documents, except
that they are accessed via a Web browser and require a little extra syntax for formatting (bold, italics, hyperlinks,
etc). All of the software products have search capabilities, so you can find any information stored on the wiki site
using keywords.
How can a wiki help a newsroom? The key function that a wiki provides is the ability for everybody to share
whatever information they know in an easy-to-use and easy-to-access way. At the Pioneer Press, the editors signed
off on adding a wiki because it was pitched as a way to build an "institutional memory" in an organized,
documented way. It was also billed as a way to improve "efficiency" -- one of the buzz words in our industry right
now. In the past, we had a traditional intranet and there was one gatekeeper who had to add or edit information all
the time, or we created Word documents and stored them in shared directories that most people had no idea how to
get to.
Does your newsroom have a particular computing platform that you're tied to? In general, wikis can exist in nearly
any environment that allows for a server, a database and a web browser. But if IT and not you is calling the shots,
you should research your software options. Wikimatrix (http://www.wikimatrix.org) is a good place to start, and
there are wikis for nearly every type of environment you can imagine.
Who are your users? Will it be the high-end technology people or a broader range? This will influence your choice
of software, since you'll find yourself doing more support than you wanted if you choose an overly complex system
for a wide audience. Think about their needs and you'll spend less time dealing with their issues once it's up and
running.

Maintenance
3/13/2007 5:08 PM

Wiki Panel Handout and Notes - Reporting Cookbook

2 of 3

http://forjournalists.com/cookbook/index.php?title=Wiki_Panel_Handou...

Keeping the wiki running while doing your job
From a user standpoint, the learning curve is quite small on most wiki software. The only things that are truly
necessary to learn are how to create a new page and then how to apply any formatting you might want. There are
many fancier things you could learn how to do, but the software can be a huge benefit to you without learning all
the tricks. Don't overwhelm your users with stuff they won't need to learn at first.
Most have the ability to password-protect a certain page or a group of pages, so that you could have sections that
are not readily open to the whole newsroom. For example, you could set up a page that allows anyone to view it,
but only certain people to edit it.
Changes to pages are stored on the server and most wiki software allows you to easily view all of the changes to a
page (including the user name of the person making the change and date/time it was made). Then you can also
rollback and reverse any changes that are incorrect or unwanted. (Telling this to reporters really helped allay fears
that they had about causing irreversible damage by hitting the wrong button or something like that). Repeat this
line: "You can't break it."

Extending your wiki
There are wikis and then there are wikis. At the Post we use a simple wiki program called Instiki
(http://www.instiki.org) but we also have more complex ones like MediaWiki (http://www.mediawiki.org/) and
TWiki (http://www.twiki.org/) installed. All of those, and most others, store their content in a database, which
means you can apply all sorts of techniques to it. These include full-text indexing if the Wiki doesn't already
support it.
You can use wikis for data entry and fetching data. See this demo of Informl (http://informl.folklogic.net/wine) , a
Ruby-based wiki, for new way to use wikis.
You can use wikis as an organizer for other parts of your network, your computer and your work life. I used a wiki
as a general log of daily activities and long-term project work, so that there is an easy-to-follow trail of my work.
Beats a bunch of Word docs.
Most wikis now produce syndication feeds such as RSS and Atom, which can allow people to track the changes on
a wiki without having to call up the wiki in a browser. Take advantage of an easy way to keep people informed.

Advice for getting started
1) First think about some of the potential ways your newsroom could use a wiki. What information is hidden within
someone's head or notebooks or private directories? What information is shared now in a way that is not efficient or easy?
How could this help organize an investigative project that you are currently working on or just starting (or maybe just
finished)? Then raise these points when pitching the idea of a wiki to your boss.
2) The quality and usefulness of a wiki site hinges entirely on what users put into it and how well it is maintained. If
reporters put all kinds of phone numbers for sources on the site and then promptly forget about it -- don't use and don't
make updates when people and/or phone numbers change -- your site suddenly becomes worthless. So it's crucial to get
buy-in from everybody and for someone to continue being a proponent/cheerleader/teacher long after the site goes live.
3) Check out the various products and see what features you need. For example, the Pioneer Press higher-ups insisted on
having network authentication (so that employees outside the newsroom couldn't access it and so that certain sections
could have editing restrictions based on your job), so that limited our software choice. At the Post, most teams and
reporters wanted to secure sensitive work behind a login.
4) Be thoughtful about the structure of your wiki when you first begin. Each page must be linked from another page, so
it's crucial to have some sort of hierarchy and organization system. Think about what "sections" you want to have and then
allow each section to branch off into sub-sections and individual pages. Talk to your in-house researchers or archivists

3/13/2007 5:08 PM

Wiki Panel Handout and Notes - Reporting Cookbook

3 of 3

http://forjournalists.com/cookbook/index.php?title=Wiki_Panel_Handou...

about structure - they spend lots of time dealing with such issues.
5) Be prepared for the naysayers who have only heard the horror stories of errors and other problems that have plagued
Wikipedia. Remember, wikis are tools, and like any other can be used well or poorly. There's no inherent evil here. Some
ideas: Suggest the option of having really important stuff behind a password or restricted for editing in some way; show
them how you can trace all of the changes on a page and who made it (and the fact that a wiki can be set up to require a
user name), and that you can rollback any bad changes; suggest that you hold training sessions to get everyone started and
that one of the key points you'll make is that this should be treated just like any other material we publish or broadcast.
Retrieved from "http://forjournalists.com/cookbook/index.php?title=Wiki_Panel_Handout_and_Notes"

BluWiki Toolbox:
Search

Go

Search

Views

Article
Discussion
Edit
History
Toolbox

What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Printable version
Personal tools

Log in / create account
Navigation

Main Page
Community portal
Current events
Recent changes
Random page
Help
Donations
This page was last modified 04:02, 2 March 2007. - This page has been accessed 22 times. Disclaimers - About Reporting Cookbook

3/13/2007 5:08 PM

