LOOSENING LIPS
The Art of the Interview
2007
Eric Nalder
Seattle Post-Intelligencer

General Advice
An interview is a seemingly casual but directed conservation that clicks open locked doors, organizes
scattered memories and penetrates privacy chambers. The craft is both art and science.
I learned the techniques described in this handout during 37 years of reporting, and more than 20
years of teaching workshops. Many were borrowed from psychiatrists, psychologists, police officers, FBI
agents, lawyers, private investigators, social workers, journalists and others who regularly interview
people.
Though I am an experienced interviewer, I regularly re-read my own handout and learn from others.
These techniques require constant practice and the skills must be regularly upgraded.
There is no personality best suited for conducting an interview, and anyone can learn. Each
individual should tailor these techniques to their personality. And it is okay to fail as long as you learn
from your mistakes.
The steps in this handout have been extensively tested (like any good recipe). However, Loosening
Lips is a work in progress. Your emailed suggestions would be deeply appreciated

THE SET UP
RESEARCH: Preparation is as important as execution. Don’t pick up a phone or knock on a door
before you have researched your subject. If you have only five minutes, run the person’s name on the
Internet. Given more time, check clips, resumes, biographies, various writings and home addresses (map
the address on a locator program just to get a feel for it). Look at court records, bankruptcy files,
association memberships, etc. For very important quarries, question friends, family, neighbors and
associates. If you are going to talk to a person about a machine, read the operating manual ahead of time.
Obviously, research produces better questions, but it can also help you to listen. And a well-researched
interviewer is an empowered conversationalist. On the phone your voice will sound more authoritative, in
person your demeanor will be more hypnotic. Yacht buyers candidly described their multi-million-dollar
tax breaks and tanker captains admitted their mistakes to me because I could converse so easily about
their boats, their lives, and their businesses.

PLAN: Plan your interviews, perhaps consulting a friend or colleague. You’ll need to consider
who to interview first, and where. You’ll consider how much time you’ll likely have, whether to tape

record and how much information to reveal. My general advice: Early in any investigation I interview
someone with key knowledge to test the tip or theory. Then I work from the periphery inward, i.e. talking
to witnesses on the edge of an event first, and then moving towards more and more central characters
(unless I’m in a hurry, at which time I will reverse this procedure). I like to interview people at the place
where they are doing the thing I am writing about. However, whistle-blowers and reluctant targets are
best contacted at home. You might calm a nervous source by taking him or her for a walk. A lunch
appointment requires your subject to spend at least an hour with you. A tape recorder might cause
nervousness at first, but it will “disappear” during the interview. (Disadvantage: you’ll need time for
transcribing). I like to reveal as much as possible to an interview subject, but beware of feeding
information to people that will come back to you as fact. There is an old police adage: “Don’t ask, ‘did
you see the red car’, but instead ask, ‘what did you see?’”
.
ORGANIZE: Write single-word clues on the flap of your notebook to remind you of issues you
want to cover. Add to that list during the interview so you don’t interrupt but are prepared to tackle
unresolved issues later in the interview. Organize paperwork that you might pull out so you don’t fumble
and disrupt. Prepare a comprehensive all-purpose question for cases where the door might slam in your
face. Prepare the photographer and any fellow interviewer so you will work well together.

INNER INTERVIEWING: Prior to any interview you must silence your ego, so you can
open your ears and your mind. The ego is a primitive device installed in your brain to tell you when to
flee from tigers. Unless you regularly interview tigers, it will misinform you during any interview,
hectoring you with concerns about your next question or whether you dressed properly. I silence my ego
using three steps. The first step is preparation, as described above. Then I imagine a successful interview,
closing my eyes the way a ski racer does, envisioning the event from start to finish. Finally, I meditate,
very briefly, by simply emptying my brain of all thoughts and breathing deeply. Also as part of my
preparation, I empty myself of uneducated pre-conceived notions, opinions and prejudices, thus preparing
myself to learn.

RELUCTANT PEOPLE
THE OPENER: Approach your subject as though you belong there. Straightforward
introductions are best. Be open and unafraid. Never lie.

KEEP IT GOING: When the door is closing on your face, find common ground. "By the way, I
notice you've got a poodle. I've got a poodle. Weird dogs. Just the other day . . ." The key here is to get a
person talking about anything. A Danish reporter once told me he asks people what kind of car they prefer
to drive. I’ll ask about a plant I noticed near the front door. Once the conversation gets going, give the
person a simple task that is on point (“I noticed you are the safety director but so-and-so is the safety
manager. What’s the difference?).
TAP THEIR CURIOSITY: Offer to explain what you are working on, what you know about
or what you have been told. Prepare for this opener ahead of time, and don’t express opinions.
GET THEM TO SPEAK ABOUT OTHERS: Bring a list of people who are players in
the story you are working on. (A list gleaned from payrolls, or phone books, etc). One-by-one, ask your
subject to talk about these individuals. People are more comfortable talking about others than about

themselves. In talking about others, they will reveal more about themselves and their organization, and
they’ll point you in valuable directions.

NO BIG DEAL: Never argue about a person’s reluctance to talk, but instead interview their
fears. They’ll sometimes dissuade themselves of misperceived perils. Respond to the "I can't comment"
by explaining that you need their help, and tell them (if you can say so honestly) that talking to you is no
big deal, because you are contacting a lot of people and because you are there to learn. Express all this
with a soft but relentless momentum, thus massaging their objections into a realization of possibilities.
Propose alternatives. Steer. Keep the conversation rolling. Respond to the "I'm afraid to comment" with a
little sympathy and reassurance (though it must be honest reassurance). Listen to people’s concerns and
understand them. Propose easier “assignments” like “just describe your job” or “tell me about your town.”
You’ll get to the harder stuff later.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR OTHER BIG SHOT: Gently, without being insulting, respond
to a "no comment" from an "important" person or bureaucrat by reminding how bad that sort of thing
looks in print. Explain that you will be doing a story whether they cooperate or not (if that’s true). Explain
that you want to get it right. Offer to call back shortly before the story runs to describe what will be in the
story. (In the process, get all the contact numbers).

RATCHETING: If a subject insists on talking "on background," make a formal agreement and
explain that you will try later to get them to talk on the record. Take notes. At the end of the interview, or
at a follow-up interview, pick out quotes that aren’t too damning and say: "Now what about this thing you
said here. Why can't you say that on the record?" If they agree to put that comment on the record, go to
another one in your notes and say: "Well, if you can say that on the record, why can't you say this? And
so on. I have gotten an entire notebook on the record this way. Sometimes the interview subject will not
agree to a particular quote – “I could never say that in print” – but they’ll provide an alternative.
Interview that alternative, and you will get what you need on the record. If they insist on anonymity,
however, you must honor it.
ANONYMITY: Don't offer anonymity blithely for it can be license to lie. Never agree to “off
the record” information because that means you can’t even think about what you’ve been told. Stick to
“background”, and honor all agreements.
DETOURS: If a person won't talk, go to others in his or her office or to associates. You will get
more information, and by doing this you will loosen them up.
THE STATUE OF LIBERTY PLAY: Emphasize that people are more believable when
they put their name behind what they say. It's the American Way: A robust public debate.

FOR THE SAKE OF CLARITY: There are cases where someone tells you part of a story
and balks. Or you already know part of a story and can't get the rest. Try saying, "look, you've already
told me this much (or, I already know this much). You had better tell me the rest. I mean, you don't want
me to get it wrong. I sure don’t want to get it wrong.”
NO QUESTIONS, PLEASE: Sometimes making a statement is better than asking a
question. Read from a document or repeat something someone said. A question might produce nothing
more than a “yes, no or I don’t know”, A statement will provoke a comment.

USE WHAT YOU THINK YOU KNOW: Ask the official WHY he fired the whistleblower rather than asking WHETHER he did the deed. The question presumes you already know even if
you don't have it confirmed. They'll start explaining rather than denying.
LOST REPORTER: It doesn't hurt to say you need the person's help. "Who is going to
explain this to me if you don't?" But don’t be too lost, that engenders distrust.

TRY AGAIN: When the door is slammed in your face, try again a day later or a week later,
while you are working on other tasks. Keep trying for months. People change their minds.

GETTING ALL THE GOODS
CHRONOLOGY: Take the subject through his or her story chronologically. You will
understand the tale better, and you will spot gaps in the timetable. This is one of several techniques aimed
at organizing the interview subject’s memory bank (like sorting a messy file cabinet) and penetrating the
various levels of privacy (like opening the locked file cabinet drawers).

LIFE STORY: One way to start the chronology is at the person’s point of birth. During a trip
through the life story, you may stumble onto significant information, but at a minimum you will create
commonality. Or start the chronology somewhere else, if you are in a hurry, like a date just before the
action you are interested in.
LOGIC: The chronological approach can’t expose everything, including gaps. Train yourself to
listen for any gap in the normal logic in any story, for places where any “letter” is missing in the A-B-CD logic. Insist that the story make sense. If B is missing, the speaker may be accustomed to talking to
experts; or doesn’t know the information, or left something out, or hadn’t thought about B, or is lying.
These are all important issues to pursue. Don’t argue, just press for logic. Never be afraid of
embarrassment if you ask about something you don’t understand. You’ll be more embarrassed if you get
it wrong. Remember this adage from Investigative Reporters and Editors: ”There are no embarrassing
questions; there are only embarrassing answers.”
HOW: When a person says something important, ask the key question: "How do you know
that?" It sheds light on credibility, extracts more detail and is a door opener to other sources. The
inevitable answers will include: “I heard it from so and so, I saw it in X document or I was there”. Follow
these responses with more extensive questioning to determine the location and background of “so and so”
or the ways to obtain “X document”. Also follow up with the question: “How else to you know that.”
People often provide cursory roadmaps at first, but if you persist you will discover other routes. When a
person replies to your question by saying they know about something because they were there, try
hypnosis.
HYPNOSIS: When an interview subject person brings up an important event, asks questions
that bring them to “touch points” in their memory. Ask where they were standing that day, what were
they doing, what were they wearing, what was the temperature and what were the noises around them?
You may need to do this several times. People prefer to tell their stories, especially troubling stories, in
the abstract. “I drove the car off the cliff.” Once the subject is mentally anchored in the past – standing in
the kitchen preparing to walk to the garage – ask your questions in the present tense rather than past tense.

Ask questions like: What are you doing now? What is your friend saying? By doing this, you will enliven
the memory of the person you are talking to. Additionally, you will be there. You and the interview
subject will drive off the cliff together.

ACTIVE LISTENING: Encourage the interview subject by gesturing or nodding, and by
repeating a portion of their statement back to them. This pumps the well, and requires you to listen more
intently. By repeating statements, you also test whether you understood the speaker.

MIRRORING: Without being obnoxious, imitate the body language and gestures of the
speaker, to encourage connection.
INCOMPLETE SENTENCE: While interviewing a person, end a sentence prematurely,
trailing off before you reach the end. Paul Shukovsky, a P-I reporter who is also a trained psychologist,
says the speaker will feel compelled to finish the sentence. That will provide more information and pump
the well.

HYPNOTIC PACE: Change the pace of your questioning, and your tone of voice, slowing it
down to encourage relaxation.

THE MANDATE: It pays sometimes to tell people what to do rather than asking them to do
something. Subtly and gently done, this puts you in the role of the authority, and the interview subject
must obey. Don’t ask for a document, for example, but instead tell the person you’ll be at their office at a
certain time to pick it up.

WHY: Don’t just ask a person what they did; also ask why they did it. Newspapers can
distinguish themselves by explaining events, but if you don’t ask why, you’ll have a harder time
explaining. Questions like this may seem obvious, but listen to your interview tapes. We don’t always do
what is obvious.
PAY ATTENTION TO DETAIL: Inventory the room thoroughly and in an organized
fashion. Look at the walls, the desktop and the lapel pin. Make notes on what you see, and make
intelligent use of it during the interview. If you ask someone to tell the story behind an object on the desk
or the wall, it can relax and distract. It will also provide you with surprising information. Also, I regularly
interviews objects with my eyes. I have asked “questions” of and gotten “answers” from ship engines and
stormy seas.

SPONTANEITY–- When you are “on scene”, let things happen. Hang around. Listen and
watch for the unexpected.

TELEPHONE – If you can’t be on the scene, ask people on the phone to describe their
surroundings. This will transport you emotionally over the phone lines and provide information (the
plaque on a man's wall became a key detail in one story, after I had independently verified what it said).
Get people to tell their stories in three dimensions over the phone. Let things happen. Listen and “watch”
with your ears for the unexpected.
USE YOUR EARS -- We talk too much during interviews. Let the other person do the
talking. Check your biases at the door; listen with an open mind. React with an open mind.

LOOK FOR OTHER SOURCES: While at the interview, listen and watch for other
sources. Meet the secretary, the assistants and the co-workers and make note of details about them. This
will come in handy as you turn them into sources.
TAKE OVER: Your demeanor will be important. Be courteous and move with authority and
confidence. Without being boorish, walk through doors ahead of your host and stop unexpectedly to chat
with someone. If you can, chose your own chair and your position in the room.

GETTING THE CONFESSION: Ask the subject for the names of people who support
him or her. Then ask for the names of people who would criticize. Then ask what those critics are likely
to say. This will jar loose uncomfortable information and tips. Ask whether the person has ever been
disciplined or fired on the job or in school, charged with or convicted of a crime, arrested for drunken
driving, sued, testified in court, etc. Since all this stuff is on a record somewhere, people are reluctant to
lie about it.
LIARS: If you know someone is lying, allow the liar to spin his or her yarn. Don't interrupt
except to ask for more detail. Deceivers frequently provide extensive detail because they think a very
complete story will add to their credibility. Listen and take good notes. When the lie has been fully
constructed -- down to the last nail -- go away with an arrangement to come back. Re-interview the
person, and when they start telling the lie again, get all the detail and arrange to come back again. Sit
down with your notes, and logically pry apart the lie (nail by nail). Then re-interview the person, this time
logically unraveling the lies. Don't be impatient. The fabricator is now in a corner. Keep them there until
their resolve breaks down.
DON'T JOIN: Be sympathetic in manner, but don't join sides with your sources. We always
protect anonymous sources, but we also examine them closely. Don’t grant anyone a license to lie. Also,
don’t get sucked in by the embattled congressman who seems so cooperative when he grants you an
interview and says, "I don't believe in taking money from those guys." You should say, "that may be true,
but I'm asking you whether you took the money, not whether you believe in doing so." Also don’t be
sucked in by the crook’s confession to stealing $10,000 when in fact, if you pry, you will discover the
amount was $100,000.
DON’T GET MAD: Don’t argue, fume, accuse or get angry. When you get angry you grant
the recipient ownership of a piece of you, which they can collect on later. Conversely, if they get angry
with you, and you handle their rage with aplomb, you will own something of them. That said, you should
carefully listen to the sentiments and facts behind another person’s anger at you. They might have a good
reason to be livid, and even if they don’t, there is important information for you contained in their anger.
FALSE END OF AN INTERVIEW: Whenever possible, interview a person more than
once. Every interview has a false end, a point at which you are done with the main line of questioning and
you close your notebook. At this point, I always tell people I will need to talk with them again. I get from
them every phone number and contact address they can provide. If I don’t already have their date of birth
for some reason, I’ll ask for it, noting that it might help me find them in the distant future should they relocated. Then I’ll interview them again, paraphrasing at some point what I already understood them to
say. This allows them to correct false impressions, and it inevitably provides me with more complete
information. The first interview is like a snowplow, pushing the heavy stuff out of the way, easing my

path for the second interview. People are also reassured to know that I am going to contact them again
before the story runs.

INNOVATE: If an outrageous question comes to mind, and seems compelling, ask it. During a
phone interview I convinced a man sitting in a bar with a cell phone to pass the phone around so I could
talk with his companions. A ship captain allowed me to go through his files only because I asked.
DRAIN THEM: People aren't aware of how much they know. You must guide them through
their memory. Visualize your subject as a bucket full of information and empty it.
HONESTY: Don't pretend to be someone else and don't lie. You can certainly omit information,
but the more you can reveal about the nature of your story, the more comfortable and helpful your subject
will be.
BE THE DIRECTOR: A great interview feels like a conversation but moves relentlessly
toward the information you need. Keep control, but do so gently.

BE FLEXIBLE: You may know what your story is about, but don't get stuck. A really great
interview might be one that completely changes your story. Seek the truth, not what you believe to be the
truth.
PERSONALITY: Let your personality shine through (if you have a good one). Don't be a blank
wall. It helps sometimes to tell people about you.

OPEN-ENDED QUESTION: Near the end of an interview, ask the person what else our
readers might be interested in. Sometimes people have more than one newspaper-worthy story in them.
CHECK BACK: After the story runs, call the subject for his or her reaction. You'll get
additional stories and tips this way.
*******************************************************************
(Contact Eric Nalder by phone at 206-448-8011, or 360-394-9500 or email at
ericnalder@seattlepi.com)
(Rev. 4/21/2007)

