1

Daniel Zwerdling’s assorted reporting tips
IRE conference 2007
Please feel free to call or write, if you have questions or comments:
Daniel Zwerdling
Senior Correspondent
NPR
202-513-2217
dzwerdling@npr.org

Convince yourself that there’s no difference between plain old
“reporting” and “investigative reporting.” Every story should dig below
the surface and teach us something important, whether it’s 100 or
10,000 words.
Look up “investigate”: “To observe or inquire into, in detail; examine
systematically” … “examine into, with care and accuracy” .. Isn’t that just
good reporting?
A lot of reporting these days presents truth and lies as equal weights on a
scale: “Industry executives say the new rules will make the air cleaner. But
critics say the new rules will make the air worse. For now, one thing is
certain: only time will tell. John Jones, QBC News, Washington.” No
wonder people often feel numbed by the “news.” Your job as a reporter is to
dig deep enough, given your time and resources, to tilt the scale in one
direction, so you can tell your audience, “We might never know the whole
truth, but the evidence shows that the scale tilts in this direction …”
Every day, before you start work, put your hands on your hips, take a
deep breath and say three times, “I AM somebody!” (apologies to Jesse
Jackson). OK, it’s wacky, so do it silently in your mind.
You’re reminding yourself that you’re a reporter. You do an important job in
our society: you dig for the truth and tell the public what it needs to know, to
make our society better. So, you have the right -- you have the duty – to
approach anybody on Earth, and ask any question, and ask for any document

2
and information. If they say No, you also have the right to ask them a second
time, and a tenth time, and a hundredth time (as long as you do it politely
and respectfully). It’s amazing how many reporters limit themselves because
they’re too embarrassed or afraid or insecure to approach potential sources
and push for information.

You don’t need secret documents. You don’t even need FOIA. You
could spend the rest of your life digging up great stories simply by
gathering what’s already in the public record. You just need to slog
through it, sift it, analyze it, and put it in context. Speaking of which …

Always get and read the full report! Read every word if possible, but at
least scan every single page. And read the footnotes and appendices.
That’s where you’ll sometimes find the best sources and tips.
Compare what’s in the Executive Summary to the rest of the report –
government officials often use the executive summary to misstate what the
full report actually says, because they know that many reporters on deadline
don’t read more than that.
And remember: when a source quotes a report, be sure to ask him/her
for a copy, or at least the title – and then get it and read it. It’s infuriating
how often officials misquote reports and statistics in interviews or
congressional testimony, and then get away with it because nobody checks
up on them.
If the issues in your story are affected by laws or rules, read those laws
and rules, word for word. You’ll soon learn that government officials and
corporate executives aren’t obeying them, or that the laws and rules are so
weak that they allow officials and executives to do things that seem like they
should be illegal, but aren’t.
Be persistent. There are no magical techniques for getting potential
sources to talk or give you documents. Unfortunately, you just have to
call and call and call them, and ask and ask and ask them, over and
over and over again. Often, even the most reluctant people will eventually
open up. Remember that everybody thinks their world view is The Right

3
One, so convince them that you genuinely want to help them explain it to
your audience ...which, as a good journalist, you should!
Put yourself in your sources’ mindsets. Try to identify and empathize with
the challenges they face, the problems they’re dealing with, and the fears
they have. It will help you figure out the best way to approach them and get
them to open up. Perhaps more important, it will help you write a fairer,
more nuanced story.
Get all your sources, from ordinary people to powerful politicians, to
give you their information in the form of detailed anecdotes. This will
help bring your stories alive and make them more convincing. You shouldn’t
finish the interview unless you can visualize exactly what your source is
saying, as though it were a movie. For instance, don’t be content with a
soldier saying, “Since my commanding officers learned I have PTSD,
they’ve called me a scumbag and treated me like crap.” Ask the soldier to
describe a few detailed incidents, like scenes in a movie: what day did one of
these incidents happen, what time was it, where were you standing, who else
was there, what happened next, exactly who said what, what was their tone
of voice, what did you do next, etcetc ….

Don’t hang up with a source without asking these questions: 1) other
than you, who are 3 or 4 other sources who know more about this issue
than anybody else in the world – and what are their phone numbers? 2)
What documents do you have that relate to this issue .. and will you
please send me copies? 3) What else is bugging/exciting/worrying you,
that we haven’t talked about? 4) Who are 3 or 4 sharp people who will
now tell me that everything you’ve told me is nonsense – and how will
they likely attack you?
This last question surprises people, and often makes them defensive at first.
But just explain, “As you know, we reporters always have to report various
sides of the story. And if you tell me right now how your critics will
probably attack you, then you can also prepare me how to challenge them
back.”
Be politely curious and nosy in people’s offices and homes and
workplaces. Look, openly and cheerfully, at documents lying out in plain
view, or pinned to their bulletin boards, and then ask your source to talk

4
about them if they seem relevant – could be a break-though! Ask who’s in
photographs and why they’re important. If the source interrupts you for an
interesting-sounding phone call or an urgent meeting in the hallway, or to
check a memo, ask pleasantly, “What was that about?”
Check out what your sources tell you. Reporters (and their editors) let
sources say all kinds of things in anecdotes, without ever corroborating
them. Not good. There are obvious ways to confirm info – ask for
documents, medical records, emails, whatever, but it’s not always possible.
If the source is telling you a powerful anecdote about something that
happened, ask who else was in the room, and convince the source to let you
call those people to see if they’ll confirm it. If the source is afraid of
retaliation, ask his/her help figuring out a way to confirm the anecdote
without letting people know where the info came from. A good way to check
if your source is generally truthful or a liar: ask innocent details (hey,
where’d you go to high school? play any sports? What was your grade point
in college?) and then call those places to verify. Speaking of which …
Print a HIPPA-like form that you ask key sources to sign – I mean
sources who are at the center of your story -- basically authorizing anybody
on the planet to talk to you about their life history, including their legal
problems and medical condition, if relevant. That still might not convince
officials to talk with you about the sources, but now you can say in your
story, “Top officials at Homeland Security refused to talk about the day that
guards at the detention center beat up John Jones – even though he gave us
written permission.” Speaking of which …
Tell your audience everything you did to try to get important
information from government/corporate/military officials, and
everything they did to avoid you or refuse. We reporters are so
accustomed to having officials blow us off that we take it for granted
(“Despite repeated requests, military officials declined comment”). But it’s
an important part of the story, so make it an important and vivid part of the
story: tell a compelling anecdote about whom you contacted, what you
asked, how they blew you off, whom you tried next, how they gave you the
runaround …
When your confidence flags – and it will – say the mantra again: “I am
somebody!”
###

