Making CAR stories sing
IRE-June 7, 2007-Phoenix
Rose Ciotta, The Philadelphia Inquirer
rciotta@phillynews.com
215-854-5024

10 tips for writing and editing:
1)Plan for Success: Think ahead about who needs to be on the team to produce a wellwritten project. If you are the data analyst and you expect to interview and write, say so.
Consider your editor your writing partner who will not only get space for the project but
plan for a finished multi-media package.
2)Interviewing with power: Data leads you to people and places. There’s nothing like
doing an interview when you know more about the data than your subject. Be prepared to
re-interview the data once you collect more information. Mine the data until you find
your story. Be prepared to update the data if needed. Review your findings in detail with
your editor who needs to understand it as well as you do. Alert your editor as early as
possible to any delays or analysis problems. As early as possible, bullet proof your
results. Enlist experts if needed to verify your conclusions. Start mapping and online
presentations early.
3)Organizing for writing: Adopt a system that allows you to find the right quote, the
right number, the right fact during writing and editing. The time you spend at the front
end doing outlines and organizing your material will pay off in the end. What if your
editor wants to flush out a point you gave a sentence to; can you find your notes?
4)Picking a structure: Series? Narrative? One day with sidebars? Do this early. What
kind of story will this be? Try it different ways. Is there a natural narrative? Write a tight
version of your findings….is there a place for this at the top of your story? Use boxes to
explain analysis, how story was reported. Be in sync with your editor. Don’t go planning
a skyscraper if she’s looking for a bungalow…at least not without convincing her first.
5)Consider Alternative Structures:
• Narrative interludes
• One person’s story
• Chronology
• Recreating a key moment (narrative)
• Intro overview with multiple vignettes
6)Write, Write, Write: Early, even as reporting is underway. Write in blocks; envision
the subheads. Reward reader with narrative interludes, dialogue and description

7)Length: Collaborate with your editor who has to negotiate for space; Be ready to
revise, tighten and kill precious quotes. Not every person in the story has to speak. Not
everyone in your notebook has to appear in your story. Think of yourself as a Hollywood
director deciding whom to make a star. Be very selective.
8)Be Open to Suggestions: Other editors are your first readers. If they have questions,
readers will too. If they see a dense section, so will the reader.
9)Writing Numbers and Data Analysis: Select the best and use them strategically and
descriptively. Let graphics, maps and online interactive do the heavy lifting on details.
Reserve numbers with impact for the story. Data allow you to write authoritatively. Data
are not frosting on the cake, not gravy.
Avoid number heavy paragraphs. Avoid stacking numbers paragraphs. Round off long
numbers; Describe huge number so reader can see it: would cover two football fields.
Use ratios: three out of four.
10)Role of Online: Videos and interactive maps online expand your storytelling with
data. Do this story planning at the beginning of the project. If initial interviews are too
sensitive to videotape, plan to go back for focused interview for online. Look for
interactive devices for data i.e. map that allows reader to drill down for local information;
look up databases; video that takes viewer to person or place revealed by the data.
Online links of storytelling with data:
The Philadelphia Inquirer
1)Test score cheating in Camden schools
http://go.philly.com/camdenscores
2)Videos of victims of violence in Philadelphia schools
http://go.philly.com/teachersafety
3)Decade of Change in Philadelphia Area Schools: video, interactive map; lookup
database
(part of Report Card on the Schools)
http://go.philly.com/reportcard
Select-A-School
Interactive data lookup that allows reader to shop for schools that meet their criteria
http://inquirer.philly.com/specials/2007/report_card/select_school/selectschool.asp
4)Philadelphia Homicide—continuing coverage; interactive map
http://www.philly.com/inquirer/special/violence/
5)Bury Your Mistakes—child deaths
http://www.philly.com/inquirer/special/child_welfare
Reference books:
The Art and Craft of Feature Writing
By William E. Blundell
Stunning sentences and other books in the Effective Writing Series
By Bruce Ross-Larson

