2007 IRE Conference
Phoenix, AZ

"The best investigative editor: Reporters tell what makes one"
Practical advice -- for investigative reporters and editors to succeed together:
Selecting: What to investigate, where to invest your time and energy, and where not to.
The best investigative editors work hand-in-glove with reporters. They do not just manage up. They form a team. They
have mutual trust, camaraderie, and work off each other's strengths. Teamwork is the foundation for the best editorreporter relationships.

•
•
•

What is investigative reporting? Deciding what to investigate starts with an understanding of what
investigative reporting is, and what it is not. The classic definition has three elements: (1) Reporting through
one's own work product and initiative -- not just reporting on somebody else's investigation, (2) on matters of
importance -- not just interesting, but significant, (3) which some persons or organizations wish to keep secret.
Investigating off the news: What went wrong? How could this have been prevented? What did they know and
when did they know it? News investigations start with subjects and verbs of importance to readers.
Investigative projects: Investigating forests, not just trees. Local elements illustrate national problems. Start
with a kernel and grow. One case leads to file cabinets. A public-records frame of mind. Accountability
reporting. Avoid the boring or obvious, but don't forget the classics: justice, health, safety, political money, social
issues. Capturing tips and managing whistleblowers.

Juggling: Managing and juggling lots of things, short and long enterprise stories. Feeding the
beast, while creating time for good investigative work. Editors and reporters must work together to reach a balance. Hold
short meetings to set priorities and talk about what’s coming ahead.
•

•

•

Be organized and create a system that works for you. My two best friends are a calendar and a small board
I keep on my desk. The electronic calendar (Outlook) alerts me of meetings, interviews, and deadlines I set up
on records requests I’ve made to any agency. This keeps me abreast on every story I’m working on or following
through. By the end of each day, I list every person I need to call or task I must perform the next day i.e. writing
a records request, working on data and so forth.
Try to plan ahead and brainstorm ideas: Write budget lines even if they are generic whether they are short
and easy or enterprise and investigative. Set up your own deadlines. You can’t predict breaking news on your
beat but you can plan ahead of time to get short and fast stories done and keep your editors happy while you
work on investigative stories on the side.
Rank stories by importance: Editors and reporters must meet and set up priorities. Rank the stories and when
you are working on multiple stories keep calls and tasks under sub-categories. This will give you a sense of
accomplishment.

Tracking: Planning the project and keeping it on track
•

•

•

Use a story memo to help ensure reporters and editors are on the same page
from the start and to help think through a project strategy. Key elements of
a story memo: Story premise and why it's unique and important; minimum
achievable story/maximum possible story -- and estimated
reporting/writing/editing time to achieve each; resources needed (CAR
assistance? Outside expertise? Money for scientific testing? Travel?
Documents or data via FOIA that may take time? ); potential
roadblocks/barriers that may cause delays; photo/graphic/web opportunities.
Discuss how all departments will coordinate. Who will resolve
disagreements about resources or direction? Identify which high-level
editors will be involved later in final edits and develop a plan to keep
them informed and gain input.
Set interim deadlines for reporters – and for photo, graphics and web
staff. Keep a tracking file of material submitted.

Coordinating: With photo, graphics and the web:
Editors and reporters should coordinate with photo, graphics, page designers and the online staff during the early stages.
But most of all, reporters should take the lead on following through the process. Here some ideas to consider:
•
•
•

Don’t wait for photo and graphics to come to you: Reporters should meet with graphics, photos, web staff
and brainstorm soon after work on a story begins because good ideas are often born during these meetings.
Continue the communication during the process to ensure everybody is meeting deadlines and especially
that everyone is clear about their tasks.
Meet with everybody after the story is filed: The purpose of this meeting is to layout all the elements and
how they fit together. But this is a great opportunity to talk about presentation and toss ideas to page designers.

By the same token, you should be looking at what is lacking and what can be done to acquire it (i.e. may be the
photos didn’t capture the purpose of the story and photographers need to re-shoot something or the graphic
needs more information).

Writing: What investigative reporters like from an editor when they write.
•
•
•
•
•

Enough time to write. You may need to make your reporters stop reporting and start to put words to paper.
A willing ear and an open mind: Talking about the lead, the nut graf and the story structure. Look for ways
to use literary techniques of narrative, scene-setting, dialog, conflict, resolution, and dramatic tension.
Writers should start drafting early to focus their thinking. These may be the story memos. Editors need to
give the writer a lot of freedom to change and improve the story memos and early drafts.
Talking ---> writing, rewriting, editing, rewriting some more, editing, rewriting more.
A well-read editor is invaluable to a time-pressed reporter.

Bulletproofing: Ensuring accuracy, completeness and fairness
•
•
•
•
•

Discuss and develop a plan for bulletproofing the story: verification
letters/emails/faxes; final or confrontation interviews; fact checking;
lawyer review.
Have a plan – and build in enough time -- for editing and bulletproofing
other project content: Cutlines, graphics, web content, video, audio.
Step back and ask questions of the reporter: What’s not in this story that
should be? Is there anything that’s gnawing at you? What will the harshest
critics say about this story -- and are you comfortable defending it?
Flag last-minute edits (changes or deletions) for fact checking by the
reporter.
Include reporters in reviewing page proofs and looking at the project as a
whole.

By Mc Nelly Torres
South Florida Sun-Sentinel
954-356-4208
mntorres@sun-sentinel.com
Duff Wilson
The New York Times
212-556-8380
dwilson@nytimes.com
Alison Young
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
404-526-7372
ayoung@ajc.com

