By Mc Nelly Torres
South Florida Sun-Sentinel
mntorres@sun-sentinel.com
Joe Ducey
KNXV-Phoenix

jducey@abc15
Lea Thompson
thompson.lea@gmail.com
2007 IRE Conference
Phoenix, AZ

Consumer investigations: How to dig out good stories and
keep your audience asking for more
Through surveys and focus groups newspapers are learning that consumer issues are hot
topics for readers. But think about it: we are all consumers. Whether is a defective
product or a loophole in the system, consumer issues affect all of us. The beauty of
covering consumer issues is that your best sources are around you. Talk to your friends,
neighbors, relatives and co-workers. Look at consumer advocate Web sites and keep an
eye on what’s going on in government. But before you get started consider this:
Be available: Sometimes the best tips come from readers. Establish a tip line online to let
readers know you are there for them. You might need to go through a lot of bogus stuff,
but it will be a matter of time before you get some good tips.
Consumer advocates and experts: Keep constant communication with these folks
including your local consumer affairs office. These agencies take complaints from
consumers and the records will be useful as you cover stories. Other sources include:
attorney general office, consumer services at the state level, and state agencies, but also
your local economics crime division and white-collar crime investigators.
Know the problem: Sometimes consumer issues are very complicated. Perhaps you
found the existing laws don’t protect people or the issue has never been addressed. This
will be a constant challenge. Keep a dialogue with your sources because they will be the
ones who can direct you toward the right track. For example: As I was investigating a
business I discovered how a scrupulous contractor with a history of defrauding
consumers had managed to use a loophole in the system, which allowed him to operate a
business by using another licensed contractor. He was on probation at the time I was
looking into his business yet he hired a license contractor to qualify his company.
Regulate the Regulators: A lot of the best consumer protection stories come from taking
a hard look at the government agencies that are supposed to keep us safe (contractor
business, foreclosure rescue firms, nail salons, restaurants and dog kennels). Take a look

at any public records agencies keep relating to their investigations, such as inspection
records. How often do they find problems? What is their caseload? Is it so high that
they are more likely to overlook violations? In short, are they doing their jobs?
If it looks gray, move on: Don’t waste your time on what it seems to be confusing. If the
scam story is not clear chances are someone is not being honest with you. Sometimes is
better to walk away from what it seems to be a story. There are plenty of stories to go
around.
Do your research: The Better Business Bureau might seem like a good resource at
times, but be aware that the BBB is a membership organization. I found that their records
are not reliable and that in many cases consumers think the BBB can help them with their
problems. The BBB is not a government agency. Look through your state’s incorporation
records and licensing agencies. Check your local or state licensing rules and databases
because almost every business needs a license. Also, keep in mind that blogs could be a
source even though their reliability is as good as the author. But most blogs provide
resources so it could be a useful tool. Use google and other searching engines to see
what’s out there on the topic you are researching.
Learn about the bad guy: Use Lexis\Nexis, criminal background check, civil lawsuits,
divorce files, corporation records of current business but other businesses he might have
owned. If he/she is out there to make a buck more than anything else, chances are that
other businesses he/she had before went through the same problems. Also, check
association the business belongs to, its competitors, including former employees and
enemies.
No promises: Don’t make any promises as you begin delving into an issue. This is
something I do from the beginning. I look into the problem and I’m honest with the
caller/reader from the beginning. Sometimes you get results, but sometimes you don’t.
My job is to write the story not to work as a problem-solver or mediator.
Databases: Look locally first. The consumer affairs office might keep complaints
electronically, but you should also look at your county electronic records and then move
up to the state. Licensing, inspections, occupational licensing, state corporate records,
civil lawsuits and other electronic records are great resources when investigating an issue
or problem.
Put the data online: Say no more. Readers love to search inspections on their favorite
restaurants, pet food recall and nail salons. But don’t stop there, offer other tools to your
readers like studies you mentioned in a story and you have on a PDF format, why not
post it online too. Note: When planning to post a searching database online, you should
keep in mind the data could be dirty and it must be cleaned. Talk to the online folks to
develop more efficient ways to working together on this.
Offer a solution or useful information: When you write the story try to give something
to the reader whether is what to do if he/she is in a similar situation and where to go for

help. I try to get a tip box with each story. Sometimes is dreading, but I’ve learned to
appreciate this because it helps me to write the story. I concentrate on some areas and
leave the other information for the tip box. Try to give readers telephone numbers, Web
sites and organizations.
Looking out for the consumer: Think outside the box. Ask yourself: How can I tell this
story differently? Listen what people have to say – you’ll be surprised at what they might
offer. Once you identified what the topic/problem is, look for a consumer advocacy
group. They are everywhere. More importantly, keep an eye on government agencies
because their regulatory role is crucial on consumer stories. And hold them accountable
when government agencies are not doing their job. That’s our job.
Consumer Groups:
Consumer Reports
www.consumerreports.org
www.consumersunion.org
www.consumer.gov
www.consumeraction.gov

www.consumersearch.com, which compiles product reviews from other publications.
www.consumerworld.org
National Consumer League
www.naticonsumersleague.org
The National Association of Better Business Bureaus
www.bbb.org
This is the main ship for the BBB, you can search a national database of companies, but
also find your local BBB.
Consumer Federation of America, a national advocacy group
www.consumerfed.org
The National Consumers League
www.nclnet.org
National Fraud Information Center
www.fraud.org
The Center for Science in the Public Interest
www.epsinet.org
Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing
www.ncinet.org

This coalition works against telemarketing and Internet fraud.
National Association of Insurance Commissioners
www.naic.org
National Consumer Law Center
www.consumerlaw.org
Scam Busters
www.scambusters.com
The American Council on Consumer Interests
www.consumerinterests.org

Government agencies:
Consumer Product Safety Commission
www.cpsc.gov
CPSC list all recalls but also collects data on injuries and deaths caused by consumer
products. The database known as the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System
(NEISS), which list the number and severity of consumer product-related injuries to
persons treated in hospital emergency departments in the U.S.
Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov
You can search the Web page to see if the commission has sued or taken any action
against a local company.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC
www.fcc.gov
Food and Drug Administration
www.fda.gov
Postal Inspection Service
www.usps.gov
National Association of Attorneys General
www.naag.org
Consumer information clearinghouse
www.consumer.gov

This site has government brochures and information in addition to links to all the federal
regulatory agencies.
Other sites:
www.crimes-of-persuasion.com
www.consumeraffairs.com
This is a general site with good leads on scams and other information.
Online complaint sites:
Angie’s List
This is a membership online consumer resource list.
www.angieslist.com

