STRATEGIC RESEARCH

Lawrence Lopez
LarryLopez@srresearch.com

www.srresearch.com

Dismantling The Experts

By Larry Lopez, Private Investigator
Strategic Research
larrylopez@srresearch.com 617 497-6700
http://www.srresearch.com

2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix
Private Eyes Share Their Tips
3:40-4:40 pm Friday, Salon B

Investigating the background of an expert witness begins with the same kinds of steps used to background any individual: using locator databases like ChoicePoint and IRB to learn the names the expert
has used and where he or she has lived. The names of relatives may be useful as well, especially if you
are looking for conflicts of interest.

The Resume
Whether you are checking the credentials of an expert, you will then want to gather as many versions of
the expert’s resume as you can find, through the internet and through sources such as specialized editions
of Who’s Who. Many experts have their own web sites, and it can be useful to look not only at the material posted there but also at the material posted on former versions of the web site, found through cached
pages on Google and Archive.org.
Once you have secured the resumes and made sure that they are consistent, you should verify academic
degrees, employment, professional licenses and other resume items.
The list of prominent people who are found to have exaggerated their credentials grows daily. Recent
additions include expert witnesses like a former deputy director of the Suffolk County (New York)
Crime Lab and a burn expert from the National Burn Victim Foundation. There are fraudsters from
all walks of life: a U.S. Undersecretary of Defense, the Deputy CIO of the Department of Homeland
Security, a New York Times sports columnist, surgeons – even Notre Dame’s football coach.
There are significant discrepancies on at least one of every ten resumes we check, and even higher
ratios in some lines of work.
Academic institutions generally will confirm degrees but may not provide additional information. Beware, however, that many “degrees” are offered by diploma mills with few or no academic requirements.
While there is no general database of diploma mills, several sites including the US Department of Education, the Council for Higher Education Accreditation, the state of Oregon. http://www.osac.state.or.us/
oda/diploma_mill.html and Elearners.com’s http://www.elearners.com/resources/diplomamills.asp are good starting points. In addition, many college alumni groups have a presence online, and
many graduate theses can be found through UMI and other databases.
Employers will generally confirm the dates of employment and job titles, and most professional licensing
boards will confirm whether there is any public record of discipline. Professional societies will generally
provide dates of membership. Beware, however, that some societies may be the equivalent of diploma
mills.

Newspaper And Literature and Presentation Searches
There typically include both general newspapers and specialized publications that may contain articles
by or about the expert.

While general newspaper databases in Lexis, Dialog, Factiva et al. often overlap, each have coverage that the others
don’t, and the best combination of them can vary from case to case, depending on budget and on where the expert has
lived and worked.
Technical publications are often found in specialized databases. Medline and PubMed, for example, are good for medical
research, while NCJRS is a better source for forensic research.

Presentations and Informal Writings
Many experts also give presentations at conferences like IRE’s and are often recorded on tapes sold through the conference sponsor. Because they are speaking to colleagues, they often are much less discrete than they would be in other circumstances. If you already have an expert in the case, consider having the expert assist the investigator in identifying key
publications and conferences where the subject of the investigation might be found.
Many professionals also participate in on-line discussion groups, and their postings may have been archived, either
through Google’s groups function or through separate facilities. For example, old postings on the Experts-L list from
expertwitnessnetwork.com can be found through the archives at http://lists.digilogic.com/archives/expert-l.html. As
with most e-mail lists, the discussions often are remarkably unguarded and may show the expert taking a position opposite the one he or she will be taking in your case.

Organization Research
If the expert works or has worked for a university, government agency, non-profit or other large entity, it may be useful
to explore that entity’s alliances (including those of its directors) and sources of funds. Useful sites include OMB’s Federal Audit Clearinghouse, IGNet, Community of Science, and Guidestar (for IRS Form 990s). Other sites include the
left-leaning CSPINet.org Integrity in Science database at http://www.cspinet.org/integrity and the right-leaning Capital Research database at http://www.capitalresearch.org. There also are industry-specific sites such as Quackwatch
(for medical matters) and the Forensic Hall of Shame (for criminal matters).
In addition to specific funding and alliance issues, you should attempt to determine whether the entity is subject to examination by an accrediting body and what the results were of any examinations held during or soon after the expert
worked there. In addition, you may want to look for significant wrongdoing by the expert’s associates. You may also
wish to identify former associates in order to interview them about their impressions of the expert and the entity. There
are many ways to find former employees, including organizational newsletters, on-line resume postings, Accurint’s People At Work database and ZoomInfo. In addition, some industries have attracted sites such as Vault.com and Greedy Associates where employees can easily post complaints and other comments about their jobs.

Regulatory, Administrative and Litigation Search
Ideally, searches for appearances in regulatory, administrative and court proceedings look for actions involving the expert both as a party and as a witness. While most of the free and for-pay databases of court, arbitration and regulatory
records make it easy to locate parties, locating the expert’s role as a witness is chancier.
Coverage of federal and state regulatory agencies varies but is worth exploring. When backgrounding a medical expert in
Massachusetts, for example, it is advisable to check both the Worker Compensation board, where the expert may have
testified, and the Board of Registration in Medicine, where the expert may have been the subject of charges. The best
electronic sources for those regulatory actions, while incomplete, are the archives of Massachusetts Lawyer’s Weekly
and the databases at the Social Law Library. Other sources, for Massachusetts and elsewhere, include files on Lexis, Dialog and WestLaw of agency decisions and agency-decision-reporters such as BNA and CCH. A number of state and federal agencies also make their decisions available through the internet, but the ability to search for an individual name

often is limited. Some easily searchable agency databases are available only on the internet, including the HEAL database of doctors who have defaulted on their medical school loans and the GSA database of persons debarred from doing
business with the government.
Court coverage varies as well. Most federal trial and appellate courts can be searched electronically for parties through
PACER, RACER and CM/ECF systems, but a handful have separate systems or no on-line availability whatsoever, necessitating an in-person search. In-person searches also are needed for older cases that predate the electronic systems.
While almost all federal courts can be searched electronically, state and local courts vary widely both as to which courts
are available and as to how far back the data goes. In-person searches are often required.
In addition to searching for dockets, you can search many state and federal published decisions. Because these searches
typically scan the full text rather than just the party information, published decisions can provide you not only cases in
which the expert was a party but also cases in which his or her testimony was addressed in the court’s decision. While
this will not get you a transcript, it will give you the name and contact information for the other side’s lawyers.
There also are a number of sites that collect information specifically about expert testimony. Some are open to all; others
are restricted to certain types of lawyers.
Two sites reserved for civil defense attorneys and criminal prosecutors are IDEX at http://www.idex.com/about/
index.html and DRI at www.dri.org/dri/expert-database/index.cfm. Both offer a broad array of material, including
deposition transcripts, resumes and a discussion list. IDEX allows anyone to see whether it has information on a specific
name but requires membership before one can go further. DRI requires membership for even the initial search.
Plaintiff’s lawyers and criminal defenders have similar possibilities at sites ATLA.org, run by the American Trial Lawyers Association, and TrialSmith.com (formerly DepoConnect), which gets much of its material from individual state
trial lawyer associations. A number of states also have useful sites, including Illinois, which posts a spreadsheet with the
name not only of the expert but also the case name. The spreadsheet runs 114 pages with more than 40 entries to a page.
Juryverdicts.com, run by the National Association of Jury Verdict Publishers, can tell you whether an expert is listed in
any of the verdicts and settlements summarized by its member newspapers. You can then buy the specific entry and get
the case details.
Other useful sites include
--Exemplaris.com, which will sell you federal trial transcripts that mention your expert’s name;
--TrialsDigest.com, which offers deposition transcripts mostly from California courts;
--Triodyne.com, which specializes in transcripts of testimony by engineers and scientists;
--Briefreporter.com, which will sell you briefs that mention your expert by name; and
--MDEX Online, which says it has a searchable database of all reported Daubert, Kumho Tire and Joiner cases, with
links to core documents including transcripts
Missing in action are a number of other once-advertised sites, including NetCourt, National Expert Transcript Service
and Transcripts Unlimited.
While you may wish to concentrate on courts inside the United States, consider researching those of other countries, especially those in the European Union and the Commonwealth. Australia, for example, offers free full-text searching of
many decisions, and a number of Americans have testified there, sometimes with disastrous results. As with domestic
courts, searching foreign courts requires a mix of internet and for-pay databases such as those available on Lexis.
—[This research guide was last revised on June 7, 2007 and began going out of date the next day. Please feel free to contact us for updates and additional thoughts tailored to the specific type of expert you are investigating. To see a sample of
tailored resources, please see a companion conference tipsheet, “Researching Doctors”.]

