LOOKING FOR COURT CASES
By Larry Lopez, Private Investigator
Strategic Research
larrylopez@srresearch.com 617 497-6700
http://www.srresearch.com

2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix
Private Eyes Share Their Tips
3:40-4:40 pm Friday, Salon B

What are the best on-line sources for criminal and civil court records?
First of all, some caveats. Databases are put together by underpaid, overworked clerical workers. Most
clerical workers will mis-type the name of any ethnic group that is not their own. They will put last names
in the first-name field and vice-versa. They will include only the first plaintiff and defendant, leaving out
all the other parties, including the guy you are looking for..
The key things to look for in a court vendor are:
q
q
q
q
q

how many courts and jurisdictions (counties, cities, whatever) they cover
what kinds of cases (criminal? civil? family? housing?) are included and when are they purged
are all cases listed or just those involving businesses
how far back the coverage goes and
how often the file is updated

FEDERAL COURTS
Let's talk federal first, since that's simpler.
In addition to the Supreme Court and the Circuit Courts of Appeal, there are something like 91 trial level
("District Court") jurisdictions and a bunch of bankruptcy courts. There also are a few miscellaneous (and
specialized) panels like the maritime,veteran’s and tax courts.
Virtually all of the mainstream appellate and trial courts, including the bankruptcy courts, can be searched
through the PACER/RACER and/or CM/ECF systems.
For most courts, what you will get is an index of all cases with that name and an option to pull up the
specific dockets for each case. The docket will give you the names of all the parties, lawyers and judges in
the case, as well as a brief description of each motion and ruling. In some instances, on you can click on
highlighted entries and get full-text of the actual motion or ruling.
There are two ways to search PACER -- through a nationwide index or through the index for the court in
your particular area. For reasons no one has been able to fully understand (must be those gremlins again),
there are occasional cases – and entire courts -- that show up in local systema but not in the national index.
If you are searching nationally, it is probably worthwhile to go back in locally and double-check the key
jurisdictions.)
For details, see:
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/links.pl
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/psco/cgi-bin/miss-court.pl
[NOTE: The start dates for individual courts vary widely, from the early 1970s to the mid-1990s. You can
find the details under the “Date Ranges” option in the nationwide index search. A start date of, say, 1/1/90
should encompass all cases that were still open on that day, no matter when they had been filed, and all
cases opened since then. Cases closed before 1/1/90 would not be on the index but could usually be
searched on microfiche cards kept at the clerk’s office.]

There is no sign-up or monthly fee for PACER, and you are billed once every three months. If the bill is
under $10.00 for the quarter, you are told not to bother paying until next time. Each search costs eight cents
per page, one of the best bargains in the database business.
A number of private vendors resell PACER/CM/ECF info for a higher fee. In my opinion, they aren't
worth it, with two possible exceptions:
1) If you want them, for a separate fee, to send you a notice every time a new motion or ruling is filed in a
particular case and
2) ) For certain types of advanced research. For example, LexisNexis (“LN”) does NOT give you easy
access to the actual dockets, but it DOES separate out into "fields" some data that you cannot search for
easily in PACER itself. If, for example, you want to find all personal bankruptcy cases where the debtor
had assets or debts above $1 million -- bankrupt yuppies for short – only Lexis can do it.
Most specialized federal courts can’t be searched easily, although U.S. Tax Court’s has a good (and free)
docket inquiry function, at http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/.
A lot of federal appellate opinions are available through the major legal web sites such as Cornell Law
School, as well as through LN and other vendors. One can also find appellate briefs at a number of places,
and many federal agencies (e.g. Department of Labor and NLRB) have searchable databases of
administrative law decisions, debarrments and other information available on their web sites.)
In addition, the Federal Bureau of Prisons now offers an inmate locator on its website,
http://www.bop.gov/. (Click "Inmate Info" at left). The database covers all current inmates and all those
released since 1982, but it is not search-friendly:
-- While it provides name, race and age to the nearest year, it does not have middle initials, Jrs., exact
DOBs or other details that can help you determine if the inmate Joe Blow is the same Joe Blow that you are
researching.
-- There don’t seem to be any standardized data input provisions. For example, a test search for an inmate
whose first name is actually Natel could not find him that way -- he was only listed as "N". And testing for
the last name "Johnson" turned up 66 "Joseph Johnson" entries, and 12 "Joe Johnson" entries as well as
three "J. Johnson" entries on inmates whose first names may or may not have been Joe.
-- Don't use "Senior" or "Jr." or the like. In our tests, the database located two "Charles Keating" entries of
ages that seem to correspond to the former Arizona S&L chief & his son. But when we searched for
Charles Keating Junior or Jr. or III, the database could not find anyone.

STATE COURTS
So much for federal stuff. Now for the states, which are a REAL stew.
Unlike the feds, most states have courts on four levels: Supreme (called Appeals in NYS just to confuse
folks), Appeals (Supreme-Appellate Division in NYS), major trials (Superior in most states, County or
Circuit in others and Supreme in NYS) and minor trials (District and/or Small Claims and/or Municipal).
Some also have specialized courts for juveniles, divorces, complex business litigation, probate and the like.
Since every state is different, you really need a good book to make sure you are looking where you want to
look. I use The Sourcebook for Public Record Information, put out by BRB publications, but there are
other books that will do as well. I like BRB because the Sankey brothers, who run it, are genuinely good
people who will take the time to figure out which product will serve your needs as opposed to which one
they might prefer to sell you. They also have a nice set of public-records bookmarks on their site at

http://www.brbpub.com/pubrecsites.asp. While there, check out the updates and in-depth explanations at
http://www.brbpub.com/pubrecupdates.asp.
Other useful portals include http://www.legaldockets.com/ (about $200 a year) and
http://www.searchsystems.net (about $70). I do not recommend their paid links, but the free ones can be
useful.
Each state, and sometimes each county, seems to use a different record–keeping system, with different start
dates and refresh rates. Some states, like New Hampshire, are black holes with NO system whatsoever for
public access to court dockets, although one can occasionally find written decisions and schedules for
future appearances. Others, like New Mexico, look like a virtual paradise, with a free, web-based search
engine with a one-stop search of what looks like every trial court there is. Most states fall somewhere in
between the extremes, with databases that contain only some counties, or only some sorts of cases, or only
cases that are still alive in the system. Some states, like Alabama and Maryland, have just about everything
available on a fee-basis. Other states sell whatever data they wish to vendors, who in turn make it available
for a fee. Some combine several of these options.
When searching, make sure you understand the rules, Masssachusetts, for example, does not allow last
name truncation unless you check the box at the bottom of the search form. That means if you are looking
for suits against Robert B. Smith, Jr., and don’t check the box, you can’t just enter “Smith”. You must
enter “Smith”, “Smith, Junior”, “Smith, Jr.” “Smith, trustee” “Smith, tee” “Smith Junior, trustee” and
Smith Jr., tee” etc. Secondly, while most data entry clerks correctly place the last name in one field and the
first name in another, clerks in some counties jam everything into the “last name” field. So, if you enter
Smith in the “last name” field (even with the truncation box checked) and Robert in the “first name” field,
you may miss some cases, because while the database has a “Smith Robert” in the “last name” field (which
the truncation box can handle) it has only a blank space in the “first name” field and therefore assumes you
are querying for someone else, named Robert Smith-Robert.
In addition to what the states sell or give away directly, there are abstracting companies that go into courts
and write up bare-bones summaries of some cases. The abstractors typically resell their data to vendors like
Dun & Bradstreet or LN or Know-X, and they usually limit themselves to civil cases. In many instances,
they don't even do all civil cases -- just ones that involve a business as a defendant. If a vendor tells you it
has coverage of a particular state, you need to ask not only what years, what courts, and how fresh the data
is: you also have to ask if it is all cases or just business litigation (or just business litigation that results in a
judgment of more than, say, $25,000).
There's a fair amount of overlap among vendors, but each of them seems to have some courts the others
don't, and there are the usual parsing gremlins. In a case with enough at stake to make it worthwhile a few
years back, we searched all available New York and New Jersey courts, using three different vendors.
Each returned some cases that the others did not -- even though they all covered the same counties and
bought each other's data.
LN, for example, is VERY good at “equivalents.” Try searching for something like "Four Brothers
Wholesale and Retail Grocers" and you are at the mercy of the data-entry clerk's truncation and
abbreviation whims. (It will show up on PACER as something like "4 Bros Whlsle"). LN, however,
KNOWS that Four = 4, and allows for wildcards.

MAJOR PLAYERS
The six biggest commercial players in state courts are probably LN, CourtLink (which is owned by LN but
not the same product you get on an LN court search), KnowX (which has swallowed most of Superior
Online), Westlaw, CourtExpress (owned by but different than Westlaw) and Choicepoint’s DBT,
sometimes referred to as Autotrack.
To see what jurisdictions they cover, go to:

LexisNexis
http://w3.nexis.com/sources/scripts/eslClient.pl?GSDTYPE=Dockets
CourtLink
http://www.lexisnexis.com/courtlink/online/courtsavailable.asp
Westlaw and CourtExpress
http://west.thomson.com/product/RM153285/product.aspx
KnowX/Superior
http://www.knowx.com/suits/coverage.jsp
[NOTE: The jurisdictions covered by ChoicePoint/Autotrack’s computer searches are not posted on the
public web but can be reached if you have a log-in. After reviewing the post – and spending 20 minutes on
the phone with the help-desk, we still aren’t sure whether it only covers closed civil and criminal cases or
includes live ones as well. Please feel free to contact us for additional information.

SOME OTHER PLAYERS
Other vendors, like cocourts.com, merlindata.com and e-law.com have only a couple of states but do them
very well or exclusively. Court PC of CT, for example, keeps cases in its system long after the state’s own
official website has purged them as being too old.
What makes things even more complicated is that the vendors are constantly losing old data sources and
getting new ones.

THREE TYPES OF SEARCHES
Most of the databases allow you to pull their brief summary of the case but do not go further. CourtLink
and CourtExpress are a little different. They have bought access to dozens of states and designed software
that lets you piggyback on it directly. For other states, where piggybacking is unworkable, CL and CE
perform the computer search for you and give you the results within minutes or hours (ok, sometimes
within days).
This means there are three types of searches with important differences, and each vendor uses different
terms for them.
1) Direct computer searches, where you enter the terms and search the vendor’s database or patch through
the vendor and directly into the court system
2) Indirect computer searches, where you enter the terms of the search and the vendor then enters it into the
court system and reports back.
3) In-person court searches (often called delayed searches) where you enter the terms of the search and the
vendor gets a local records retriever to look up the name the next time he or she is in court. Therein can lie
a problem.
The local retrievers get paid as little as $3 a name and are usually required to complete the search in 3 days.
If yours is the only name the searcher gets in three days, you must hope they are sufficiently professional to
drive to the courthouse, pay for gas and parking and do the work for a grand total of $3. While there are
some very good and conscientious searchers, there are also instances when a searcher swears there is no
case, even if you know for a fact that there is one.

In addition, many retrievers usually work on pre-employment searches, where the law restricts how many
years back they can search and what kinds of cases can be reported. Even if you tell the vendor you want
ALL cases, not just pre-employment cases, your instructions will often fall on deaf ears.
If you are going to use this type of search, you might want to ask the company what kind of integrity
testing they do. Or you might want to do some controlled buys yourself, where you know what the results
SHOULD be before you ask the question.

ADDITIONAL SOURCES FOR CIVIL RECORDS
In addition to the docket searches, you can sometimes find cases by searching for judgments and liens,
either in the court clerk’s office or the county recorder/registry’s office. Judgments and liens are typically
recorded only when the case involves money damages, but they will often pick up instances where a the
case pre-dates the docketing database or came from an out-of-state court and had to be domesticated where
your subject lives in order to take full effect. Another reason to search these databases in addition to the
dockets databases is that this is where you will find federal and state tax liens.
For coverage, see:
http://w3.nexis.com/sources/scripts/eslClient.pl?GSDTYPE=Judgments+%26+Liens
http://west.thomson.com/product/40453708/product.aspx
http://www.knowx.com/judg/coverage.jsp
http://www.knowx.com/liens/coverage.jsp
Other sites, like Lawyers' Weekly newspaper archives, class-action lawsuit web sites and the like, can
sometimes find the odd case or two. Also, vendors like LN, Westlaw and Dialog have a lot of stuff in
specialty publications like Verdict & Settlement reporters. Once again, being able to search every word
instead of just certain fields is a key advantage: we once found an expert witness’ 20-year-old criminal
conviction through a footnote in an appellate decision on a case involving a completely different man.

ADDITIONAL SOURCES FOR CRIMINAL RECORDS
There's also a backdoor to some criminal cases through the state prison systems and some county jails.
Increasingly, they are putting their inmate locators on the web, and some, like Arizona, keep the
information available even after the sentence is over.
A number of vendors buy the inmate vendor and advertise it as a criminal records check. Don’t believe
them. At best, state-level inmate records cover the small minority of criminal defendants who are convicted
and sentenced to incarceration in state and county facilities and/or probation. The records will not include
those sentenced to city jails (or to county jails in many cases), to diversion programs, to monetary fines,
etc.
In some states anyone also can ask the state police for a criminal records check. In Florida, South Carolina,
Pennsylvania and Texas, for example, you can check the names at a website for fees ranging from about
$3.15 to $25. In Connecticut and New York, you mail in a form with a check.
While this may sound like an ideal solution, audits by the US Department of Justice show that these state
depositories are riddled with errors and incomplete data. Since the NCIC relies on these depositories as
well, even the NCIC is more show than substance. Unless you are prepared to visit more than 10,000
federal, state and local courts in more than 3,600 counties, there is no way to conduct a complete,
nationwide, criminal search. The cops can’t do it, and neither can you.

A FINAL WARNING
Last but not least, don’t forget that, whether civil or criminal, a court ruling often isn’t the last word. There
are always appeals and pardons, and your libel lawyer will be very grateful if you check carefully before
you write.

-----

This version of the tipsheet was last revised on June 11, 2007 and began going out of date an hour later. It
makes significant changes to and should be used instead of the paper tipsheet distributed during the panel.

