LOOKING FOR PEOPLE
Larry Lopez, Private Investigator
Strategic Research
larrylopez@srresearch.com 617 497-6700
http://www.srresearch.com

2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix
Private Eyes Share Their Tips
3:40-4:40 pm Friday, Salon B

In a lot of ways, it is getting harder to locate people. The Social Security Administration now lets people get new
numbers if they claim to be victims of identity theft or stalking, and a growing number of states let alleged abuse
victims use a dummy Post Office box on all state and local government forms.
Even if they aren’t trying to hide, a lot of people don’t show up with current addresses or telephone

numbers in free internet telephone books or even at the Registry of Motor Vehicles.
If free searches don’t come up with what you want, how should you evaluate which fee-based services to
try next?

A) How Fee-Based Address Databases Work
1) The spine of most address data is the "header" portion of credit reports by one or more of the three
major credit bureaus: Experian (formerly TRW), TransUnion and Equifax. The data in the credit reports
comes largely from banks and insurance companies.
2) Autotrack, CDB Infotek and other resellers get their data from lots of sources, including the three credit
bureaus and Departments of Motor Vehicles, the FAA etc, voting lists, etc. The way they blend the data -and how often they refresh it -- goes a long way to determining how good they are. And, to complicate
things a little further, some of them in turn resell data in bulk to other resellers.
3) The information from credit bureaus are subject to a whole bunch of privacy laws, which are in constant
flux. The two most important federal laws are the Fair Credit Reporting Act ("FCRA") and the GrammLeach-Bliley Act ("GLB"), both of which are enforced in large measure by the Federal Trade Commission.
Because the laws are not preemptive, states have also passed laws governing the use of data.
4) The other data that resellers buy -- motor vehicle records, voting rolls, etc. -- also have restrictions,
which vary from state to state. The best known is probably the federal Driver Privacy Protection Act, or
DPPA.
5) In an attempt to forestall tougher laws and rules, the credit bureaus and most resellers have adopted a
voluntary set of industry standards called the IRSC guidelines.
6) The FCRA, GLB, DPPA and IRSC all set out different privileges for different types of users. An
insurance agent can get certain data under certain circumstances where a lawyer cannot and vice versa.
7) Each of the credit bureaus interprets the FCRA, GLB and IRSC guidelines in its own way and writes its
contracts accordingly. The resellers, in turn, have their own interpretations, which they insert into their
contracts with you.
8) The major GLB provision for address databases took effect in 2001. It still allows financial and
insurance companies to provide credit bureaus with up-to-date addresses and other data. But it goes beyond
the FCRA/IRSC restrictions on who can see the new data. The old data (call it the pre-GLB subset) is
grandfathered in. As a result, resellers have one subset of up-to-the minute data that can only be sold under
the GLB's terms. But they also have a pre-GLB subset, which they try to update with data from nonbanking and insurance sources. That can include voting records, property records, phone books, etc.

9) The questions that some resellers ask you about permitted purpose are designed to figure out which
subset you are entitled to search. If Reseller X does not ask as many questions as Reseller Y, it is possible
that X only has the pre-GLB subset, while Y has both. If a reseller asks no questions whatsoever, it may be
that none of the data comes from credit headers but was cobbled together instead from telephone books,
cross-directories and other unregulated data.
(And incidentally, while LN did take the SSN out of what you see when you do a person search, the data is
still there, which means you can search by SSN and find the person to whom the SSN belongs).

B) Choosing A Database
All the major locator databases use credit headers as their backbone. They flesh out their product with a
mix of other data such as voter registrations, telephone listings and mailing lists.
Here are key questions to ask when evaluating a database:
1) As you know, there are three credit-header companies whose data is the backbone of most locators:
Experian, Equifax and TransUnion. Does the initial search draw from 1, 2 or all 3 databases?
2) Once you are past the initial search screen and into the details, do you draw from 1, 2 or all 3 databases?
3) How often do you update each of those databases: nightly? weekly? every quarter?
4) Many locators blend in additional datasources -- things like property records, telephone books, magazine
mailing lists etc. What do you add for the state in which I am most interested?
5) Do you provide a full or masked SSN?
6) What other data do you offer?
7) What subscription options do you have? (Some locators charge an all-you-can-eat flat fee, others a
monthly usage minimum. Some charge a monthly fee and a per-search add-on. Some are completely a la
carte: no monthly fee or minimum but a fee for each transaction.

C) Using The Database
1) There are always differences in how the vendor software parses your request. Some handle a name with
an apostrophe better than others, for example. And there are always gremlins in any database.
2) Assuming the budget permits it, we usually start with a combination of CDB and either IRB or Tracers.
We sometimes add in other databases and/or toggle between inputs (try the name first to pick up the SSN
and then try the SSN to see if that search produces a different result). Or we re-input a spouse name to see
whether that comes up with a newer result.
3) If you think you will be doing a lot of searching, one option might be to sign up for a cheap database and
try it first. If the cheap database does not have the right answer – or if the case is too important to risk a
wrong answer – then find someone who specializes in database research and ask them to do it for you.
4) Don’t forget that fee-based searches aren’t your only option. If the person you are looking for has ever
been made bail, the bail bondsman has a thicker file on him or her than any law enforcement agency. If he
or she made political campaign donations, you may find an address and occupation online through the FEC
or state agencies, on social networking sites, in University alumni directories and in many other places.

