LOOKING FOR DEATH RECORDS
By Larry Lopez, Strategic Research http://www.srresearch.com
Paper records
Death records in the United States are generally kept at the state level, although there are
some national databases.
To apply for a paper copy of someone’s death record, you can find the appropriate state
agency at http://vitalrec.com/death.html
You also may be able to find death certificates in probate court files.
Databased Records
Although some states make their own death records available to the public through free
or fee-based databases, the easiest way to search for most (but not all) deaths is through
the Social Security Death Index (“SSDI”) generated from the Death Master File of the
U.S. Social Security Administration (“SSA”).
The SSDI contains the records of deceased persons who were assigned Social Security
Numbers (SSNs) and whose deaths have been reported to the SSA. Although it
contained more than 65.7 million records by the end of March 2001, it should be noted
that not all deaths are recorded in it. Those who are covered by Railroad Act pensions,
for example, may not appear in the SSDI, and neither may others without an SSN.
Furthermore, a dead person may not show up in SSDI if you are searching old data.
While some databases download the SSDI data frequently, others used CD-Roms that
may be six months old or more.
In addition to missing people who are dead, an SSDI search may falsely report as dead
someone who is in fact alive. Reporters at both the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette and the
Miami Herald, for example, have written extensive articles about finding living people
listed as dead, including numerous elderly women who were not dead at all but were
listed that way after their husbands died.
Once you have located a death record on SSDI, you can file a freedom of information
request with SSA for additional information, which may help you to trace relatives.
A sample letter is attached on the next page.
In addition to checking the SSDI, don’t forget to look for death notices elsewhere,
including newspapers, trade journals and alumni association newsletters

Social Security Administration
Office of Central Records Operations
FOIA Workgroup
P.O. Box 17772
300 N. Greene Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21290
Re: Freedom of Information Act Request
Dear Freedom of Information Officer,
I am writing this request under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. Section 552. I
hereby request the Social Security File (including the SS-5, Application for
Social Security Card) for the following individual:
LAST NAME, FIRST NAME
SSN:
Birth: Day, Month, Year
Death: Day Month Year
This individual is deceased, having been listed in the Social Security Administration's
Death Master File. I understand the fee for this service is $7.00 when the Social Security
Number is provided. Included is a check for $______ made out to the Social Security
Administration to cover any administrative costs required by this request.
Please respond to my request upon receipt of this initial correspondence. Thank you for
your attention and assistance.
Sincerely,

