Investigating Failing Government Safety Nets
Chris Halsne, KIRO‐TV (CBS), Seattle
206‐728‐8517
chalsne@kirotv.com

Government regulation investigations often start with a spot news event.
TV crews all over town throw up lights & go for 3 or 4 shows. The story makes the front page of
the paper. The second day, there may be a quick follow up. Most daily reporters move on to
the next event.
WARNING INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS: Never fail to watch your own newscasts or read your
own paper.
Expand the boundaries of coverage beyond the single event and see if there is a system‐wide
problem or, at least, a common problem. Your discovery may greatly expand the number of
viewers/readers affected.

Example: Broken and Unchecked. Using computer assisted reporting, we proved that in
any given moment, about 1 in 10 fire hydrants is broken or in need of major repair. That
number increased proportionally when communities failed to conduct hydrant inspections on
time.
We envisioned the on‐air story in three, expanding sections. We also added exclusive
interviews, data, behind‐the‐scenes stories, and special graphics to the website.
http://www.kirotv.com/hydrants/index.html
1) Good story telling means good humanization. Take spot news event and set up the larger
investigation. Take the opportunity to remind viewers of the previous event. Personalize.
Find an emotional connection.
2) Slightly expand beyond one event and study what that means to the community in which
the event occurred. Re‐investigate the spot news details and the surrounding known facts.
Dig deeper into the specific government system that is in charge of oversight.
3) Go Big. Check other cities, counties, or statewide. You may not find problems elsewhere,
but that finding could be a valuable “standard”. Ask the data to find “unique” items. For
example, we asked the hydrant repair data which hydrants repeatedly failed. Should a
hydrant have 9 major repairs in three years? Does it work in between? Is there no money to
replace it?

Avoid Being Sidetracked: Officially, red‐flagged, out‐of‐service hydrants are not a great
threat. Rescue workers know about them. Unknown broken hydrants raise safety concerns for
homeowners and firefighters alike.

Common Safety Inspection Deceptions:
1) Agencies allow private industry to self‐regulate. Complicated, extensive rules are too time‐
consuming for the government inspector to really make sure everything is up to code. They
check the private company logs, insurance records, etc and call it good. That’s a case of an
inspector inspecting records, not performing a real, hands‐on inspection.
2) Shifting definitions of “inspection”. Make sure you understand how inspections are
conducted. Always ask the government agency to define the word inspection. Visual vs.
Hands‐on

Story Ideas for Any market
Commercial Building Fire Sprinklers: Many sprinkler heads and pipe are clogged or
recalled due to malfunction. How often are inspections mandated and are those goals being
met? How are the inspections conducted and by whom? If recalled sprinkler heads remain in
the building, who knows and for how long?

Construction Cranes: These things are like carnival rides, repeatedly taken apart and
reassembled. Check out the “lean factor”.

Recycling Center Industrial Safety: Many workers are impaired or part of a rehab
program. Combine that with poor safety training, lack of workplace supervision, and few state
inspections.

Free to Go: Review “extradition limitations” on criminal arrest warrants per jurisdiction. To
save money, many law enforcement agencies will not leave town/county to get a wanted
person, even if that accused criminal is already in police custody. Make sure you review how
jurisdictions handle domestic assaults.

High on Prison Life: Pills handed out like candy to convicted felons inside prison. Look for
large dosages of Morphine, Oxy, Ritalin, & Methadone. Health issues (addiction, suicide or
accidental death), Security issues (theft, hoarding, inside dealers), taxpayer cost (both pill costs
and security costs to distribute).

