Maud Beelman
Assistant Managing Editor, Investigations/Projects

The Dallas Morning News
mbeelman@dallasnews.com

IRE 2007: “Editors’ Track: Conceiving, managing the investigation”
Structure the investigative process. Break it into sections. The length of each will vary, but the
phases are typically the same. The first is research and planning, a preliminary look at the subject
of investigation. Start drafting a project outline here and talk about your methodology. File your
FOIAs, request the data you know you need at this point. Have early meetings with
photographers, graphic artists and Web colleagues to discuss alternative storytelling techniques.
The more time spent at the front end, the fewer problems at the back end. The second and third
phases are for reporting, retooling the project outline, drafting story outlines and writing. The
final phase is for editing, fact-checking, final decisions on layout/presentation and, if necessary,
pre-pub legal review.
Create benchmarks for your investigation. Determine how you will judge the project’s
successful progression, or lack thereof. How will you know when you have enough? How
will you know if you should bail out?
Meet regularly. Doing so at the same time on the same day of every week makes them
easier to remember and lets the meetings serve as mini-deadlines, allowing reporters and
editors to assess progress, compare notes, share ideas, sources and leads. On rolling investigations
(as we experienced with our work on the Texas Youth Commission), consider holding brief daily
meetings. Ours are 15 minutes each morning.
Take notes during the meetings. Often, reporters will give the best or essence of what they’re
learning or doing – the latest great piece of information they’ve uncovered – and that is not
always reflected when the copy is turned in. They talk “in the moment” at these meetings, and
you can capture color or details that might be lost as the reporter labors under the long write.
Interview your reporters. Some reporters think best by talking out their findings,
problems or strategy. Write yourself a memo later as to what the reporter said, so you can
help jog memories, as needed.
Outline the project and, later, the stories. Outlines are valuable not only for showing
what you have, but for revealing holes in the project planning, methodology or story.
There is no one way to do an outline, except to say that it is not a notebook or brain
dump. It’s a document that outlines what you think the project/story will be about.
Later, it can be refined to update with what you know. And, even later, it can be an
outline of the actual story, which makes writing easier. Everyone has their own way of doing
them; the format is not what's important. The focusing of your mind on what you are reporting
and writing is.
Build timelines/chronologies. They often show you connections or holes you did not
realize existed.
Build your foundation with data and documents, and use humans to bring your story to life. If
your foundation is data analysis, do that as early as possible and let it guide your reporting. The
last thing you want to be doing near the end of a project is trying to get anecdotal reporting to
match the data.

Write memos. They also help reveal holes in information or logic that you might not
notice until too late to fix. If you have many reporters working on a project, encourage
them to write memos to share across the team – writing them in “publishable” format,
with quotes, names, titles, etc., exactly as they would appear in print, saves time at the
end. Team investigations are like compounded interest – when individual knowledge is
shared and leveraged, the overall effort is strengthened.
Encourage reporters to write as they go. The best of the best do it, and there’s a reason
why. First, in long investigations, it makes the final writing easier. Second, it allows you
to write “in the moment.” If you don’t start writing until the end of a yearlong
investigation, not only are you overwhelmed with information, but you risk having lost
the spontaneity of your material.
Encourage reporters to re-read their notes periodically throughout the reporting and
writing process. Information obtained at the start of the investigation often means something very
different from the perspective of greater knowledge and understanding. The same goes for
documents. If you’ve gotten an early document dump, as we did in TYC, re-read the records for
each new line of inquiry.
The 25-word rule. With apologies to Steve Lovelady, who coined this rule, if your reporters
can’t summarize their story in 25 words or less, they’ve got more reporting and thinking to do.
Moot court it. My reporters taught me this one. A team of my reporters gathered colleagues from
other departments one day to present the premise and methodology of their investigation for
scrutiny and feedback. It helped them see where to tweak and bolstered their confidence that they
were on the right course.
Confront early. Information or perspectives may emerge from confrontation interviews that you
did not know/had not considered. Doing these “final” interviews before the last minute gives you
time to consider, analyze and incorporate what you heard. It can strengthen your report and
buttress you against allegations of onesidedness or malice.
Make the methodology clear to the team and the reader. Even if you’re blessed, as we are, with
a computer-assisted reporting editor, be sure everyone on the team knows how the analysis is
being done and has input. Then explain what you did, how and why to the reader. Consider
posting the database(s) that served as the analytical foundation. This is the best way to protect
yourself from those who might try to discredit your work.
Contain chaos but allow failure. Use all the organizational tools at your disposal to
keep the project and the reporters on track, but allow people to take chances even if
there’s a risk of failure. Let them go down those informational rabbit holes, just follow
closely behind.

