TIP SHEET
WRITING AND PRESENTING THE INVESTIGATIVE STORY
IRE 2007
Panelists: Steve Eckert, Dateline NBC
Renee Ferguson, WMAQ TV

Steve’s Tips:
1)

ALWAYS WRITE IN THE ACTIVE VOICE.

There are rare exceptions .. but the ACTIVE voice makes your stories
tighter .. clearer .. and more direct.
2) WRITE WITH A NATURAL RHYTHM.
I’m fond of alliteration and the old “Rule of 3’s”.
Make your script simple, sharp and surprising.
3) KEEP YOUR SENTENCES SIMPLE.
If you have a complicated subject, you need to explain it
step-by-step .. one bite-size piece at a time.
4) MAKE ROOM FOR FREQUENT “NAT SOUND” PAUSES.
After you make an important point, use a short pause to let it sink in.
5) Ask yourself:

WHAT IF I TOLD IT TODAY?

A working outline while you’re researching/shooting will help you
identify issues, pictures and holes you still need to fill to make your
story compelling.
6) BEFORE YOU WRITE, HAVE A SOLID STRUCTURE.
By stripping your story to its barest bones, you will understand it
most clearly.
7) BUILD UP .. DON’T LET DOWN.
Try to build to a climax near the end of your story. You may need to
tease it at the top, but think twice about giving away so much at the
beginning that the rest of your story feels like a “let-down”.
8) LOOK FOR FRESH EYES.
Bounce your scripts off someone who’s NOT INVOLVED in your story.
They’ll raise questions a viewer might.

###

RENEE’S TIPS:
What Amy Jo’s Story Teaches us ..
1. For a story to hold the viewers attention it must be allowed
to unfold. Like a novel, use of foreshadowing, hints of
what’s to come, challenging the viewer/listener to stay for
the next juicy tidbit of information is essential.
2. Descriptive language using an economy of words is important.
In the example of Amy Jo’s story we learn right away that she
is vulnerable and that *something* happened to her in a
nursing home. We learn this in the anchor intro…just enough
to encourage the viewer to hang around to find out what.
3. First pictures or first words must be powerful. Ideally both.
The first picture of Amy Jo establishes that she is different,
in a wheel chair, has a neck tick. No need to say any of
this. We preserve her dignity by merely introducing her and
hinting that hers is an extraordinary story.
4. Since Amy Jo can’t speak, her mother Cheryl becomes both a
voice for Amy Jo and for herself. We are immediately in touch
with Cheryl’s emotion…even before we know why. Putting the
viewer in touch with a character’s emotion early into a story
is a powerful technique for building suspense and drama.
5.

By the time the viewer is shown and told that Amy Jo is
pregnant he may have already guessed. By engaging the viewer
in this kind of thinking you get them to become vested in the
story.
Time to raise the next question.

6. How did it happen? Again the mother raises the question.
have a mystery on our hands.

We

7. We begin to answer how it happened by looking at how the
nursing home was run, using state nursing home records.
8. What does the nursing home have to say for itself?
Nothing on camera. A statement read in an objective voice
allows the viewer to decide about the sincerity of the owners.
The governor held a news conference two days after this story
announcing nursing home reform and children’s protection act.
9. By allowing the story to unfold we also let the viewer know
that it will continue to unfold. We do not have all the
answers but we will keep seeking them. Stay tuned.

###

