Investigating Bus Crashes
By Michael Grabell, The Dallas Morning News, mgrabell@dallasnews.com
1. Check the bus company’s safety record on the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration’s
Web sites.
SafeStat: http://ai.fmcsa.dot.gov/safestat/safestatmain.asp
SAFER: http://www.safersys.org/CompanySnapshot.aspx
Passenger Carrier Safety: http://www.ai.fmcsa.dot.gov/Passenger/home.asp
*Don’t forget to check with your state department of transportation. Companies are regulated by
the feds for interstate travel and by the state for intrastate travel.
2. FOIA the company’s most recent Compliance Review from the FMCSA.
3. SafeStat has summary information on Accident Reports, Vehicle Inspections, Driver
Inspections, and Citations. Request the full reports from the state/federal law enforcement
agency that issued them.
4. In addition to lawsuits, check for complaints with your state attorney general’s office and the
Better Business Bureau.
5. Check for recalls with NHTSA’s Office of Defects Investigation.
http://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/problems/recalls/
5. Vehicle: SafeStat’s accident and vehicle safety pages will give you VIN numbers and license
plates. Track registration and ownership records with your state DOT. In our situation, we had a
bus that was operating in Texas, leased in Maryland, and registered in Oklahoma by its owner in
British Columbia. The bus had also operated for many years in Georgia, Ontario and Quebec.
Canadian records Web site: http://www.journalismnet.com/canada/
4. Driver: SafeStat’s driver safety page won’t give you the driver’s name. But the actual citation
or accident report from your state often will. If FMCSA did the report, it won’t. Request the
driver’s record and license application from your state dept. of public safety. In our case, some of
the drivers had driven buses and gotten in accidents in Mexico.
Mexican FOIA Web site: http://www.sisi.org.mx/
5. Check on PACER to see if the company is in bankruptcy. They often are. In our case, the
company was required to issue monthly reports on how it was spending its money.
6. Don’t wait for the FMCSA and NTSB to finish their investigation. Check with other agencies
involved. In our case, the state DOT and the sheriff’s department had done their own
investigations. Open records requests yielded the same records used in the NTSB hearing and
criminal prosecution: crime scene photos, witness statements, investigators’ notes, driver
logbooks, the company’s daily inspection reports, driver expense reports, maintenance invoices,
trip manifests. We also got a list of trips that TXDOT said violated the law, which showed us
everywhere the bus had been in the last four months.
7. Check with plaintiff’s attorneys. They may be getting discovery while the investigations are
pending. This yielded the company’s entire maintenance file on the bus involved in the accident.

How to Check the Safety Records of Charter Bus
Companies Your Schools Hire for Field Trips
By Michael Grabell, The Dallas Morning News, mgrabell@dallasnews.com
1. Request the database of transportation services purchase orders or invoices from your local
school district. Or request the actual purchase orders and invoices. Don’t just get the approved
vendor list because districts sometimes go off of the list.
2. How does your district vet bus companies? Get the school’s policy on field trip transportation.
This can often be found in district’s request for proposal (RFP) for charter bus services. Also, ask
for any complaints they’ve received from students, parents, teachers and coaches.
3. Run the companies through SafeStat to check their safety records and FOIA their last
compliance review.
4. Don’t forget to check with your state DOT. In our case, one of the main contractors was
registered with the feds but not with the state, which meant they weren’t legally allowed to be
driving in Texas.
5. Go on Nexis to find out who owns and manages the company and run their criminal records.
Most states have rules about school contractors with felonies. Contractors who want to do
business with schools often have to file felony conviction notification forms with their bid
package. In our case, one of the main contractors was run by a convicted drug trafficker.
6. Go to the address listed for the bus company. In our case, one of them traced back to a house
in a subdivision. No room for buses there. The visit led to questions about whether two
companies were one and the same, set up to dodge regulators.

