Thinking With Both Sides of Your Brain:
The challenge of presenting in print and online
IRE National Conference, June 9, 2007
Richard Galant
Associate Editor, Newsday
Rgalant@newsday.com
(631) 843-3274
The opportunity: Stories and projects have more impact when they are told online as
well as in print. Online presentations broaden the audience, capturing users who don’t
read newspapers. They also can last well beyond the life of a typical newspaper article,
becoming an ongoing resource.
The challenge: Reporting, writing and editing for one medium is hard enough.
Presenting online requires special skills. Editing for both print and online takes careful
management of people and projects.
The differences: Print and online are different, though related media. Newspapers have
hundreds of years of history. They are constrained by the cost of newsprint. They
communicate to readers in a one-way fashion. They can’t target the individual user. They
are limited to text, photos and graphics. They are largely opaque institutions that obtain
information and publish a finished story without normally giving the reader access to the
primary sources. Newspapers have a tradition of doing some longer stories that at least
some readers will finish.
By contrast, online news sites have only 12 years or less of tradition. Space on the web is
effectively infinite. Online is inherently interactive, it can be customized to the individual
user. It can provide video and audio in addition to text and still photos. It can be
transparent to the user, who can dive into the raw data and the original sources. Users are
oriented toward short bursts of text, not long stories.
The common threads: The single idea or theme that underlies a story or project is just as
vital online as it is in the paper. If you can’t articulate that clearly, you’re nowhere.
Accuracy and balance is crucial in both media. And public service animates both print
and the web.
Key pointers:
• Take advantage of the differences between print and web to amplify your findings
and increase impact.
• Use the power of your underlying database as a way to involve users in your site.
• Get everyone – photographers, videographers, online producers, designers,
presentation editors – involved early.
• Meet regularly, focus on the key milestones that need to be hit.
• Coordinate print and online publication dates.

