Covering worker safety and health
Ken Ward Jr., The Charleston (W.Va.) Gazette
IRE Conference June 2007, Phoenix
(304) 348-1702, kward@wvgazette.com

Investigate Deaths and Injuries:

Every day, more than 16 American workers die and 12,000 more are
injured on the job. That doesn’t include those who die from
occupational diseases, which claim another 50,000 to 60,000 each year.
No matter where you do journalism, there are a lot of stories
there. Investigate them. Get the OSHA data from NICAR, at
http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/viewdatabase.php?dbaseindex=23
. Review reports of mining deaths at www.msha.gov. Study Bureau of
Labor Statistics safety data at http://www.bls.gov/bls/safety.htm.

Follow agency budgets and staffing:

The AFL-CIO publishes an annual report that estimates how long it
takes OSHA inspectors to visit every workplace in the country and in
individual states. It’s important to keep up with changes in budgets
and staffing that affect how well regulatory agencies can do their
jobs.

Keep up with the rulemaking agendas:

Every federal agency publishes a semi-annual regulatory agenda in
the Federal Register. Keep up with it to see if emerging health and
safety threats are being addressed, or if agencies are falling behind
their own rulemaking schedules.

Talk to the workers:

Sometimes this is the hardest part. Workers -- especially those
without union protections -- don’t always want to risk their jobs by
giving interviews about safety problems. But they know the most about
the problems they face. It’s also worthwhile to interview families -wives, children, sisters, parents -- of workers killed on the job.
Putting a face on the statistics makes workplace safety problems harder
to ignore.

Look for lawsuits:

Lawsuits are often filed by injured workers, or by the estates
and/or families of workers killed on the job. Plaintiffs lawyers have
tools that reporters don’t -- they can subpoena witnesses and
documents. The lawsuits aren’t the story (well, sometimes they can be),
but the materials uncovered in discovery are frequently a treasure
trove for investigative reporters. Get to know the lawyers in your area
who specialize in worker safety cases, and ask them for deposition
transcripts and copies of records they obtained during discovery.

File lots of FOIA requests:

File early and file often. Ask for entire investigation files,
previous inspection reports, and correspondence with companies. Ask for
scientific reports about the safety and health effects of various
industries. Ask for the regulators’ appointment calendars to see who
they are meeting with and (maybe) listening to.

Follow the issue closely:

There are a couple of great blogs about worker safety and health
issues. My favorites are http://thepumphandle.wordpress.com/ and
http://weeklytoll.blogspot.com/.

