Tisha Thompson
WMAR-TV Baltimore
410-372-2536
thompson@wmar.com

Testing Gadgets & Techniques
Before you start any testing project – there are a few things you should always keep in mind:
1. A lot of testing can be expensive – especially if it involves a lab. If it gets pricey, look for a cheaper alternative by
asking industry experts how they do it (gold testing) or justify the expense by coming up with multiple story ideas
using the same technique ($100 radar gun = speeding cops, speeding buses, even people sledding).
2. Testing takes a long time – especially if you are working with a lab. If you have a series of stories you’re working on –
get started on the testing project first (at least a month in advance would be wise) and go work on the other stories
while you wait on results.
3. Test and test again. If you get a result you were not expecting or your testing method can be called into question – do
your best to retest (this is why you need to give yourself a lot of time). If you get a funky result – it may be just that – a
strange outlier that is not representative. If you’re not willing to have a judge and jury question your testing
methodology – don’t publish your results. Or in other words, if you are going to call people on their mistakes – be
prepared for them to interrogate you back.
4. In that same vein, create a “control” experiment whenever possible. For instance, if you have six aquariums full of
food, water and roaches – blast five of them with roach killers and leave one aquarium alone. It’s the “scientific” way
to do it.
5. Show the process. People really like to see how you did it – and its always interesting video.
6. Be prepared for your antagonist to wiggle out of guilt with technicalities. To avoid this as much as possible, always try
to use the testing methodology published by the Federal government (Internet searches on EPA, FDA, CPSC
websites) or ask your lab or local health department with help. If the methodology doesn’t exist – find something
comparable. When it comes to product testing – follow the directions in minute detail.
Some testing techniques are pretty simple to do – others require high-tech devices with a high-tech expert to run them.
Here are a few that have been very successful for me and other reporters I know in the last few years:
The NITON Analyzer
All you do is point it at plastic, metal, dirt, you name it…and it will give you its elemental composition in 3
seconds. We used it to find out how much lead is in children’s toys and jewelry -you can use it to test any
element from arsenic to plutonium.
Contact: Bill Radosevich, Radiation Safety Trainer, NITON Analyzers @Thermo Fisher Scientific
612-670-9660 or William.Radosevich@thermofisher.com
Gold Testing
Every pawn shop in town has a little rock they rub "gold" jewelry on – after they pour nitric acid on it – it
will tell them instantly if it’s 24k, 18k, or even “real” gold.
Contact: local state contact for the National Pawnbrokers Association
http://www.nationalpawnbrokers.org/state.htm has the entire list
Radar Detectors
You can get a decent radar detector for about $150 and clock anything from speeding cops to school
buses to people sledding more than 20mph down icy slopes in the winter. Just be prepared for the cops
to challenge you on the fact you and your gun are not "certified."
What we used: Bushnell Radar Gun
www.bushnell.com/general/speedgun_velocity.cfm?section=General%20Use

Smoke Pollution
Hagit Limor at WCPO rented an air quality machine from the CDC that tests air pollution in a small space.
She went around and tested the air in bars and restaurants before and after a smoking ban went into
effect.
Who Hagit used: Matt Shortino at Ashtead Technology in Rochester, NY (585-424-2140)
matt.shortino@atrentals.com or www.ashtead-technology.com
Potholes
I did the TV version of this story after I went to a NICAR panel on transportation by the KC Star’s Gregory
Reeves. Hook up an accelerometer to your car, drive around all of the streets in your city...and see which
neighborhoods/streets have the worst potholes and how "hard" they are on your car. THIS IS A VERY
COMPLICATED TOOL – find the engineering guys in your building for help – or call Gregory Reeves.
We used the same thing Reeves did: $675 version at Crossbow Technologies www.xbow.com
Roach Killers
Start a relationship with your local university’s entomology department. We teamed up with University of
Maryland Professor Mike Raupp, who collected roaches, ticks…every kind of bug we wanted to kill. We
put the roaches in a bunch of aquariums – gave them food and water – and then unloaded every kind of
roach killer we could buy...from powders to gels to "bombs." We did the same thing with tick collars…and
set up those glow-in-the-dark UV bug zappers to count how many "good" bugs versus "bad" bugs they
kill. You'll be stunned. While you're at it, see how many mosquitoes those propane tank models actually
catch. Can you say "zero?"
Hand Washing
You can buy it – or you can borrow it from your local health department. To show how most people never
wash their hands, ask them to put a lotion on their hands. “Glo Germ” is invisible under regular light and
simulates “germs.” The only way to remove it is to properly wash your hands for 20-30 seconds. If you
don't, you're hands "glow" in UV light.
Where to get it: www.glogerm.com
Water Testing & Other Laboratory Testing
Your boss says “test the water.” Um…it’s a little more complicated than that. The trick with water testing
is you have to know exactly what it is you want to test. Instead of just "pesticides" you have to give the
lab an exact list of each chemical you're looking for. You will need to get specially prepared bottles; some
contain reactive chemicals that must be filled “just right.” As a result, lead and copper cost about $5 a
sample – MTBE costs upwards of $60 a sample – not including "certified results." I recommend lead,
copper, Ph, hardness and turbidity (the gunk in the water) for starters. You can also use labs to test food
for fat, calories, carbs, caffeine, e.coli, salmonella…even the octane in gasoline.
Evacuation
Don’t forget to test people. Get a family to do a "mock" evacuation and give them 15 minutes or less to
get everything they need if a hurricane, bomb, etc. goes off in their neighborhood. See what they
remember – and what they forget.
Who we worked with: Allstate Insurance – Kristy Fair at kfaaa@allstate.com
Flying Fruit (Holiday Shipping)
Team up with your sister stations, affiliates or newspapers for this semi-easy holiday story. Buy
something either perishable (bananas) or breakable (glass ornaments) and mail them using FedEx, UPS
and the Post Office. After four years in a row, I can tell you who will get there fastest, cheapest and in the
best shape – and who always loses.
Emerald/Ruby/Precious Gem Testing
You need a GIANT budget for this one. See if precious stones are fractured filled with lotions, glass and
other impurities. You can also test diamonds to see if they are classified correctly.
Who Dateline used: Cap Beesley, President, American Gemological Laboratory, 212-704-0727

