CREATING A WATCHDOG CULTURE IN YOUR
NEWSROOM
PUT A STRUCTURE IN PLACE
Manage up. You need a commitment from the top to publish and support watchdog work, so share
success stories, reader feedback, etc. with your leaders. Designate an editor to coordinate the effort.
Define watchdog journalism. Do you want your newspaper to tell people how government is
spending their money? Do you want reporters to focus on how major employers are treating their
workers? Is watchdog daily beat reporting, projects or both? Folks across the newsroom need to
know what you are aiming for.
Set goals. Both individually and newsroom wide. Define success. Want every beat reporter to do
watchdog? Let them know it’s part of their annual performance review. Want a watchdog story on
the front page every Sunday? Make it a goal, as editors at the Arizona Daily Star did.

DEVELOP OPEN GOVERNMENT STRENGTH
Tap in-house experts. Find out who in your newsroom knows the most about your state’s public
records and open meetings law. Ask that person to teach a class for the newsroom. Make it
mandatory. Repeat it a few times until every newsroom employee attends.
Research free resources available to your newsroom. State first-amendment coalitions, attorney
general’s office, teaming up with other media.
Create individual FOIA plans. Each beat reporter should have a short list of what documents they
should be requesting and what public agencies they should be visiting, and how often. Deadlines for
key documents, such as campaign and economic disclosure forms, should be included.
Spread knowledge of public records rights, FOIA and state laws. Get copies of handbooks and
tip sheets to your staff. Celebrate when a reporter challenges a closed meeting or wins a key
document battle.
Follow through. Don’t start a fight and fail to finish it. Don’t request documents and fail to pick
them up or write about them.
Use your newspaper to fight. When public officials break the law on documents or meetings, write
about it. Tell readers their rights are being violated.

— Jill Jorden Spitz, AME, Arizona Daily Star
— Lorie Hearn, Metro Editor, San Diego Union Tribune
— Shawn McIntosh, enterprise and investigations, Atlanta Journal Constitution
June 2007

MAKE IT STICK/KEEP IT GOING
Make legal challenges. Pick a few strategic legal battles – even if they are just follow-up letters
from the newspaper’s lawyer – to show you mean business.
Teach and train. Have regular classes to impart watchdog and investigative skills. Staff members
can teach such classes as mining the web, using Excel as a reporting tool, building sources. If a
staffer goes to IRE or other workshops, have them share knowledge when they return.
Team up. Create a watchdog working group, or a brainstorming group of reporters. Monthly
brownbags across beats. Swarm a big investigative story, brainstorming across the news
departments on watchdog approaches.
Celebrate watchdog reporting. Add a watchdog category to newsroom awards. Hold “How I got
the story” sessions led by the team that produces great work.
Tell readers about your watchdog reporting. Consider house ads promoting watchdog reporting.
Do an annual spread of watchdog successes. Speak to the outside groups. Consider labeling
investigative or watchdog stories or special reports.
Hire smart. Look for watchdog or investigative background when hiring, or even consider it a
requirement when hiring.

SUCCESSFUL WATCHDOG NEWSROOM TRAINING:
— Break a class into groups. Brainstorm watchdog angles for several news scenarios. What
questions would they ask? What documents would they seek? Types of scenarios:
Unexpected departure of a local business leader. Overpass collapses at key traffic hour.
College eliminates popular student seating at basketball arena to sell more booster tickets.
— Break a class into groups, each with one laptop connected to the Internet. Compete in a
“scavenger hunt” to see who can find the most items the fastest, including looking up tax
records, form 990s, other key public documents online. Play music, make it loud, exciting
and deadline-oriented and give a prize.
— How to use Excel to cover a beat – mastering budgets, building source tracking files,
building a timeline, etc.
— Your personal watchdog plan: How to decide what public records you need to track on your
beat. How to decide what steps to take in an investigative or watchdog story.
— Demystify CAR reporting. Team up a database experts with beat reporters. Share the byline.

— Jill Jorden Spitz, AME, Arizona Daily Star
— Lorie Hearn, Metro Editor, San Diego Union Tribune
— Shawn McIntosh, enterprise and investigations, Atlanta Journal Constitution
June 2007

