VISUALIZING THE DATA
Mark Greenblatt & Keith Tomshe
Investigative Reporter and Investigative Photojournalist/Editor
KHOU-TV (CBS, Houston)
IRE, Phoenix 2007

So… you’ve spent months fighting for that database, analyzing it, and now you’re finally
ready to write the story and put it on the air- and communicate your findings to your
audience. How do you do it?
ACT LIKE A GOOD BASEBALL MANAGER
In baseball, you can work very hard for 8 innings… even hitting home runs. However,
none of your work matters if you blow it all in the ninth. That’s why the best managers
put in their ace closer in the ninth- to drive home the win. You, too, can hit grand slams
early in your data analysis and research. If you drop the ball in the end when it comes to
communicating what you found, you’ll end up losing your audience. That means all of
your hard work means little in the end. It won’t have an impact. It’s why if you want to
win over your audience, you should put just as much thought and planning into how
you’ll visualize and communicate your data to drive home your findings as you did into
the actual analysis.
COMMUNICATE THROUGH EMOTION, NOT NUMBERS
“People remember what they feel, longer than what they know”
--Al Tompkins

The Most Important Tool In Your Toolbox: Visuals

The best computer-assisted reporters use data analysis as just one tool in their toolbox.
Use your data skills to find more sophisticated stories than others know how to. But
once you find the story, go back to your toolbox and use your other journalistic skills to
visualize and tell the story. Whenever possible, DO NOT show pictures of a Microsoft
excel spreadsheet scrolling on t.v. Ask yourself: is there a better way to communicate
your findings? Could a standup, creative graphic, or a character you interview make your
most important findings more memorable for audience?
Check Your Archives
*One of the best places to find supporting video or great characters, is in your own
newsroom’s story archive. Don’t forget to check it.
Get to know your graphics department well
*Find the most creative person in your graphics department, and get to know them well.
Bring them your findings- and ask them if they could think of a more creative way to
visualize the story than just by showing a scrolling database.
Team Up
*Talk with your teammates early on. Involve photographers, producers, and reporters
from the beginning. If you don’t work on a “team”, find an informal partner who is
creative and brainstorm with them.
Graphics: Keep It Simple Stupid
*emphasize clarity and flow when presenting graphics - you do not want to clutter the
screen
because you DO NOT want to confuse the viewer.
*Make sure your script does not clash with the graphical elements.
*Once you have a pretty concrete version of your script start working with your editor
and/or graphics people to
plan out - a storyboard approach works very well - your graphics - keep in mind the flow
in and out from
video elements to graphics. If possible, you can try to plan ahead and integrate a piece of
video into the body of a graphic
*If appropriate, lay a bed of sound under the graphics - keep in mind this is for
background effect so it should not compete with the reporter track.

