FOR DISTRIBUTION BY RICHARD BEHAR AT IRE
ANNUAL CONFERENCE
June 2007, Phoenix – “Attacks on Journalists” Panel

http://www.mediachannel.org/wordpress/2005/09/23/project-k-meetsproject-a/

Project “K” Meets Project “A”
By Richard Behar.
Published at www.MediaChannel.org
Sept 23, 2005
30 years ago, journalists from dozens of news outlets joined hands (and pens) in
Arizona after reporter Don Bolles was killed. A similar effort is underway after
last year’s murder of Paul Klebnikov in Moscow.
The death of Paul Klebnikov, the Forbes magazine editor shot nine
times as he left his Moscow office in July 2004, was a blow to
press freedom and transparency in Russia. That his killing
remains a mystery is an ongoing challenge for investigative
journalism worldwide.
Times have changed since 1976, when Arizona investigative
reporter Don Bolles was blown up in his car on the day of his
eighth wedding anniversary. (He and his wife had planned to
celebrate it by seeing a new movie called “All the President’s
Men”). Journalists descended on that state in droves to pick up
where Bolles had left off on his probes of organized crime and
local politics. Led by Newsday’s investigative giant, Bob Greene,
nearly 30 reporters from two dozen media outlets created a 23part series. They were dubbed the Desert Rats. And their effort the “Arizona Project” - was proposed for a special Pulitzer, led to
major reforms in the state and, in the words of then attorney
general Bruce Babbitt, “dragged Arizona kicking and screaming
into the 20th century.” It also fueled a newly-formed national
association of investigative reporters that now numbers in the

thousands.
The Arizona Project was “the finest hour in American journalism,”
concluded the American Society of Journalists and Authors. But
Phoenix is not Moscow, and the investigative spirit of the 1970s
is today a faint memory inside the growing number of
newsrooms that are under pressure to produce fluff to make
money in today’s economy. Klebnikov, the 41-year-old top editor
of the start-up Russian edition of Forbes, was one of the few
journalists on the cutting edge of the nexus between Russian
politics, big business and global organized crime. Unfortunately,
for a society hooked on an endless stream of Laci’s and Jacko’s
(note: Larry King’s August interrogation of Pamela Anderson’s
breasts), the first American reporter killed in Russia was a story
without a Nielsen audience.
The media is under plenty of attack these days - some of it
warranted, some of it clearly not. But there was a time when
serious investigative reporting seemed to matter more. It
certainly did 30 years ago, when the Bolles case made headlines
and the Arizona Project made sure to keep it there. In June of
this year, a bust of Bolles (something that failed to attract King’s
journalistic gaze) was unveiled at Phoenix’s newly-reopened
Clarendon Hotel, the scene of the attack, while his bomb-ripped
white Datsun will go on display at a journalism museum
scheduled to open in Washington in 2007 - a tribute to the 1,500
journalists who have been murdered in the line of duty. But will
the name of the former editor-in-chief of Forbes-Russia mean
anything by 2007, let alone 30 years from now?
With these thoughts in mind, I rented a car in Manhattan recently
and drove to the Old Street Pub in Smithtown, Long Island.
Something needed to be done about Klebnikov, and in July of this
year, a group of major media outlets and investigative reporters
announced the launch of Project Klebnikov. Project K — as we
call it — is a global media alliance committed to shedding light on
the murder and some of the complex stories that Klebnikov was
trying to untangle when he was silenced. It’s a tough challenge,
as all good challenges are, and I wanted to glean some insight
and inspiration from Greene, the guru of Project A (as I will call
it), who retired a decade ago as an assistant managing editor of

Newsday.
He limps from arthritis, and no longer has the 300 pounds that
he carried in the days when he would obliterate steaks, lobsters
and mobsters with equal relish. But, at 75, the man once dubbed
the “Buddha with the computer mind” is as sharp as the day he
led his people into the Arizona desert. “Nothing is
insurmountable,” he said as we nibbled our Cobb salads at the
pub. “Put the word out to the people on whom you’re working:
‘Your corrupt facet of the Russian society represents the kind of
people who killed Klebnikov. We will continue to broadcast his
work and expand it and multiply it and we don’t care what crooks
fall into our net. And we won’t let up until those in your society
who think it’s okay to kill a reporter get the message loud and
clear: Never again! You tried to stop his work and that’s why
we’re here.’ That’s what we did in Arizona.”
During the drive to the meeting, I recalled that I had been one of
Bob Greene’s many students — although we never met. As a kid
in Levittown, where Greene lived in the 1950s, I was weaned on
his work at Newsday, where in 1967 he had started the first
permanent investigative team at a U.S. newspaper. The ‘Greene
Team’ brought Newsday two Pulitzers in the early 1970s. I was
just 10 when that decade began, and I carried Newsday into my
backyard each day and summarized the best stories into a tape
recorder - in an imaginary news program that only I would hear.
Last week I turned 45, Greene’s age when he launched the
Arizona Project.
The dearth of investigative reporting about the contract-style
murder of reporters is something that has long concerned and
interested me. In the autumn of 2001, I was one of a handful of
reporters in Karachi, Pakistan, on the terrorism money trail. I
returned to New York in early 2002, a few weeks before Daniel
Pearl’s last trip to Karachi began. I’d never met Pearl. But his
kidnapping and horrific beheading affected me profoundly — as it
did so many reporters who worked in Pakistan after 9-11. Since
then, with the exception of a few excellent pieces in the Wall Street
Journal, I’ve watched sadly as the investigative reporting on the
subject has slowed to a trickle — even as the murder case in

Pakistan crawls forward, with increasing complexity, government
secretiveness, and an uncertain number of suspects still at large.
“There are so many stories that need to be done about the Pearl
case,” says Abi Wright, the Asia coordinator of the Committee to
Protect Journalists. “There is so much that we don’t know.” But
these kinds of stories are often too difficult, cumbersome,
expensive and risky for any one news outlet to pursue.
Two years after Pearl’s murder, on July 9, 2004, I was taking a
taxi to the Time-Life building to give notice to my managing
editor that I’d be leaving Fortune magazine, when my cell phone
rang. It was an FBI agent alerting me that Klebnikov had just
been murdered in Moscow, and he wanted to make sure I wasn’t
there - or going anytime soon. I didn’t realize it then, but my
next job - Project K — was suddenly staring me in the face.
Paul and I were colleagues briefly in the late 1980s at Forbes, and
we had become closer in recent years, as we battled similar libel
suits in London for our Russia-related investigative reporting - he
for Forbes and myself for Fortune. We were, in a sense, rivals on
the same team. He helped steer our lawyers and investigators to
key sources. And, two months before he was gunned down, I
alerted Paul that I had special European law enforcement
documents for him when I saw him next. We never had that
meeting.
For Bob Greene, the murder of Bolles hit hard, too. It came just
after the 1975 birth of the Investigative Reporters and Editors
Association (IRE), of which both Greene and the 47-year-old
Bolles were charter members. Like Klebnikov, Bolles was the kind
of reporter who was always willing to assist other journalists with
tips and sources. And, like Klebnikov, it took a lot to take him
out. The six sticks of dynamite under his Datsun - detonated by
remote control — blew Bolles 15 feet out of his car door. He
survived for 11 days in a hospital, in excruciating agony, as
doctors amputated his two legs and one arm in an effort to save
him. Bolles “had suffered like no man I have seen before,” said
the chief homicide investigator on the scene. In Klebnikov’s case,
he was still conscious and able to speak after the nine bullets
ripped through him. He survived a ride in an ambulance that

wasn’t equipped with functioning oxygen equipment, but
apparently died in a stuck elevator at a Moscow hospital. Both
reporters left behind large families — and a plethora of
unfinished work.
Despite the outrage in the journalism community over the Bolles
murder, Project A was controversial. Some argued that it would
distract from the fledgling IRE’s larger mission. Others felt that it
was wrong for a “posse” of reporters to engage in “revenge
journalism.” But Greene convinced most of the naysayers that
the project made sense. “The reporters were not newsroom
hotheads,” one Arizona newspaper declared afterwards in an
editorial. “They were motivated not by the glory and ego, but by
the need to know who killed the reporter and why, and what the
circumstances were that allowed it to happen - the same drive
that makes a reporter a reporter.” The assignment, said Greene,
would also send a message that “when you kill a reporter you do
not stop the work.” It’s a message that needs to be heard in
Russia today, as well as in America — again.
The unofficial birth of Project K took place at an October 2004
memorial service for Paul in Manhattan. The murder had made
the requisite headlines when it happened three months earlier,
but there had been scant media follow-up. At an open-mike
session in a church basement, I announced that I would lead the
effort. Bloomberg investigative ace Allan Dodds Frank, also a
former colleague of Paul’s, walked over and signed up. On the
sidewalk after the service, Forbes managing editor Bill Baldwin
said he was intrigued at the idea of joint-venturing with other
media entities. His concern, shared by us all, was how to make
progress without endangering lives and sinking money into a
black hole of reporting. Despite the successes of the Arizona
Project, nothing like this had been attempted since.
Frank and I, along with investigative editor Will Bourne formed
the initial core. We were soon joined by Scott Armstrong and
several prominent TV-news investigators who must remain
anonymous. Bloomberg , The Economist , Forbes and Vanity Fair signed
on as news-outlet members. The BBC’s John Sweeney extended
the project’s reach into the UK, while, just this week, Michael

Isikoff, Chuck Lewis and Knut Royce became the alliance’s
newest participants. We are flanked by seasoned investigative
reporters with a wide spectrum of past media experience - at
Business Week, 60 Minutes, Time magazine, the Washington Post, and
many other outlets. Pro- bono partnerships have been struck for
legal counsel, PR and university internships. More
announcements will come soon. There are a number of theories
as to who ordered the murder, and within those theories are
dozens of potential exposes and stories that need to be written
and told. The hard work will begin this autumn.
It was clear from the outset that, for Project K to succeed and be
welcomed by today’s media world, it had to be structured
differently than Project A. In Arizona, all of the journalists worked
under one editor, Greene, and all signed agreements that they
would not publish details until the entire series was printed.
(Greene says that only one member violated the deal, but to little
harm.) Objecting to the idea of collective journalism, the
Washington Post and the New York Times declined to take part. In fact,
when the project was proposed for a special Pulitzer citation, the
battle lines were sharp. Tom Winship, the late editor of the Boston
Globe (and a former MediaChannel advisor) led the battle on the
Pulitzer board in favor of the citation. Ben Bradlee of the
Washington Post led the forces against it. “Bradlee said it would be a
terrible thing because, if the prize was given, it would recognize
collective journalism,” recalls Greene, whose view was that the
major newspapers engaged in collective journalism each time
they ran an AP story. But Bradlee won the fight.
Despite the success of the Desert Rats, Bradlee’s view didn’t
change very much. In 2003, after delivering the keynote speech
at an IRE conference in Washington, Bradlee was questioned
about Project A, as well as some comments he’d made in the
1970s about how investigative reporters could never work
together amicably. “It seems to me that if you were going to
work in a new town — a totally strange town where you didn’t
know anybody — and some big noise from Chicago or
Washington or New York was gonna come down there, they were
painting themselves in a very tough corner,” Bradlee told the
audience. “But I would have said that if Woodward and Bernstein

would go down to some city in Mississippi, they’d eat ‘em alive.
And that takes some doing, but - look - I was wrong about what
IRE was going to end up as, and I’m glad I’m wrong.” The
audience of investigative reporters applauded.
Last week, I raised the subject again with Bradlee, now 84 and
serving as the Washington Post’s vice president at large. He doesn’t
recall the Pulitzer battle, but says he can’t deny that it happened.
He has nothing but praise for Greene: “Greene’s got a pretty
goddamn good record, for Christ’s sake, one that I’d be proud to
have. The story [Arizona Project series] was good.” Even so, he
adds, “to have part in a 23-part series — that seems to be
unmanageable. I think it’s impractical. And the people here
would say, ‘Bullshit - if it’s worth doing, why don’t we do it?’”
Moreover, he dislikes the notion of loaning Washington Post
reporters to serve on a cooperative venture under the command
of an outside editor. “I’d still be worried about turning over
editorial control,” Bradlee says. “We’d never do that. On the
other hand, we say we’d never do it, but we run LA Times stuff
and Boston Globe stuff, and we run the AP, for Christ’s sake. We
don’t check every goddamn word of that.”
In the case of Project K, members are encouraged to publish or
broadcast stories at any time, and they follow the dictates,
policies and practices of their news outlets. What we will provide
is back-up reporting and support, a database of information and
sources, and assistance in the structuring of joint ventures and
cost-sharing (when feasible). Project A proved expensive. It cost
nearly $250,000 — that’s in 1977 dollars — even with some
members working for free and digging into their own pockets
during the nine months of the venture. Project K members have
no funding requirements, and everyone is working voluntarily.
Since our alliance is looser than Arizona’s, it will take longer to
achieve results.
The Arizona Project set up their offices on a floor of the Adams
Hotel in downtown Phoenix. “The windows looked onto space,
and all surrounding buildings were below us,” Greene recalls. “So
someone couldn’t get a good sight-line with a gun.” Newsday
supplied Greene, as well as organized crime reporter Tom

Renner. Two local colleges provided eight interns, while the two
Phoenix dailies supplied three local reporters and full access to
their newspaper morgues. Greene slept in a bedroom that
adjoined the makeshift city room (where a dartboard with Ben
Bradlee’s photo hung on a wall) and there were eight additional
rooms for reporters coming and going - on loan from newspapers
ranging from the Washington Star, Boston Globe and Miami Herald to the
Chicago Tribune , Denver Post and Indianapolis Star, among many
others. TV and radio reporters also visited and worked for
varying lengths of time. The project had four rental cars, each
the same make and color, with the keys kept in one drawer.
Explains Greene: “If you were leaving the office, you just pulled a
set of keys at random from the drawer, so a potential killer
couldn’t single out one particular person from our group to put a
bomb under his or her car.”
Greene’s team determined that there would be little point in
publishing individual stories because they would not have the
impact of a series. “We were trying to put enormous pressure on
the corrupt aspects of Arizona society with two thoughts in mind.
First, we wanted to deliver an object lesson that you don’t fuck
around with the lives of reporters, because everyone with dirty
hands will suffer - including the mob. If you kill a reporter, the
work will multiply. In this way, the project was also an insurance
policy for other investigative reporters. Second, if all this
pressure is put on, maybe something will pop up out of it —
some major revelation or reform.”
Greene recalls that the project accumulated nearly 50,000 index
cards, as well as “file cabinets the entire length of the city room,
back to back.” It was, after all, 1976. There were no computers.
“We used the old FBI filing system,” says Greene, who had
worked briefly in the 1950s as a staffer on Sen. Robert F.
Kennedy’s labor rackets committee. “All individual names and
places had to be capitalized.”
Today, Project Klebnikov would be inconceivable without
technology. We are, in essence, a virtual news bureau. Our file
cabinets will have cyberkeys. As Greene remembers: “We had to
literally send someone to Missouri just to get military records.
Now it’s all on computer.”

The A Team had one reporter - Newsday’s Renner - who operated
undercover. “He never walked inside our city room,” says
Greene. “The other reporters on the project didn’t even know
what he looked like until the very end. We wanted to keep one
person ‘deep and dirty.’ It was very effective. Nobody thought he
was connected to the project. And he could come to us with the
feelings of the top cops, etc. He could say, ‘Watch for this. Watch
for that.’ And he had great contacts to begin with.”
In a less dramatic fashion, the K Team is growing with the
assistance of certain news outlets, reporters and stringers - from
Moscow to London to Washington - who are anonymously
assisting in the effort.
Since the Arizona Project, the closest the American media has
come to a collaborative venture was the 2001 recount of the
Florida election ballots, when many of the nation’s largest news
outlets laid down their swords and shields and banded together.
Even so, and despite the loose structure of our alliance, not
every invited media outlet has accepted the offer to join Project
K. One senior editor at a major newspaper explained to us that it
wouldn’t engage in collective journalism. Nor, the editor added,
will it do in-depth investigation of stories involving Russian
organized crime. Reason: The newspaper won’t put its Moscow
staffers at risk, and it needs them there to do other big stories.
While it’s not known if organized crime was responsible for the
hit on Paul, in my view one cannot adequately cover Russia today
without unraveling the activities of the numerous mafiya groups
and siloviki (old KGB ’structures of force’). Indeed, the position of
that senior editor only confirms the need for such a media
alliance. A decade ago, Boris Yeltsin called Russia “the biggest
mafia state in the world” and the “superpower of crime.” Since
Putin came to power, more than 12 reporters have been killed
contract-style and not one case has been solved.
In some ways, the Russia of today resembles 1970s Arizona,
which Bolles himself described as “a mafia encampment.”
Indeed, the Project A series concluded that organized crime was

“staging a blitzkrieg invasion” of Arizona, which had become a
“haven for white-collar criminals” in cahoots with corrupt public
officials. “We laid out [Sen. Barry] Goldwater’s mob connections,”
recalls Greene. “We laid out a prostitution ring orchestrated by
the state GOP chairman. Many of the Democrats and Republicans
were bad. Goldwater said that there is not a single organized
crime person in Arizona. The state crawled with them. And some
of them were Goldwater’s friends.”
Despite the success of the Desert Rats, some major publications
that didn’t join the Arizona Project proceeded to do “knock
stories” about the project’s work, says Greene, in part by
detailing the libel suits that were filed against the reporters and
IRE. [Goldwater himself had promised “the biggest libel suit of all
time,” but didn’t follow through.] “We didn’t lose any [suits],”
says Greene. “We did a damn good job.” As researcher James
Aucoin wrote in the Columbia Journalism Review in 1996, the Arizona
Project proved that “the people who said that lone wolves could
never work together were wrong.”
Keeping egos in check was not the problem, but exhaustion and
stress were major obstacles. Most of the Project A staffers were
working a minimum of 12 hours a day, seven days a week.
Greene required the reporters to submit memos of their progress
each night, which he would read until midnight. And each
morning, the participants would gather for an 8:00 meeting to
plan the new day. “Most of the reporters coming in and out were
working in a new environment and were constantly looking over
their shoulders to avoid being compromised - or worse,” Greene
says. “They were away from their families for long stretches. My
wife came out for a week at Christmas and I put her to work
filing. That’s the only time I saw her or my kids in that entire
nine months. Renner faced the same problem, and developed a
series of physical ailments that eventually killed him many years
later.”
Project A had one key advantage over Project K: Despite a
justice system in Arizona that moved at a snail’s pace, a judicial
infrastructure existed that would ultimately get the job done on
tracking down Bolles’ killers. Thus, Greene’s team could focus
primarily on the subjects that Bolles was trying to unravel. There

were many twists and turns in the murder case: Numerous trials,
convictions set aside, death sentences overturned, with some
witnesses and targets eventually dying of natural causes. While
some questions remain about the Bolles case, the man who
planted the bomb and one of his accomplices have served prison
time. Much of the credit for the government’s pursuit of the case
lies with an Arizona lawman named George Weisz, who wouldn’t
let the case die. And before joining the AG’s office, Weisz was a
student volunteer on the Arizona Project.
Project K has yet to find it’s own George Weisz. And in Russia,
while the team of eight prosecutors assigned full-time to the
Klebnikov case are reportedly excellent investigators, there is far
less confidence that the government agencies have enough
independence and experience to see that justice gets done. Two
suspects who were quickly arrested and linked to the murder of
Klebnikov were subsequently released - a situation that remains
murky. In June, the Prosecutor General announced that the case
was solved and closed, and that Khozh-Akhmed Nukhayev — a
Chechen rebel leader and onetime Moscow gang boss - was the
mastermind. Two new suspects are under arrest, while two more
remain fugitives — including Nukhayev, who some believe died
even before Klebnikov was murdered. The Bolles case stretched
from 1976 to 1994. The Klebnikov case could last even longer.
“In Russia, contract murders have as many as ten layers
between the people who order the hit and the men who
ultimately pull the trigger,” says retired FBI agent William
Kinane, who served as Legal Attache at the U.S. Embassy in
Moscow from 1994-99. “It can be impossible to untangle. The hit
men almost never know who hired them or why.”
After Project K’s launch, I discovered that one of our obstacles
was misinformation in articles that were being written about our
mission and activities. One account says we are confident the
killers will be prosecuted, while another says we are “vigorously”
challenging the Kremlin. Some stories in the Russian press even
maintain that exiled oligarch Boris Berezovsky is our main target.
(These accounts are all incorrect, and no such information was
suggested to outside media, either on or off-record.) When asked
if Greene faced similar problems, he burst out laughing. “You
never felt so scared about the quality of the American press as

when we saw how they covered us,” he recalls. “You’d read this
stuff and say, ‘Holy Christ!’ And these people are ‘us’! We learned
to just tell the outside press that we ‘are grateful of the press
attention, but we won’t disclose the identity of our targets or
what we have learned about them until our investigation is
completed.’ Every day, we’d have the press calling us and asking,
‘What are you doing? Tell us.’
When Project A was ready to roll with its series, it kicked up dust
all over the desert state. “Three days before the series ran, the
Arizona Republic — Bolles’ newspaper — suddenly announced it
wasn’t going to run it,” says Greene. “They said there was not
enough verification, even though we had given the paper all of
our files. And this was an outfit that wouldn’t even send a lawyer
just around the corner to check on the stories beforehand. [Note:
Greene had invited all the media-outlet lawyers to Phoenix for a
pre-publication ‘libel read.’].
The Tucson Star, armed with the same files, had no such problems
and ran the series in its entirety. Most other papers didn’t back
out. CBS Radio broadcast a daily capsule, and the wire services
ran their versions. “There was huge impact, and immediate
questions about the Republic’s action,” says Greene, who believes
that the paper’s decision stemmed from its owners being part of
an Arizona power structure (the “Phoenix 40″) that the series
was, in part, attacking. The Republic’s decision caused irate
protests outside the newspaper’s offices, and reportedly fueled a
union drive by the newspaper’s reporters. It also led to
widespread fears that certain power brokers were trying to topple
the project. “In fact, the Boston Globe skipped one part of the
series for just one day and its switchboard lit up with calls from
readers asking, ‘What - did they get to you? They get to you?,’
recalls Greene. A radio station in Phoenix read each installment
at a set time each evening; cars lined up at the curbs of Phoenix
streets to park and listen during rush hour. “Because the Republic
wouldn’t run it, the Denver Post was flying or trucking thousands of
copies a day down to Phoenix,” says Greene. “Tucson was
sending up copies too, but it [the Star] couldn’t print enough.”
Today, Greene laments the state of investigative reporting in

America and at Newsday, which has suffered severe staff cuts over
the past few years - with more announced this month. “Most
publications are risk-averse today,” he adds. “They figure, why
should they risk lawsuits. But a good investigative reporter is
gonna provoke suits, while a good corporate lawyer - and I don’t
mean a libel lawyer - is gonna say, ‘Let’s not have suits.’ They
don’t appreciate the position the press maintains in a free
society. We’re the last resort for the people. We’re serving our
constituency and our function in society by tackling crime,
corruption and incompetence. Why have a First Amendment right
if they (nation’s founders) didn’t think that we needed protection
when we sought to reveal problems in society? We don’t need it
to publish apple pie recipes.”
Greene had brought criminal investigative techniques to Newsday
(and to Project A) that he learned as a government investigator.
They built and used databases, chronologies and charts — things
common in newsrooms today but rare in the 1960s and 70s.
Newsday editor Tony Marro once wrote that Greene took reporters
“who had been keeping notes on the backsides of envelopes and
the insides of matchbook covers and taught them how to gather
and organize large amounts of information.” He has a rare ability
to connect seemingly unrelated facts to make connections that
few others see. Investigative journalism and public service
journalism became part of Newsday’s core mission. “Andy Hughes
was Newsday’s lawyer, and his attitude was, ‘If it’s true, we should
print it, and figure a way to say it without incurring unnecessary
trouble — but you can’t avoid all trouble,’ says Greene. “He was
a great guy, and one of the three lawyers on the [Arizona]
project.”
Similarly, Greene recounts an insurance executive whose
behavior probably warranted its own journalism award. One
target of the series had sued for libel and was offering to settle
the case for $50,000 and a written apology. “Several of our
lawyers warned that the insurance company wouldn’t spend
hundreds of thousands of dollars if it could get away with this
cheap settlement,” recalls Greene. “The key guy at the insurer
was a former Marine general who headed the company. I said to
the general, ‘You sold us the policy because you believed in us.

Here are all the files. [The plaintiff] is a very bad guy. I won’t
sign the apology. And we’ll say that you all wimped out.’ He said
to me, ‘You don’t have to do that. I don’t care if it costs us $1
million. We’re going with the suit.’ I never saw an insurance
company do that. He was a great, gutsy marine.”
Great and gutsy, just like Greene. His former colleague, Marro,
likes to tell stories about how Greene once protested a Newsday
ban on first-class travel by measuring coach seats and then
measuring his own butt and informing his bosses that he would
continue to fly in the front of the plane. Or about the time he fell
asleep at his desk with a cigarette in his hand and caught his
pants on fire. Or how he pounded on a wall so hard during fights
with editors that he once sent pictures crashing off the wall of
the publisher’s office.
While Greene was showing me around Smithtown in his car, an
irate driver honked at him. Greene leaned on his horn four times
in return. I was delighted to see that he’s still full of piss and
vinegar. Towards the end of our visit, Greene agreed to serve as
an advisor for Project K. He needed no convincing. When I
couldn’t hold back my glee and told him how honored I was,
Greene - true to form - cut me off with a wave of his hand.
“Awww, come on,” he said. “We’re in the same business. It’s
what we do.”
– By Richard Behar, www.projectklebnikov.org

