Below is the outline I used to moderate the IRE panel on Border Stories
Missed. It's just a rough guide, and I deviated quite a bit.

Dennis Wagner
The Arizona Republic/USA Today

IRE Panel -- Stories Missed on the Border
Who here would like to share a great idea for a border story with scores of
competing journalists? No one? I thought not. So, although this panel is
supposed to talk about what stories we've missed in our border coverage,
I've decided to change the topic a little. Instead, we’ll focus on what’s
right with border coverage, what’s wrong with it, and how to do a better
job.
I’m Dennis Wagner, a reporter for The Arizona Republic and USA Today. I
spent most of the past decade covering federal law enforcement, federal
courts and terrorism in Arizona. Much of that work involved border issues.
We have three panelists here with a depth of experience and, more than
likely, some contrary views.
Paul Charlton, former U.S. Attorney for Arizona, who supervised the
prosecution human smuggling, narco-trafficking and other border crimes for
six years.
Sandalio Gonzalez, a former DEA agent turned whistleblower, who
David Gonzales, the U.S.Marshal for Arizona, and a former state Department
of Public Safety commander and undercover officer.
Before I introduce them more fully, we should lay some groundwork:
Three initial points:
1. Incredible stories are produced along the border with some
regularity. It is a journalist’s dream beat, and some of the nation’s
best work there, literally risking their lives to get stories.
2. Because illegal immigration has been a sexy issue and a political
weapon since 9/11, many newspapers have devoted considerable resources
to coverage.
3. And, yet, I know of no one who thinks the media overall have done a
really good job of covering the beat. At best, the work is spotty and
superficial.
Just count up the number of “investigative” projects that turned out to
be Border Patrol ride-alongs.
Or, as freelancer Michael Marizco likes to point out, count the big
exposes that are filled with conditionals. Terrorists could storm across
the border or sneak a dirty bomb across.
Acknowledge the obstacles:
Newspapers are shrinking and cutting budgets.

The stories are often geographically, culturally and linguistically
remote.
The border is more than an imaginary line. It is a divider that stretches
nearly 2,000 miles, mostly through hell, yet a conduit for trade. It also
is the most crossed international in the world, with 350 million people
coming and going legally every year.
But we’re mostly talking about the black market business and unlawful
crossers: Undocumented immigrants, drug traffickers, human smugglers
moving product into the United States. Gun runners and money launderers
moving product out.
Many of the stories are downright dangerous. Just look at the killings
that target journalists and law enforcement. Look at the newspaper
shutdown, the anonymous bylines, the coordinated Mexican media effort.
One example: You've all read that narcos attacked a police station in
Cananea last month, killed several officrs, took hostages, then got into
a gun battle with Sonoran state police leaving 24 dead in all. Did you
know that, in the first three days after that incident, only one U.S.
reporter even went to the scene?
The alphabet soup of relevant U.S. government agencies –ICE, CBP, DEA,
FBI and the Justice Department – grow less transparent and cooperative
with each year, using arguments of national security or investigative
integrity to withhold reports and data. DOJ has instilled such a climate
of fear about talking to the media that local agency chiefs and their
investigators seldom speak, even off the record, and public information
officers have a simple mantra: no comment.
On the Mexican side, there is a huge intelligence gap for American
journalists caused by cultural, linguistic and confidence problems, as
well as government corruption.
Information from the south is tainted by rumor and exaggeration, and it
is often difficult to find an authoritative Mexican source.
Finally, the U.S. political climate has become infected with so much
cynicism and passion that covering immigration creates career stress.
Every story is subjected to thought police inside the newspaper, and
spin doctors on the outside.
But our nation’s best reporting has always been done in spite of
obstacles, and the border clearly is packed with dramatic, important and
fascinating news. So, what are we missing, and what are we doing wrong?
We have three Spanish-speaking panelists to address that issue:
Paul Charlton:
Served six years as U.S. Attorney for Arizona leaving early this year
as part of a purge by the Justice Department.
Became a federal prosecutor in 1991, working organized crime,
narcotics, white-collar crimes and other cases.
U.S. Attorney chaired a Border subcommittee of federal prosecutors.
During Charlton’s tenure as U.S. Attorney, federal prosecutors were
ranked in the top five for immigration prosecutions and the top 20 for
narcotics cases.
Charlton is a University of Arizona graduate. He now works in private

practice at the Phoenix firm of Gallagher and Kennedy.
David Gonzales:
Became U.S. Marshal for Arizona five years ago. His job is to track
down fugitives, protect the courts and transport prisoners.
Before that, was commander at the state Department of Public Safety,
overseeing organized crime, narcotics, special operations and other
criminal enforcement units.
Began his career as a beat cop, and later worked undercover.
Sandalio Gonzalez:
A native of Cuba, Sandalio served nearly 35 years in law enforcement,
working his way up from a Los Angeles cop to Drug Enforcement
Administration agent to special agent in charge at the DEA’s El Paso office
in 2001.
Along the way, he served as a group supervisor in Mexico City, unit
chief at the Office of Security Programs in Washington, DC, and chief of
the cocaine and South America sections. He retired two years ago amid
controversy after blowing the whistle on an investigation that employed a
confidential informant who allegedly participated in mass murders in Ciudad
Juarez.
Gonzalez is former president of the Hispanic American Police Command
Officers Association
Audience questions......?
Examples of border issues and uncovered stories...
Has anyone written a detailed story based on interviews with a cartel
kingpin or a major coyote?
Are we covering the immigration detention centers and courts at all?
Did we manufacture the Minuteman movement, giving it undo credibility?
Or, due to political correctness and/or liberal bias, did we completely
ignore a decade of swelling resentment against illegal aliens among
average Americans?
Have we unethically lowered our attribution standards when it comes to
border stories?
Have we let the immigrant-rights groups or anti-immigration zealots set
the agenda?
Do we get duped by statistics? For example, when Border Patrol increases
apprehensions we are told that means they're doing a good job catching
UDAs, but when apprehensions decline that means they have done a good
job in deterrence.

Extra Questions:

What do you see as the most glaring weakness or oversight in media coverage
of the border?

What story has been missed over and over?

What issue has been misunderstood or misrepresented?

Paul: Fast-track prosecutions achieve unequal justice?

David: Criminal aliens, the pursuit of them and the impact?

Sandalio: How does an investigative reporter penetrate the wall of silence
put up by Justice Department agencies?

