Farm subsidy stories in your area
Sarah Cohen, The Washington Post
(202) 334-6259; cohensh@washpost.com
June 2007, Phoenix
Agriculture subsidy stories
Over the past year, The Washington Post published ten front-page stories on wasteful or
duplicative spending on U.S. farm subsidies and rural development. Most of the
problems we found in the system can be found across the country. Looking at agriculture
records in your state could identify:
•

Landowners and ranchers who receive subsidies for growing crops without
planting anything. Others have written about wealthy city dwellers collecting
conservation payments on their vacation land.

•

Ranchers and dairy farmers who suffered no losses collecting emergency
drought funds, particularly in a close election year.

•

Farmers who receive price subsidies but do not sell their crops at the distressed
prices intended by the program.

•

Farmers who receive subsidized insurance and collect on their losses and also
collect money in nearly every disaster program passed by Congress.

•

Rural development funds funnelled to beach resorts, new suburban
subdevelopments and similar areas.

•

Farmers who receive far more than the legal limit for subsidies because they
have formed shell partnerships and exploited loopholes in the law – with the
blessing of state and federal overseers.

Agriculture records and databases
•

A database of 218 million payments, called the “check file”, made to farms since
1990. The data includes the name and mailing address for each recipient, the
county that the farm is in, the date of the check, its amount, the program it was
paid under and the crop year it referred to. They will not release the address of
the farm, but will release the county “farm number”, which helps in tracking a
piece of land over time. Available through FOIA to the Farm Service Agency.

•

A database of historical prices for various crops by county scraped from the
USDA’s web site (under FSA’s price supports). They were used to find people
who sold their corn at high prices, but received price supports anyway.

•

Lists of counties declared agricultural disaster areas by the USDA, and lists of
other disaster declarations made by the White House from FEMA. They were
used to find people who received disaster funds but had no agricultural disaster.
(Received through various FOIA requests)

•

Electronic pictures of maps made by the U.S. Drought Monitor.

•

Aggregate statistics by county, crop, and year on insurance subsidies and losses
– figures that the government claims is precluded from individual FOIA because
of statutory language. Downloadable on the website of the Risk Management
Administration.

•

Other aggregate statistics on the amount of each crop planted and harvested by
county, and actual average prices received by farmers for each state.
Downloadable from the National Agricultural Statistical Service website.

•

Correspondence between members of Congress and the USDA, including
complaints over failures to provide money to constituents. In addition, transcripts
of congressional hearings and comments made to agricultural commissions.
FOIA’d from state and national USDA and FSA offices.

•

Minutes of meetings of selected county committees, which are made of up of 3 or
4 farmers in a county elected by recipients of USDA funds. This group technically
approves and disapproves subsidy applications. FOIA’d at the state level.

•

A list of crop insurance salesmen scraped from the agency’s website. These
were matched to records of those who received disaster payments, allowing us
to interview people who sell insurance but don’t buy enough to cover themselves
in bad years.

•

Two databases tracking ownership and “beneficial interest” of those receiving
farm payments. One of these was released two days before the last story of
2006, allowing us to estimate the amount of money that would have been saved
had a key reform passed. FOIA’d and appealed, finally received when we
threatened to sue.
The more complex of these is called the “Entity Relationship File”, which tracks
the owners of all farm operations getting subsidies through every level. It is
difficult to use, but allows for detailed analysis of corporate structures designed to
evade payment limitations. The easier is called “1614” data. EWG will be
releasing its analysis of this data next week.

•

FAADS database of grants and loans awarded by three Rural Development
agencies, downloaded from the Census. Press press releases and other
announcements on agency and Congress members’ websites.

Washington Post v. USDA
“As the Supreme Court has established, "unless the invasion
of privacy is 'clearly unwarranted,' the public interest in
disclosure must prevail. ... FOIA's basic policy ... focuses
on the citizens' right to be informed about what their
government is up to…Under the FOIA's presumption in
favor of disclosure and its core purpose of informing the
public about the workings of government, no more is
required.” –Paul L. Friedman, U.S. District Judge, Oct. 18, 1996

“I had an
awakening…It’s not
totally free enterprise
in the United States.”
– Hein Hettinga

Records used
• Subsidy checks (217 million records)
• Ownership records (about 7 million)
• Lobbying / campaign finance records
• Production, “base” & weather records
• County committee meeting minutes
• Disaster declarations
• … and more

