Visualization as a Reporting Tool

Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / cohensh@washpost.com

Some reporters think of graphics as a separate step in the reporting process – something to
be considered after the story is largely written and the rest of the art is complete. But
reporting with graphics can help throughout the story. The bonus is that it will make the
ending art much easier to compile and fact check.

Early Visual Exploration
Timelines, maps and “small multiples” of many similar graphics can help put your story in
perspective early on and highlight subjects, programs or regions to use as examples for
further reporting. The process will also point out holes or errors in your early reporting
much more efficiently than staring at numbers buried in text.
Some things to keep in mind during this early exploration:
•

Don’t obsess over precision in the figures in these early graphics. They should be
generally correct, but don’t worry if you have various levels of rounding for every
number, if they don’t add up to exactly 100% or if you are missing one year out of
20. This is part of the exploration process – you’ll still see the big trends and you’ll
know where you need to get more data for any final graphic you want to publish.

•

Look at the pictures in many different ways, including those that some people call
cheating. For example, you don’t care that your news organization bans charts that
don’t start at zero. If it helps you see patterns, use it. Some other techniques
include: Omitting scales and the labels on graphics, leaving only the general
impression. Or look at figures in their raw form, as a percent of total or per capita
arate, as a change or percent change or in logarithms or square roots. Each provides
a different view and each can be just as illuminating as the other. You might look at
geographic data by county, town, zip code or using polygons or points. You get a
different impression each time.

•

Use small multiples. Repeating the same image over and over on the same page or
screen becomes easy to read very quickly – once you learn to read one, you’ve
learned to read them all. This is advocated by Edward Tufte, who also came up with
a variation on it that he calls sparklines:
Without much text, small mutliples can be very small – say, an inch tall by maybe
three inches wide. (William Cleveland’s experiments showed that the eye perceives
change best when a graph’s line segments – or the implied ones between bars -average a slope of 45 degrees. It means that many charts will be most effective
when they are shorter and wider than we usually make them.)

•

Go through the entire history of your subject and begin making a document that has
all of the key events. At some point, you will find a dataset that you can use as a
background to this chronology. Figure out how far back you want to go. You will
collect many more items than you can possibly use in a chronology, but it will help
you figure out what you don’t know. You will also be able to put any significant

events into context.
•

Create chronologies of any significant case studies. I often do these on paper rather
than by computer. I use different colors for different types of events, like convictions
vs. crimes or contributions vs. lobbying. They make the writing process much easier.

•

Meet with your graphics department to brainstorm about graphics you will likely want
to use in the newspaper or online. It is much easier to report them out at the same
as you report the story than it is to start over once you’ve written a draft. It also
gives your artists more time to work on making them an interesting addition to the
package rather than a last-minute add-on.

From exploration to publication
At this point, precision matters a lot. There is little ability to write around a hole in for
graphics. You either have the data you need – all of it – or you don’t. So spend some time
making sure you can get what you assume you can get. Historical data is particularly
difficult if you are going through a program or agency with a long and torrid history.
Some things to keep in mind:
•

The graphic needs to be easy to understand at a glance, but complex enough so that
readers with an interest can get something out of it. Some telling graphics are just
too difficult to understand quickly. Some obvious graphics are, well, too obvious. Try
to make sure there is a balance.

•

Convey one main idea in each graphic. What is the single biggest thing you want
people to come away with? Decide on the overwhelming impression that you want a
reader to get , then make everything else disappear. Shade or color anything else so
it blends into the background or eliminate it.

•

Simplify, then simplify again. Timelines, in particular, can end up cluttered and
overwhelming. We try to limit breakouts on a half-page graphic to about six
highlighted items.

•

Mix media. Maps with satellite images broken out; fever lines combined with
timelines; calendars mixed with pictures. It makes the graphic more visually
interesting but adds information.

•

Tell a narrative with a series of related graphics down the page or across the top.
This is similar to small multiples, but they tell an evolving story.

•

Avoid graphics that just repeat what is in the story. If that is all they are doing, they
are not serving their purpose. Either cut the detail in the story or get more
information in the graphic.

Interactive graphics online
If you have the skill and time, consider learning how to make interactive graphics as
reporting tools. They are particularly effective at this stage because they satisfy our natural
desire to dig deeper into anything that we see. But they also help get a jump-start on
moving online with a finished graphic. Most websites use Flash, though others will consider
graphics produced using plain HTML or javascript or PHP.

Graphics as reporting tools

Annotated timelines

Timelines and calendars

-Incorporates people whose narratives are in the story

Sparklines & small multiples

-Consistency in
colors and timing
-Reporting it allowed
us to make broad
claims without
lengthening the
story. Used work
already 80% done.
- Unusual: Read
back to sources
because it had to be
so boiled down.

- Graphic element of rail to list the names of the subjects.
Builds credibility to list every case when the subjects are
shrouded in secrecy.

