IRE 2007 – Phoenix, AZ
The time squeeze: Staying on air and getting there fast
Bob Segall, WTHR Indianapolis

The Art and Science of Follow Ups
Why are follow ups so important?
-- Keep you on the air while you are working on other projects, often with only a
small amount of additional work required
-- Hold officials accountable / get results and prompt change
-- Earn additional respect for you and your investigative unit
-- Help develop leads for new stories
-- Keep your bosses happy!
Story selection
Choose stories that will demand a follow up. It’s the sign of a good story. If there is no
reason to follow up or revisit the issue, is it really a topic you want to pursue in the first
place? Following a big story, there will be buzz about your investigation and viewers
(both old and new) will expect to see more on that story. Make sure you deliver!
Plan ahead
Think about follow ups while you are working on your investigation. What elements of
the story can you save for a follow up? What angles do you not have time to get for your
original investigation? What aspects of the story are screaming out for further
investigation? As you are working on your projects, think about the “five R’s” as natural
follow up opportunities:
The Five R’s
Reaction – good investigations elicit strong reaction. If you can get reaction to
your findings before the story airs, consider saving some of it for a follow up. If you do
not have reaction before the investigation is broadcast, get it after.
Results – tell your viewers what results you got. Is the city launching its own
investigation? Has someone been indicted or fired? Has the business shut its doors? Did
the victim get retribution?
Revelations – New info, details, and developments that take place after your story
airs make for easy follow ups!
Revisit/Remind -- Put reminders on your calendar (one month, six months, one
year, etc.) to revisit an issue to see what results or revelations have come about since your
story. Call your sources and contacts to see what – if anything – has happened since your
last story. If nothing has happened, that is OK to report, too! It helps hold public officials
accountable and, at times, a follow up report that reminds viewers that nothing has
happened since your report will prompt those officials to actually do something.
Relent – Investigative reporters and producers aren’t always relentless. We relent
to our deadlines and newscast time pressures regularly. If you have to keep your story to
four minutes and you have seven minutes worth of compelling information and
interviews, hold some of that info/sound for a follow up story. If there is a great angle of
the story that you did not have time to explore before airing your original investigation,
plan to cover that angle for a follow up report. Use tight deadlines and time limitations to
your advantage – see them as natural opportunities for follow ups.

Take ownership
Can your follow up be told as a VOSOT, a VO or a reader? Great! Whenever possible,
make sure YOU are the one doing it. Follow ups can be as quick as 30 seconds. If you
are the one delivering those 30 seconds, it helps keep you and the investigative unit on
the air and helps viewers identify your role in the story. Stick with it -- see your story
through until the end… whether that is a few weeks or a few years.
Remind and re-use:
Don’t assume all your viewers have seen the original story. Give them a few sentences of
background to update those who are new to the investigation, but keep it short so you
don’t bore those who are familiar. If your original investigation has priceless video and/or
sound, re-use it. Especially in the days following the original broadcast, viewers will be
talking about those elements and will want to see it again.
Taking credit vs. basking in the glory:
If your story gets results, you do want your viewers to know about it. HOW you tell them
makes a big difference. Be honest about the role your investigation played in an
outcome. Be selective about sound bites and avoid those that cross the line from public
appreciation to self-promotion. “This investigation really opened our eyes” plays
differently to our viewers than “Channel 7 has saved my life. Thank you Channel 7.”
The later sound is great for a station promo – that’s where it belongs… not in a newscast.
Most viewers do not like self-serving sound bites in news stories.

