“Feeding the Beast: Strategies for Investigations at Local Stations”
Mark Lodato
News Director & Professor of Practice
Cronkite School of Journalism
(480) 727-9415
Mark.Lodato@asu.edu

2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix, Arizona

It’s All About Attitude
1.

Lose the I-team Attitude

While investigative reporting is certainly a specialty within a television newsroom you
cannot forget your responsibility as one part of a much larger news team. Too often investigative
reporters tend to shelter themselves from the daily news product. We do this both physically
(separate rooms or cubicles) and mentally (avoiding the morning meeting, etc.).
Actively remaining a part of the daily discussion and product will serve you well on
multiple levels. Your news director and EPs will view you as an asset rather than a liability when
it comes to finding content for the evening newscasts. Meanwhile, you’ll begin to find ways to
quickly and easily interject an investigative element into a newscast that sets your station apart
from the competition.

2.

Attend the Morning Meeting

While you might not be able to do it every day, try to participate in the morning meeting
at least a couple times each week. Seasoned investigative reporters approach stories differently
than general assignment reporters, who are concentrating on deadlines. How would you tackle the
lead story? Is there an angle or bit of advice you could give to the reporter assigned? Simply
participating and contributing on this level will carry weight with producers and managers.

3.

Look for Your Nugget

In the morning meeting look for that element that screams “I-team side bar!” Often it is
the document or bit of information that the general assignment reporter won’t have the time to
get, or perhaps may not know how to find. This is where you can quickly prove your value. Take
one hour to find a unique public record and suggest it as live side bar report on what your team
has uncovered.

4.

Breaking News

When the assignment desk is scrambling, don’t disappear for an early lunch! Step up and
join the fight. At KPHO-TV I often found myself (as did other I-team reporters) standing by live
in the newsroom to pass along new information that we could turn faster than getting it out to the
field reporters. And it’s not always about being on air. Simply volunteering to help find new
information, live phoners, and sources for context (data, documents, people) is valuable in the
classic “all hands on deck” situation.
Or hit the street. CNN Senior Producer Ismael Estrada says “Go where they’re not. While
others are covering press conferences, etc., go through public records, to neighbors’ homes or
elsewhere where you can find out more that what public officials will tell you.”

5.

Create Your Own “Front Burner”

I always had a hard time tracking those I-team stories that were most likely to provide
opportunities for quick follow-ups. To solve the problem, I created my own “front burner” file
area on my desk so that I couldn’t help but see these stories every day, prompting me check up
for new information I could use for a quick turn.

6.

Track the Public’s I-team

Estrada was the first to turn me on to all of the federal GAO reports, and state and local
auditors or inspectors who are constantly rooting out the kind of public waste we hope to
uncover. Many of these agencies will notify you via email when their reports are ready, providing
you with an instant quick-turn.

7.

Make the Most of Your Sources

KPHO-TV’s Morgan Loew suggests every time you do an investigative interview, try to
get a second quick-turn story out of the same source. Something you can bring it back and turn
that piece in the same day. He says your managers will be more likely to free you up in the future
if you come back on occasion with something they don’t expect.

8.

Bring a G-A Attitude Now and Then

When possible, Loew likes to shoot a couple “daily” investigations in one day, saving
one for the future. Doubling up allows you to feed the beast and create an open day in the future.

9.

Volunteer to Cover Regular Events

Stepping up to cover things like the Governor’s weekly briefing generally give you a
little down time to make calls while providing rich contacts for investigative ideas. Two hours
work toward the day’s newscast could help unearth your next report.

10.

Don’t Ignore Court Records

Loew tries to make it habit to look through state, federal or county court indictments, etc.
at least a couple times each week. He says the documents are great sources for day-of scoops and
often reveal interesting crime trends or angles for future investigations.

11.

Keep in Touch

Don’t forget your friends are in the same boat. What are reporters you know in other
cities doing for their quick turns? Is it something that would work well in your market? Create
your own listserv where you can share ideas, tips and other new information.

12.

Stay Organized

Come in early or stay late a couple times each week to get caught up on phone calls,
emails, pick up files and get stories organized.

