Suzanne McBride
Director, News Reporting and Writing
Journalism Department
Columbia College Chicago
312-344-8907
smcbride@colum.edu

Tips For Getting Your Student Investigations Published
June 10, 2007
Investigative Reporters and Editors
Scottsdale, Arizona

1. Do some initial sniffing to make sure there’s a story. While not every tip pans out
in the “real world,” it’s frustrating for students to spend months on their first
investigative project and come up with nothing.
2. Collaborate with local media. In our case, a part-time instructor shared with me a
database of city workers he had obtained a few months earlier, long before the
class began its investigation. Later, when students had trouble getting the city to
respond to their FOIA requests, we had something to fall back on while we waited
for our own, more up-to-date database.
3. Be strategic about where to pitch the story. We explored working with one of the
local television stations, but in the end decided students would learn more and
have greater control by publishing on www.creatingcommunityconnections.org, a
local news site that covers Chicago neighborhoods.
4. From the beginning, have a plan for how to keep and share notes. We used a
collaborate web site – www.near-time.net - as our electronic newsroom. We used
our Near-time site, which could be seen only by class members, to post all
interview notes and rough drafts, link to relevant stories already published on the
subject and communicate with one another, often late at night.
5. Be thinking multi-media/convergence/whatever you want to call it from the start.
Don’t make our mistake: We didn’t think to record and videotape until late in the
game, after we had already conducted some of our target interviews. We realized
after reading some of the more interesting quotes that it would have been great if
our readers could hear those words directly from the source.
6. Be prepared for the project to take far longer than you expected and have a
backup plan for getting it finished. In our case, I identified two of the most
experienced and interested students and approached them about taking an
Independent Study with me the next semester. They got the bylines, while their
classmates got contributing taglines if we used their interviews.

