Sam Roe
Projects reporter
Chicago Tribune
Sroe@tribune.com
312-222-4418
Tip sheet: IRE National Conference, June 7-10, 2007.
Doing your own lab testing
The Chicago Tribune conducted one of the most comprehensive studies of
mercury in commercial seafood. Reporters bought 162 samples of fish from
randomly selected supermarkets in the Chicago area. Rutgers University tested
the samples for mercury, a toxic metal that can cause learning disabilities in
children and neurological problems in adults.
The results kicked off a three-day series titled “Mercury Menace,” published Dec.
11-13, 2005. (www.chicagotribune.com/mercury) The series showed that
mercury contamination in supermarket seafood is far more pervasive than what
authorities have disclosed. Among the reaction: The FDA began an investigation
into canned tuna; the USDA corrected its highly touted food pyramid; the state of
Illinois passed dramatic cuts in mercury emissions, and the Canadian fishing
industry announced that, for the first time, it would conduct widespread testing of
fish caught in the Great Lakes and sold in U.S. supermarkets.
MERCURY MENACE – MAIN FINDINGS
9 Chicago-area supermarkets routinely sell a variety of seafood highly
contaminated with mercury.
9 Several species were so tainted that regulators could confiscate them for
violating food safety rules.
9 High levels were found in two species for which the government has not
issued warnings: orange roughy and walleye.
9 Walleye contained so much mercury that the country supplying it, Canada,
could ban the fish from being sold within its borders because the
contamination violated Canadian safety standards.
9 Some samples of grouper, tuna steak and canned tuna were so tainted
that millions of American women would exceed the U.S. exposure limit by
eating just one 6-ounce meal in a week.
9 The U.S. canned tuna industry uses a high-mercury tuna species to make
millions of cans of “light” tuna, a product the government specifically
recommends as a “low-mercury” choice.
SOME TIPS
9 Study the studies. Look at how similar testing has been done. How did
they collect the samples? How were the samples packed and transported?

9

9
9
9

9

9
9
9

9

9

How many samples were selected? Make your testing as scientifically
valid as possible.
What’s the target? Do you just want to know what chemicals are in a
certain product? Or do you also want to know if there is a difference
among suppliers? Think about these things before testing. We bought fish
at both supermarkets and fish markets to see if there was a difference
between the two in terms of mercury levels. (We didn’t see any). We also
tested several brands of canned tuna to see if there were differences.
(No.)
Consult experts. Tell them about your methodology, and see if they can
help you design a better study. In the end, you want your story to be able
to withstand intense scrutiny.
Choose labs carefully. Pick a reputable lab that doesn’t have any
conflicts. Labs at universities are often least expensive, and researchers
there might alert you to any unusual findings.
Consider conducting a random sample. We didn’t want to simply buy
fish at the nearest store or where we personally shopped. A random
sample removes biases you might have and gives you results that are
representative of a larger population. Plus, a random sample is fair. If you
want to name names -- identifying stores where you bought tainted items,
for example -- you should do a random sample. (We paid W3 Data, a
company that compiles information from phone directories, $300 to
generate a list of all supermarkets and fish markets falling within the six
telephone area codes in the Chicago region. We then used a randomnumber generator function in Microsoft Excel to select our stores.)
Remove other possible biases. For example, we knew prior to testing
that a fillet from a large tuna would generally have more mercury than a
fillet from a small tuna. So in our study, the counter help selected the
samples.
Do quality control. We asked our lab to test 10 percent of our samples
twice for quality control. This cost us $720 more, or $45 per sample.
Keep the samples. After your testing is complete, have the lab hold onto
the samples for a few weeks in case you want to do further testing on
those same samples.
Is DNA testing needed? In the seafood industry, suppliers are known to
pass off a cheap fish species as a pricey one. If your test results seem
fishy, you might want to do DNA testing – about $150 per sample – to
determine whether that piece of gourmet fish is really what it claims to be.
Expose lousy regulators. Testing stories can be a great way to expose
poor governmental oversight. We knew the FDA had done only scant
testing of seafood for mercury. So we tested some species of fish that had
been rarely tested to highlight how the government had dropped the ball
on mercury.
Don’t despair. When the going gets tough, remember that these kinds of
stories resonate with the public like few others. We received hundreds of
emails, calls or letters, and the series was featured on the Today Show.

