Budgets and Finance at City Hall

BUDGETS. Identify budget watchdogs, inside and outside
government, and stay in touch with them. Get to know the budget
analyst or controller. Scrutinize budget line items for revenue
and spending that show major increases or declines. Why is that
happening? In the case of major increases, ask who is making
sure that the extra money is being spent properly. What are the
safeguards?
Always obtain the city’s audited financial statement. Does it
jibe with the one the mayor puts out? Read footnotes for
concerns by auditors and mention of lawsuits that may affect an
agency’s financial condition. Bond-sale documents also should be
read for financial information that may not be included in
budgets – trends in the city’s ability to collect property tax
revenue, for instance.

NO-BID BONDS. Governments by and large use competitive bidding
to buy things like trucks and paper for the mayor to crank out
press releases. It’s another story with municipal bonds, the
principal way in which local governments raise billions for
capital projects. Across the U.S., 80 percent of all bonds are
sold without competitive bidding. In most cases, there is little
excuse for it. Banks know what they’re doing – they can sell
most debt without having to clear their throats.
So why does this happen? Banks have convinced governments,
especially small ones, that they’ll get better service and a
competitive interest rate through a process known as a
negotiated sale. That means one bank, or a consortium of banks,
will sell the debt directly. Trouble is, negotiated sales are
almost always more expensive, according to studies of the
market. The result: Taxpayers pay more in interest and other
costs over the life of a bond.

2

Plus, no-bid deals are fraught with payola and conflicts. In
California, banks win the exclusive right to handle bond deals,
then give money to campaigns to win voter approval for the debt.
In some cases, banks that are supposed to be independent
financial advisers convince agencies they should sell the bonds
too, doubling up on fees. If the agency you’re covering is
considering a no-bid deal, make them justify it and give you
details of the cost. Always check for campaign contributions.

ODD FINANCING. Beware goofy bond deals. Remember that most bonds
are sold and not bought. Financing does not generally spring
from the creativity of the city treasurer, but from the
salesmanship of Wall Street. Banks come up with all sorts of
exotic vehicles to sell government debt, not all of it
justified.
In recent years, banks sold governments around the country on
bond programs to raise billions of dollars for construction of
low-income housing and hospitals. Little of the money was ever
spent from these special bond ``pools’’ and the agencies that
issued the bonds were forced to buy them back from investors.
The deals were cooked up by banks and other financial firms to
make a big killing on fees, which they did through bid-rigging
and secret deals.
Ask an agency if it has ever received a so-called adverse
determination letter from the IRS for bond issuance. The feds
challenge the tax-exempt status of municipal bonds when money
isn’t going for the public purpose intended.

SWAPS. This market is huge, and getting bigger. Watch for these
deals, which can hamstring an agency unless it pays a big fee to
get out of them. Swaps are contracts used as interest-rate
hedges by governments. It’s a Wild West market, unregulated and
arcane even for professionals. JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America
and other banks sell swap contracts to collect big fees.
How they may work: Let’s say you’re carrying variable-rate debt
on your house. A bank will come to you and say it can protect
you against rising rates. It’ll give you payments based on the
going variable rate so that if rates go up, you’ll be hedged. As
an incentive to do the deal, banks will give you a chunk of
change up front. In exchange, you’ll have to make payments based
on a fixed rate of interest to the bank. What’s more, the bank

3
also will collect a big upfront fee. It’ll collect yet another
fee if the market turns against you and you are forced to unwind
the swap.

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS. It’s the rage now for cash-strapped
cities and states to consider selling toll roads, airports and
lotteries to banks and other private interests to operate.
Depending on the structure of the deal, such so-called P3
partnerships can work for both sides.
But some observers are worried about loss of government control
(as tenuous as it sometimes is) on public works. If a toll road
falls into private hands, for instance, who sees to it that
tolls are controlled and that maintenance is done? There are
also worries about loss of public-sector jobs as private
managers turn work over to independent contractors.
Beware undue influence to arrange these deals. In Texas,
lobbyists working in behalf of public-private highway
partnerships paid the travel expenses of dozens of state
legislators to attend P3 promotional events.

SOURCES AND PUBLICATIONS

BUDGETS
Guides for elected officials on budgeting, revenue forecasting,
performance measurement and accounting available from the
Government Finance Officers Association, 312-977-9700.
National League of Cities survey on finances of U.S. cities:
http://www.nlc.org/ASSETS/DBAC48DF87984F05BA92BF7E603F5637/rmpci
tyfiscalcondbrf06.pdf
Michael Pagano, professor of public administration, University
of Illinois at Chicago, 312-355-4681, mpagano@uic.edu. Does
fiscal research for the National League of Cities.

4
BONDS AND SWAPS
IRE Journal article:
http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/viewjournal.php?number=1593
``Handbook for Muni-Bond Issuers,’’ Joe Mysak, Bloomberg Press.
Good primer on bond types and how municipal debt is sold.
http://www.munios.com or http://www.emuni.com. Sites that
publish bond documents.
Bond Buyer Red Book of municipal bond dealers, financial
advisers and lawyers. Issued quarterly. Available in libraries
if can’t get from Bond Buyer.
Credit agencies. Ask agency officials for the latest credit
reports from Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service and
talk to the analysts who wrote them. S&P media: 212-438-2756.
Moody’s media: 212-553-0376.

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS
Business Week article, ``Roads to Riches,’’ from 5/7/07 on what
can go wrong when Wall Street wants to operate toll roads,
lotteries and other government functions:
http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/07_19/b4033001.htm?
chan=search
Rep. Peter DeFazio, Oregon congressman opposed to giveaways of
public assets, (202) 225-6416

Panel on First Day on the Beat: Investigating Cities and County
Government. IRE 2007 National Conference, Phoenix.
David Dietz
Senior Writer
Bloomberg Markets Magazine
345 California Street Suite 3500
San Francisco, CA 94104
(415) 743-3551-SF
(415) 819-4662-cell
(415) 733-7625-fax
ddietz1@bloomberg.net

