IRE 2007 Panel//First Day on the Beat: Covering Cops
Tips
Ruth Teichroeb
Investigative Reporter
Seattle Post-Intelligencer
ruthteichroeb@seattlepi.com
206-448-8175

Gina Barton
Investigative Reporter
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
gbarton@journalsentinel.com
414-224-2125

1. Obtain a current list of sworn officers for every department you cover, including
middle name and birth date (if possible). You never know when something will happen
and you’ll be scrambling to background “Officer Smith”
2. Use that list to run the names of sworn officers against court records, especially
municipal/district courts that handle misdemeanors. You will find drunken driving
convictions, domestic violence arrests/convictions and fodder for any number of
interesting stories.
3. Use public disclosure laws to request the police department’s internal investigations of
officers on any number of topics, from unnecessary use of force to conduct unbecoming
an officer. Try to get copies of investigations into “unsustained” complaints as well as
those with findings because those can tell you a lot about what behavior goes unpunished.
Question redactions, file follow-up requests and get your attorney involved if necessary.
4. Ask for the police file, including incident reports and follow-up, on a high-profile case
(e.g. domestic violence-related murder with prior complaints) and find out how police
responded to a victim’s complaints. Don’t assume the official line is the same as what
happened.
5. Ask for a police department’s written policies on police conduct and then compare that
to what is done when an officer violates those rules. Police discipline can vary widely
from officer to officer and department to department.
6. Civil court records, especially divorce files, can be a gold mine for backgrounding
officers. Domestic violence allegations that were kept out of criminal court often appear
in divorce records. Don’t forget your local U.S. District Court because police misconduct
cases are often filed as federal civil rights cases.
7. Examine the experience of non-traditional officers on the force, including female cops
or those from minority groups. Talk to those who have recently left the department about
controversial issues if current officers won’t go on the record.
8. Use public disclosure to ask for records on issues of public interest, including police
overtime, racial profiling or payouts in civil claims.

9. Check police union tax records for story ideas. Like any other non-profit, police guilds'
past three IRS Tax Form 990s must be made available to the public. These documents
will give you detailed info about the union’s finances and other valuable information.
10. Check to see if a civilian auditor issues regular police oversight reports about police
misconduct, including statistics on the number of citizen complaints, outcomes etc.
11. Request a list of hiring standards for the police departments you cover. What level of
education must officers have? Are people with criminal records allowed to get jobs on the
force? The requirements might not be as strict as you think.
12. Put in a standing request for lists of recruit classes. Then, keep track of how many
recruits make it through the academy. Low numbers of graduates may indicate problems
with either recruiting or training.
Keeping track of recruits will also help keep your roster current.
13. Check your local prosecutor's record on charging cops with crimes.
Are officers ever criminally charged for on-duty uses of force? In off-duty incidents, are
cops routinely given deferred prosecution agreements or allowed to plead to minor
offenses that will let them keep their guns - or their jobs?
14. Get statistics regarding police uses of force, including tasers, shootings, night sticks,
etc. What's the department average? How does that compare with departments of similar
size? When an officer is involved in a high-profile incident, ask for his or her individual
stats and compare them with the department averages.
15. Make friends with defense attorneys. Many of them keep lists of officers known for
using excessive force, planting evidence, committing perjury, etc.

