Conducti ng International
Investigations
1. Read anything and everything on the issue before you
start. It's best to assemble it in chronological order or by categories or issues. Connect
the dots and paint a picture of some new or unexplored angle or issue lurking in the
background. For example, in the Iran-contra affair, The Miami Herald’s Alfonso Chardy,
was able to identify Lt. Col. Oliver North's role in the scandal months before his name
became well known by noticing references to him in connection to the contras in several
Central American newspapers.
2. Fixer/Driver/Translator. Like on any foreign assignment, your eyes and ears on
the ground must be trusted, capable and efficient.
3. Language proficiency is best. You can expect to be reading documents in
native languages. The best thing is to be fluent. The next best thing is a trusted
translator/fixer.
4. Reach out to the government agencies where you are visiting.
The official channels might not be the most productive, but sometimes a detective or
bureaucrat with an independent streak might help cut through some of the red tape. It's
always preferable to actually visit them in person. Like in the U.S., face to face contact is
best. Beware of the government in authoritarian countries.
5. Ask for records. Many times, foreign countries have a rich paper trail on certain
issues that you may be investigating. They could be arrest records, migration records,
homicide rates. The Panamanian government declassified all the Posada records that the
ministry of exterior was holding after we lobbied them.
6. Do not expect your appointments to be honored on time. Many
times you make an appointment, but the person you made it with will either forget or be
late. Don't be offended, at least not at first. Keep at it. Persistence pays.
7. Connect with local media. Local reporters are often among the best resources
to getting you what you need. They are among the best fixers you can have. Local
journalists will often help you in exchange for information that is useful to them. You can
always negotiate with them so that they don't publish the scoop before you do.
8. Just go there. Telephone service and phone books are often unreliable and
incomplete. If you have an address, check it out, be it a jail, hospital or restaurant. Like in
the United States, talk to neighbors to track people down.
9. Ministry of the exterior can help or hurt. This is a double-edged sword.
The ministry of the exterior of most foreign countries probably knows better than any
other agency why you may be interested in a story, and whether or not it could help or
hurt their government's image. If you think they might play ball, then go to the ministry
of exterior. It could result in declassified records, or tips. It could also backfire and bring
unwanted attention and scrutiny.

