Access Arizona
Training and tips for acquiring
public records and covering
meetings in Arizona
June 10, 2007
IRE National Conference
David Cuillier
Assistant Professor
Department of Journalism
University of Arizona
520-626-9694
cuillier@email.arizona.edu
and
Mark J. Scarp
Columnist/editorial writer
East Valley & Scottsdale Tribune
480-970-2351
mscarp@evtrib.com

This training material was developed by Charles Davis from the University of MissouriColumbia, Joel Campbell from Brigham Young University, and David Cuillier for the Society
of Professional Journalists on-the-go newsroom training program. For more information
about this program, go to http://www.spj.org/bbtraining.asp.

-1-

Agenda: Access Arizona
Part I. The stories
1. Story ideas
Handout: FOI laws in action
2. Thinking documents
Handout: Creating a document-driven newsroom

Part II. The method
1. Quick review of the Arizona public records law
2. Tips and strategies for a successful request
Handout: Planning your FOI request
Handout: How to handle denials
Handout: The art of access
3. Current FOI issues in Arizona
4. News you can use
Handout: Sunshine law background
Handout: Top 10 open meeting red flags
Handout: FOI resources

About the speakers
David Cuillier, a former reporter and editor at newspapers in the Pacific Northwest,
is vice chairman of the SPJ FOI Committee and is a FOI trainer for the SPJ on-the-go
newsroom training program. He also teaches access to information and computer-assisted
reporting at the University of Arizona, and conducts research in public attitudes toward
access and strategies for acquiring public records.
Mark J. Scarp is editorial writer and columnist for the East Valley (Mesa/Scottsdale,
Ariz.) Tribune, a daily newspaper serving several communities near Phoenix. Mark spent six
years from 1997-2003 representing the southwestern United States on the national board of
directors of the Society of Professional Journalists. He was president of the Valley of the Sun
(Phoenix) SPJ chapter from 1992-1994 and from 2003-2006. Since 1992 Mark has served
on the board of directors of the First Amendment Coalition of Arizona and was its president
from 2000-2005.
-2-

Handout: FOI laws in action
By Charles Davis and Joel Campbell
Stories using state records laws
 Big spenders: In May 2004, reporters at the Richmond Times-Dispatch
made a public records request to find out that taxpayers sent 25 of its
employees to a Philadelphia conference for black public administrators at a
cost of about $45,000. City leaders said they had good reasons for sending
so many people. The conference will be held in Richmond next year. Some
city employees went for professional training, city officials said. Others went
to help host a $12,500 reception complete with a Petersburg dance troupe
and hors d'oeuvres. The city budgeted $5,000 to underwrite the party's cost.
The party was held, in part, to attract more visitors to Richmond in April
2005, when the city will host the conference for black public administrators.
 Criminal cabbies: Using driving and criminal records obtained under
Georgia Open Records Laws, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution found that 72
percent of taxicab drivers had a serious violation on his or her personal or
professional driving record, ranging from excessive speed to DUI. In the past
seven years, 622 taxicab drivers have had their licenses suspended,
including 94 who currently have a suspended driver's license. What's more,
the investigation found 63 taxicab drivers with criminal records in Georgia,
including 10 who had spent time in prison. The charges included armed
robbery, child molestation and kidnapping.
 Unsafe bridges: Using a database Inventory of Bridges from the Federal
Highway Administration in 2000, the Boston Globe found that the rate of
problem bridges - with structural defects or with design flaws that make
them too narrow, poorly aligned with roadways or unable to carry larger
vehicles - is the third worst in the country. Nearly 40 percent of the 4,995
bridges in Massachusetts rate low enough to qualify for federal repair funds a situation that state officials said posed a threat to public safety.
 Vulnerable airports: After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, CNN.com used a
Federal Aviation Administration Enforcement database to find that the three
airports where the terrorist attacks originated had the first, third and fourth
lowest weapons detection rates among the 25 largest U.S. airports.
 Drivers of death: In April 2002 KIRO-TV in Seattle reported that a public
transportation program for the disabled has covered up fatal accidents. The
reporters managed to obtain documents revealing the flaws in the system -incident reports, autopsy reports, wrongful death lawsuits, trip
reimbursement vouchers, etc. Another finding is that many of the van
drivers had extensive felony records.
-3-

Stories using the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
 Airline safety: In 1996 when a ValuJet crash in the Everglades killed 110
persons, the Cleveland Plain Dealer had documents in hand showing what
the government knew about safety problems at the airline. It had just
completed a series of articles on safety problems at small airlines, a series
that relied significantly upon records received through FOI requests to the
Federal Aviation Administration.
 Rape in the military: In 1995 the Dayton (Ohio) Daily News used the Act
to learn that women in the military endured cavalier responses to charges of
rape brought against enlisted men and officers, many of whom had faced
multiple charges. In 1993 that newspaper perused Occupational Safety and
Health Administration databases obtained through the Act to identify the
most dangerous work places in the country.
 Radiation victims: After the Albuquerque Tribune filed requests for
information on victims of governmental radiation experiments in the early
1990s, Department of Energy Secretary Hazel O Leary began a departmental
program to identify and make public widespread abuses of past radiation
experimentation.
 Night accidents: In the late 1980s an Orange County (Calif.) Register
reporter showed that hundreds of servicemen were killed or seriously injured
in accidents relating to their government-issue night vision goggles, with the
Pentagon attributing the accidents to "pilot error."
 Workplace health risks: In 1985 the Public Citizen Health Research
Group used the Act to find that government had identified 250,000 workers
in 249 work places who faced increased risks of cancer, heart disease and
other illnesses because of their work environment — but that it had not
notified the workers of the risks.
 Government waste: Other reporters have used the Act to identify
wasteful government spending. In the early 1990s a request by an
Associated Press reporter led to a story about a little known $200 million
federal program to advertise U.S. food and drink overseas. Monies were
going to companies such as McDonald s, Burger King, Pillsbury, Dole, M&MMars and Jim Beam — all of whom had substantial advertising budgets of
their own to draw on.

-4-

Handout: Creating a document-driven newsroom
By Charles Davis and Joel Campbell

Creating a “document-driven” newsroom is a state of mind, a new way of
thinking of stories and of beats.
EXAMPLE: City Hall
1. Get thyself a BUDGET.
2. OK, that was easy. NOW what?
What now? Well, let’s start thinking about documents.
We have the money tracked at the budget level. But how do we track where
that money is going?
3. What else can we use?
4. A good way to brainstorm FOI is to map the government. Governments
often make this far easier by mapping themselves – look on their web sites
and you’ll often find organizational charts that can help jump-start this
process.
5. The question: “What sorts of documents might be generated by the
activities of this office?”
When we think about a mayor’s office, what sorts of records are produced?
6. The mayor is awarding a $100,000 grant to a local arts group. What
questions does that raise in your documents-driven mind?
7. Track requests in the newsroom and share information among the staff.
Post the record requested, when it was requested, who asked for it, and who
it was directed to. This can spur others to request information or maybe
another reporter has gotten the same record in the past.
8. Pick up records even if they are provided after deadline. Get the
government officials accustomed to you asking for records and following
through.
9. Do an FOI a day, for every story. Get yourself and the officials in the
habit.
10. Explain in stories how records helped bring to light important
information.
11. A final tip: many public offices maintain an index of records – a master
list of documents routinely filed!
-5-

Master index continued…
Here is a recent example of the City of San Francisco’s master index, under
a single heading, “Mayor, Economic Development”:
Administration
Accident-Injury Reports
Administrative Files
Audit Reports
Budget Files
Check Payments
Conflict of Interest Form 700
Contracts & Grants
Discrimination and Harassment Complaints
Draft Contracts
Family Medical Leave Act Records
General Correspondences
Medical Information
Office Expenditure Documents
Payables (Invoices/ Vendors)
Payroll Reports/ Timecards & Related Documents
Personnel Files
Policies/Procedures
Purchase Orders (copy)
RFA, RFP, RFQ(s) & Records
Receipt/Deposits
Travel Request (copy)
Work Orders
Worker's Compensation Record
http://mission.sfgov.org/cgibin/sunindex/getData.cgi?docColor=deptsonly&dept=moed&Submit=GO
Just think for a minute about how many stories lie in this data!
Now that is thinking documents-first!
Now imagine your entire newsroom thinking this way.
-6-

Handout: Planning your FOI request
By Charles Davis and David Cuillier
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Avoid fishing. Try to limit your request to what you really want.
If you simply ask for "all files relating to" a particular subject,
you may give the agency an excuse to delay its response, and
you risk needlessly running up search and copying costs. Do
your homework.
Get specific. Cite relevant newspaper clips, articles,
congressional reports, etc. If the records have already been
released, let the agency know the date, release number, and
name of the original requester. If you are asking for a database,
talk with the techies ahead of time to know exactly what data
you are requesting and in what format. Tour the agency office
and ask about what they are working on.
Prioritize. Let the agency know if you'd like to receive
information in a particular order. Materials could be reviewed
and released to you in chronological or geographical order - or
you may simply not want to wait for all the records to be
reviewed before any are released.
Know the law. Know the statutes and case law better than the
officials and lawyers. If you know the law and you are entitled to
the record then remind yourself that you don’t have to prove you
have a right to the record; they have to prove you can’t have it.
Remembering that tends to give you more confidence and feel
less apprehensive and more empowered.
Be polite but persistent. The people on the other side of the
counter don’t come to work with horns and cloven hooves. They
are people too, and they are more likely to get you what you
want faster if you are nice about it, especially at the beginning.
Ask verbally. In most cases, first ask for the records verbally. If
you are denied or blown off, then submit your request in writing.
Submit a request. If you anticipate balking, bluffing, or being
passed around or put off, simply submit a public records request
letter, which starts the clock ticking and requires them to act
and stop passing you around or delaying. On the following pages
see a sample state public records request letter generated from
the online request letter generator provided free by the Student
Press Law Center.
-7-

•

•

•

•

•

Go to the top. Sometimes going straight to the agency’s
lawyers or top officials speeds things up. Clerks sometimes deny
requests or stall as they try to make sure they don’t release
something that will get them in trouble. Once the agency
attorneys look at it and see it should be released, it often is.
Keep forms handy. If you deal with an agency frequently that
has its own form, keep copies with you ready to fill out and hand
over.
Choose your tone. Note the last paragraph of the request letter
that threatens litigation. Discuss this with an editor to make sure
you are prepared to sue if denied. Also, consider whether the
wording may create defensiveness or hostile undermining of
your request (e.g. delays). Sometimes it’s better to attract flies
with honey than vinegar. But at other times, coming in strongly
and quoting the law can demonstrate you are serious and know
what you are talking about.
Follow through. After you submit a request, always follow it
through to the end, especially if they provide the records, even if
months after you need it. Also, if denied initially don’t skulk
away cowed. If you have a legal right to the information keep at
it. How you treat requests and denials will effect how agencies
treat requests in the future. Educate officials and get them in the
habit of providing information to you and the public. It’s part of
their job.
Keep records of records. Keep track of every step of your
different requests. Keep dates, contact names, phone numbers
and try to correspond by email so you can have written records
of what was said to whom. Some requests can last years, so
keeping track of details can help.

-8-

Sample FOI letter
This state open records act request letter was generated online from
the Student Press Law Center Web site, www.splc.org/foiletter.asp. A
federal FOIA request letter can be generated
fromhttp://www.rcfp.org/foi_letter/generate.php.
______________________________________________________________________________
June 10, 2007
Mayor Bob Walkup
City of Tucson
120 Main Street
Tucson, AZ 85721

Dear Mayor Walkup,
Pursuant to the state open records law, Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. Secs. 39-121 to 39-126, I
write to request access to and a copy of all expense reports for the city for the past five years. If
your agency does not maintain these public records, please let me know who does and include
the proper custodian’s name and address.
I agree to pay any reasonable copying and postage fees of not more than $10. If the cost
would be greater than this amount, please notify me. Please provide a receipt indicating the
charges for each document.
I would request your response within ten (10) business days.
If you choose to deny this request, please provide a written explanation for the denial
including a reference to the specific statutory exemption(s) upon which you rely. Also, please
provide all segregable portions of otherwise exempt material.
Please be advised that I am prepared to pursue whatever legal remedy necessary to obtain
access to the requested records. I would note that willful violation of the open records law can
result in the award of legal costs, including damages and reasonable attorney fees. See Ariz. Rev.
Stat. Sec. 39-121.02.
Thank you for your assistance.
Sincerely,
David Cuillier
Tucson Tattler
100 Turnpike Street
Tucson, AZ 85704
520-626-9694
cuillier@email.arizona.edu

____________________________________________________________________________________
-9-

Handout: How to handle denials
By Charles Davis and David Cuillier

IF THE AGENCY SAYS…
"YOUR DESCRIPTION OF THE REQUESTED DOCUMENTS IS
INADEQUATE"
This means you probably did not give enough specific identifying
information. Give the agency the benefit of the doubt and
rewrite your request. You can try to call or make an appointment
with the official processing your request to get more help.
"THE REQUESTED MATERIAL DOES NOT EXIST"
If you are reasonably certain the records you've requested do
exist, and if your request letter was clear and informative, you
should try to do more research. Are there news reports,
congressional hearings or court records that describe the
information you want more clearly?
Rewrite your request, giving the agency more guidelines and
clues for where they might find it. Try to be as patient and
understanding as you can; some agencies are short staffed or
have disorganized filing systems.
"SOME OF THE MATERIALS ARE EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE, SO
WE WON’T GIVE YOU ANY OF THE RECORDS"
The agency can't withhold an entire document or file because
some portion(s) of it is exempt from disclosure. The agency
must release any non-exempt material that can be reasonably
extracted from the exempt portion(s).
"WE CAN’T GIVE IT TO YOU BECAUSE AN EXEMPTION SAYS WE
HAVE TO KEEP IT SECRET"
FOIA exemptions are discretionary, not mandatory - an agency
is not required to withhold information. Agency officials can
choose to waive the exemptions and release the material, unless
another statute specifically restricts that disclosure.

- 10 -

"WE JUST DON’T WANT TO GIVE IT TO YOU"
The agency must explain its reasons for determining that an
exemption applies to any particular information.
•
•

•

•

•

•

•

You have the right to contest any exemption claim.
You can file an administrative appeal to a higher agency
official. And if this fails, you can file a lawsuit. The federal
court must conduct a full judicial review of the agency's
claims and it is up to the agency to justify its denial of
your request.
The exemptions must be narrowly applied, since the FOIA
was created to maximize public access to agency records
Even if the agency releases substantial portions of the
material you've requested, you can appeal the decision to
"sanitize" the rest. You can also request a detailed
justification for each deletion.
While you are haggling with the agency, try to get the
information from another agency. Some records are kept
by multiple agencies (for example, boating accident data is
kept by state agencies and the Coast Guard).
Writing stories about the issue can be very effective in
opening up records, particularly if you ask the elected
officials what they think about their agencies trying to be
secretive and violate the law. It is helpful, as in most
stories, to put a human face on it and focus on how the
secrecy affects average citizens, not just the newspaper.
The agency isn’t saying “no” to you; it’s saying “no” to the
public. Tell the public.
Get to know the state’s attorneys. If they side with you
then that can provide leverage for when you run into
hassles over public records.

"OK, OK. HERE ARE YOUR RECORDS. THAT WILL BE $1
MILLION, PLEASE."
You might be able to narrow your request and just get copies of
the materials you actually need. In any case, you should be able
to view the records for free and not pay for copies.

- 11 -

If you still need copies, discuss ways to reduce the charges.
Some possibilities include asking for the information in electronic
format instead of paper copies (saved to a disk for a cost of $1).
You might be able to use a digital camera or portable scanner to
avoid copies.
Arm yourself with what other agencies charge for copies,
including for computer programming time if you are seeking a
database. If many other agencies charge nothing or very little,
then make that known, including by writing a story about it.
"WE ONLY PROVIDE THIS INFORMATION TO RESEARCHERS.
YOU CAN HAVE IT IF YOU SIGN THIS CONTRACT WITH US."
Some agencies give information to researchers provided they
sign a contract with use restrictions, such as prohibiting
identification of individuals in the records. Few reporters are
willing to sign such agreements. The problem is you might want
to use the information for something else later and won’t be able
to. Also, fundamentally it designates journalists as above
average citizens with special access, and it creates a new
category of “public information.” Either it’s public or not. Some
journalists advise only considering such agreements when the
information is clearly not public but the agency is willing to
release it for your story. For discussion on this topic, see Uplink,
March/April 2003, p. 1.
"WE DON’T KNOW WHY YOU WANT IT OR HOW YOU MIGHT USE
IT. YOU MIGHT USE IT IN A WAY WE DON’T LIKE.”
Tough noogies. In most states a records request can not be
denied based on who the requestor is or how the information will
be used (except in the case of commercial mailing lists). If they
ask why you want the information you can tell them: “I wouldn’t
want to determine the story before I have all my facts. I’m just
doing my job at gathering information.” If you request records
routinely from an agency (weekly), then it will be no big deal
and they are less likely to question you.
"WE DON’T CARE WHAT YOU SAY, EVEN IF THE LAW SAYS WE
HAVE TO GIVE IT OVER. YOU AREN’T GETTING IT."
Sue them.

- 12 -

Handout: The art of access
By David Cuillier

Access laws are essential, but sometimes officials thumb their noses at
them and suing is the only answer. But if you can get the records by
persuasion, even better. Below are tips for getting sources to comply
with requests, based on the six elements of persuasion by marketing
professor Robert Cialdini of Arizona State University. They build on
techniques used by journalists for centuries. It comes down to knowing
how to deal with people.
1. Reciprocation
• Rejection-then-retreat: Ask for a lot, then cut it in half. “Can I
see all documents you have regarding the budget? OK, how about
starting with just the expense reports for the past five years?”
Request information that you can give up later, such as social
security numbers. If it lands in court a judge might want you to
concede something anyway. When it appears you are giving them
something then they are more likely to reciprocate.
• Give and take: Don’t ignore newsworthy positive stories.
Occasionally government actually does something right. One of the
benefits is that when you ask for public records they are more likely
to comply. When you do something positive to someone,
psychologically they feel obligated to reciprocate and help you out.
But don’t make up stories or get buddy-buddy. Readers come first.
• Be a helper: Check in frequently after the request is filed and offer
to help to make their jobs easier. They might not take you up on it
but they might appreciate the gesture and move it faster.
2. Commitment and Consistency
• Everyone happy: Ask, “How are you doing today?” When the
person says fine, then he or she is more likely to help you. People
don’t want to appear stingy when they are fine and you are not.
• Commitment: Once commitment is made, people try to stick to it.
Get commitment verbally: “Do we have an agreement?”
• Ratcheting (low-balling): Get a commitment for something
small, then it opens the door for getting a yes on something bigger.
“How about if I could see a copy of what a police report looks like.
OK, do you have what a case file would look like? What does it look
like in your computer system? Any chance I could just get an
electronic copy of your reports in Excel for the past year?”
- 13 -

3. Social Proof
• Peer pressure: We follow what we see everyone else doing (e.g.,
canned laughter). This is most effective when people are uncertain
and when the reporter is similar to the person. “Boy, all the other
towns in the county provide this information. I wonder why it isn’t
open here?”
• Patriotism: Focus on the importance of what they have to offer to
the community. That it’s their duty as an American to keep
government open and transparent, and the community will
appreciate it.
4. Liking
• Looks: As much as we hate to admit, people often make decisions
based on how a requestor looks. Dressing well helps; looking shady
usually raises suspicions and increases denials.
• Similarity: Dress like your sources. Act like your sources. Talk
about similar interests.
• Compliments that are sincere help.
• Association: Disassociate yourself with negative media and people
who use information irresponsibly (spammers, identity thieves). Go
to lunch with people for a positive association with you and food.
5. Authority
• Bigger gets better responses. Journalists from bigger media
have more “authority” and tend to get calls returned faster. If you
work for a smaller organization, consider teaming up with reporters
from other organizations. Cooperative requests can increase
pressure for release and serve everyone’s interests.
• Titles have authority. Have the request letter co-signed by the
managing editor or, depending on the importance of the
information, the publisher.
• Government allies. Get people in government on your side to
back you up. Get to know the state attorney general and others.
• Shallow but effective. Symbols of authority are effective: titles,
clothing, automobiles. Even height conveys authority.
6. Scarcity
• For a limited time only. What you are offering is limited. “I don’t
have time to wait until next week for you to check with the
attorneys on this. My deadline is in six hours. Either I get the
information or I’m going to have to write a story for tomorrow
morning’s paper explaining that your agency is withholding it. I
would hate for you all to look like you are hiding something and are
bad officials when I know you aren’t. The public will appreciate it.”
- 14 -

Handout: Sunshine laws background
By Charles Davis and Joel Campbell

No matter where you live, there are some key points to be made about
public meetings and records laws.
1. Government meetings and records are presumed open.
Here’s an example from an Iowa statute, but all states have similar
language: “This chapter seeks to assure, through a requirement of
open meetings of governmental bodies, that the basis and rationale of
governmental decisions, as well as those decisions themselves, are
easily accessible to the people. Ambiguity in the construction of
this chapter should be resolved in favor of openness.” (Iowa
Code 21.1)
2. Access laws are written for the benefit of the public.
This means that part of our duty is to convince the public of the
importance of these laws – and the best way to do that is to
demonstrate them in action!
3. The laws provide a good framework for managing public
business.
a. If officials follow the laws routinely they’ll be better prepared to
deal with public scrutiny when crises arise.
b. While the laws allow government officials discretion to close
meetings or records under certain circumstances and provides
procedures for doing so, neither law requires a government
body to choose secrecy (though other sections of state laws
Code may require confidentiality). If they do require
confidentiality, again, the key is to make them prove that fact!
Don’t take their word for it!

- 15 -

Handout: Top-10 open meetings red flags
By Joel Campbell

1. Diffuse the open meetings bomb. If a discussion scheduled for a closed
meeting looks like it might violate the law, make a phone call before the
meeting and try to persuade public officials to discuss the agenda item in
question in the open. Some states have FOI hotline attorneys who may be
consulted.
2. “Retreats” should raise a red flag. Just because a public body wants to
meet at the beach or mountains for a retreat doesn’t mean the open
meetings law doesn’t apply.
3. Be careful of attorney-client privilege. Some public bodies try to get
around the open meetings act by claiming attorney-client privilege. Question
the use of such ploys.
4. Challenge “stealth agendas.” If the agenda says minutes, old business,
new business, begin challenging the public body for more information. If the
agenda says the public body is closing the meeting to discuss “personnel” ask
that members go on the record with specific details about meeting closure.
Some states’ laws demand “reasonable specificity” on the agenda.
5. Question boilerplate closures. In some states, the Municipal League has
encouraged city councils to include an “executive session” on their agenda as
a matter or practice whether they really need it or not. Such a practice may
encourage more closed meetings and violates the spirit of most open
meetings laws.
6. Beware or “electronic meetings.” Some states allow meetings to be
conducted over the telephone or via video or audio conference. However,
such meetings usually require that journalists and the public can listen or
watch. Also be aware of the emerging trend to conduct public business via email. Make sure the public bodies you cover aren’t engaged in e-mail
conversations about public business.
7. No votes for “executive sessions.” Laws normally require that a majority
vote be taken to go into closed session. Keep public officials honest and
demand votes be taken.
8. Beware of “work meetings” or “committee of the whole” meetings.
In some places, public bodies hold regular “work sessions,” “committee of
the whole meetings” or “work meetings” before their regular meetings. In
most cases, these are meetings to discuss matters informally and line up
votes. These are still public meetings no matter what they are called.
9. Get the meeting documents. Ask for the same information packets the
members of the board or council receive. These are public documents and
can help you be more thorough and accurate in your reporting.
10. Beware of executive sessions for non-specific times and locations.
Some boards have attempted to approve closed meetings for a non-specific
time and location in the future. In some cases these have been used to bring
in candidates for job interviews. Object strongly to such tactics to get around
open meetings laws.
- 16 -

Handout: FOI resources
Society of Professional Journalists
• Joel Campbell, FOI chair
joelcampbell@byu.edu, 801-422-2125
David Cuillier, FOI vice chair
cuillier@email.arizona.edu, 520-626-9694 (w); 520-229-1466 (h)
• Open Doors publication guide to access, including a long records story idea list
http://www.spj.org/foia.asp
Investigative Reporters and Editors (IRE)
• Keyword searchable morgue of 20,000 investigative stories
• Keyword searchable 2,000 tip sheets
• Hundreds of FOIA requests that have been filed
• Cheap access to dozens of federal databases
www.ire.org (Membership required for full use of site)
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
• Reports and tips regarding access, including a guide to using FOIA and a stateby-state explanation of access laws (“Tapping Officials’ Secrets” publication).
• Online FOIA request letter generator (doesn’t apply to state records laws)
www.rcfp.org
Student Press Law Center online request letter generator
• Online state records request letter generator
www.splc.org
Coalition of Journalists for Open Government
• Tracks issues regarding access issues
http://www.cjog.net/
Citizen Access Project
• State-by-state comparison and ratings of access laws
http://www.citizenaccess.org/
National Freedom of Information Coalition
http://www.nfoic.org/ Also, see http://www.missouri.edu/~foiwww/
Arizona access resources
• Tapping Officials’ Secrets for Arizona (Reporters Committee)
http://www.rcfp.org/ogg/index.php?op=browse&state=AZ
• Arizona ombudsman for public records and meetings (Elizabeth Hill)
www.azoca.gov, 602-285-9136 x32 or 800-872-2879, ehill@azoca.gov.
• Arizona Reporter’s Handbook on Media Law by Dan Barr
• Arizona Newspapers Association
http://www.ananews.com/
• University of Arizona Department of Journalism – David Cuillier
cuillier@email.arizona.edu, 520-626-9694 (w); 520-229-1466 (h)
• Arizona public records audit
http://www.azstarnet.com/publicrecords/
- 17 -

