Using data to investigate abusive teachers
Chris Davis and Matthew Doig
IRE 2007
Sarasota Herald-Tribune
Series link:
www.heraldtribune.com/apps/pbcs.dll/section?CATEGORY=MULTIMEDIA0202

How to start
Case tracking systems often can provide electronically the basic information you need to
analyze complaints against teachers and how they are handled. In some states, data may
be kept by the state department of education or the agency in charge of teacher
certification. School districts may also maintain their own databases to track complaints
against and punishment of teachers.

What you can do
Getting the data allows you to look at all sorts of trends. Among them:
Are female or male teachers punished more harshly? * Are punishments appropriate for
the crime? * What percentage of cases is actually prosecuted? * Which school districts do
a better job reporting cases to the state?

Small or big?
Getting a database of teacher misconduct cases doesn’t have to turn into a huge project.
You might use it analyze misconduct cases in one county or to background a teacher who
gets accused of abuse in your local school district. This can be especially useful if you
can get information on cases that did not lead to punishment (those cases are not usually
advertised even in states that post actions against teachers on the Web.)
Teachers who get caught often have a history of complaints. Just getting a database of
allegations from your local school district could lead to stories about repeat offenders.

Data pitfalls
Public records laws vary by state. In some states, action against teaching certificates is
not widely available. In others, information becomes public at certain stages in a case. In
Florida, all cases files become public once state officials determine if “probable cause”
exists to pursue action against a teacher’s certificate.
Be aware that case tracking systems are not necessarily built for the kind of analysis you
will want to do. Key will be how well agencies categorize the type of allegation in each
case. In Florida, hundreds of cases that involved sexual harassment and assault were put
in a generic category “inappropriate behavior” with a wide variety of other misconduct.

Building your own database
Because of the limitations in Florida’s database, we chose to build our own using source
documents on more than 3,000 cases against teachers. It’s a time consuming task, but it
guaranteed us the information we wanted for analysis.

Look for summary documents that will provide the information you need. If you start
asking for entire investigative files, your copying fees and redaction charges will break
the bank quickly. Florida produces three key administrative documents in every teacher
misconduct case. Those documents describe the allegations, the resulting punishment and
included information about the teacher’s school, job and certification number.
If you go this route, a certificate number or social security number is a must. You will
need it to verify a teacher’s identity and ultimately to compare it to payroll or staff data to
see if your abusive teachers still work in your district or state.
Digitize the records. Instead of typing all of our data in, we paid a company a few
thousand dollars to digitize all 30,000 pages. We built an online entry form and then cut
and pasted the information to input it.
Double entry. It’s twice the work, but it made our data that much more reliable.

Save yourself some time
We spent a lot of time looking for abusive teacher anecdotes while we were fighting
public records battles. Some of those efforts paid off. But the best anecdotes ultimately
came from our database, which we used to highlight repeat offenders and egregious
behavior that led to light punishment.

Other things you should know
A certification or staff database is a must if you want to compare teachers who get in
trouble to the current teaching ranks in your state. Make sure both data sets have a
certification number or other unique identifier so you can verify a teacher’s identity in
both.
Get to know how information in misconduct cases flows from the school level to the
district, to state officials and to administrative courts. Often, relatively simple forms exist
that summarize the allegations and punishment at each step. When you start examining
specific cases, screen your examples by requesting these summary files instead of entire
investigative files. You’ll save tons of time and thousands of dollars.
Illustrating a project like this is difficult. When it came to photos, we relied on public
records again to do much of our work for us. In Florida, yearbooks are public record. We
also asked for digital photos kept by the Florida Department of Education for its
employee badges. That gave us mug shots of every employee in the department.
Find out the qualifications of the people investigating teachers. It’s as basic as reviewing
personnel files, but it revealed Florida investigators whose previous jobs included
decorating cakes, selling department store cosmetics and working with college athletes.

