Dawson Ryan Associates
12021 Wilshire Boulevard #846
Los Angeles, CA 90025
Adam322@aol.Com

Adam Dawson
(310 452-4976)

June 8, 2007

Here are some of our favorite books on investigations:

The Cybersleuth’s Guide to the Internet by Carole Levitt, Mark E Rosch; (Eighth Edition) IFL
Press (2006)
Web Search Savvy: Strategies and Shortcuts for Online Research by Barbara Friedman (2004)
Find It Online: The Complete Guide to Internet Research by Alan Schlein; Facts on Demand
Press (2004 Fourth Edition)
The Investigators Little Black Book by Robert Scott; Crime Time Publishing 2002 (Third
Edition)
Investigators Guide to Sources of Information; GAO 1997
Public Trails : A Guide to Public Records in California by Stephen Levine & Barbara
Newcombe; Center for Investigative Reporting (Second Edition) 1996
Financial Investigations: A Financial Approach to Detecting & Resolving Crimes; Internal
revenue Service, Government Printing Office
The Investigative Reporter’s Handbook: A Guide to Documents, Databases and Techniques by
Brant Houston, Len Bruzzese and Steve Weinberg; IRE (2007)
Get the Facts on Anyone by Dennis King; Macmillan (1995)
Where’s What: Sources of Information for Federal Investigators by Harry Murphy; Warner
Books (1976)

Dawson Ryan Associates
12021 Wilshire Boulevard #846
Los Angeles, CA 90025
Adam322@aol.Com

Adam Dawson
(310 452-4976)

June 8, 2007

Private Investigators Share Their Secrets
During the 18 years that I was a newspaper reporter I thought that we were on the front line of
protecting the public’s right to know.
After more than 18 years as a Los Angeles private investigator I now know that what I thought
was the front line was somewhere in the rear. As a Private Investigator I go to war every day to
keep public records public and maintain people’s access to everything from court records to
police reports to EPA records.
We’re out there fighting your fight and many of your colleagues do not seem to care. Anyone
who thinks this fight isn’t serious is in for a few surprises.
In the last 15 years we – reporters and private investigators - have lost access to:
- Postal change of address forms
- the ability to obtain information on any business soliciting from a post office box
- voter registration records
- state motor vehicle records
- police reports accompanying complaints filed in court so there are no details as to what
happened, how much was stolen in the public record
What’s next?
I’m sorry to report that last week California’s State Senate moved to outlaw the use of pretexting.
That means none of us will be able to go undercover to catch crooks the police can’t be bothered
with or don’t have the resources to chase.
Speaking of losing something, in Orange County (California) the county clerk destroys Superior
Court lawsuits a year after they are settled, dismissed or resolved by any method short of trial.
They destroy those files and any depositions or other exhibits. Try proving that candidate for
sheriff was accused of domestic abuse five years ago without those documents.
Although state law allows Orange County to destroy those files it appears that they are the only
county in the State that does it and nobody seems to be interested.

Lest you think this is only a product of those wacky folks in California, an American Bar
Association subcommittee recommended this month that certain criminal records – including
some convictions – be sealed and available only to the government.
I’m not sure about any of you but I’m not certain that’s an avenue I want to go down.
Some states are starting to restrict access to UCC filings because they want to remove certain
identifiers so that we can’t tell if that John Smith with the business loan is the same one you are
investigating.
It is the same story in County Recorder’s offices.
All of this in the name of privacy or the fear of identity thieves.
I’m not certain the people who whip-up the “privacy police” really understand the consequences
of their actions because once we – the media and licensed investigators – lose the right to access
this information we’ll never get it back. It doesn’t work that way.
Of course if the press, the public and yes, private investigators, don’t have access to these things
who will? Just the government. The police. I guess for some people that’s OK.

