Reporting to Editing
Or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Meetings
By Joe Tanfani
Philadelphia Inquirer
Managing the transition
--Ok, in truth, you’ll still hate going to meetings. But I find it’s helpful to keep in mind
that the business at its heart is really about great reporters doing their jobs. So as an
editor, your real mission is to help your reporters operate at their highest level of
engagement, confidence and skill.
-The hardest thing for me was not losing the byline but in missing the work itself, the
thrill of nailing the key interview, or the fun of running around knocking on doors. One
solution is to keep your hand in when you can. But at least: try to get out. Keep in touch
with your sources. See them for lunch. Try to sniff the air once in a while.
- Learn to give up some control over the details of how the reporting is done -- such
issues as when the time is right to approach the subject of the piece, or strategies for
working the sources. Nothing’s worse than a micromanaging editor who hasn’t gotten
comfortable with the idea that he or she can’t do all the interviews and decide each and
every reporting move. At the same time, don’t abdicate. If things are going off track,
you’ve got to speak up.
-It can feel a little awkward to make the transition from reporting colleague and drinking
buddy to boss, particularly when you have to make the calls that you don’t think the
sourcing is good enough, or the lead doesn’t work, or, frankly, that they have to suck it
up and take on an unpleasant assignment for the good of the paper. But you’ll win your
colleagues’ respect if you are helping push them to do great work, and when they see
you’re able to effectively advocate for their stories. And it doesn’t hurt when you’re
humble enough to admit your rookie screwups.
Managing the project
- When considering which projects to take on, always make a clear-eyed assessment of
the potential, and the pitfalls. What’s the lead say on the dream story? What’s the lead on
the fallback story? What do we need to prove to get there? What records exist that might
help us, and how do we get them? What’s a good guess as to how much time it will take?
How original is this story? If it’s been done before: how can we do it better, or find some
new facet of the subject to explore? Our sources: what’s their motivation? Have we done
the right research on them, to help assess their credibility?
-For reporters who haven’t done long-form stuff before, you’ll often have to pitch in and
help with the organization. Encourage reporters to track their information and sources
with a spreadsheet, to develop a filing system that works for them. In a long story with a
lot of moving parts, I often suggest that reporters organize their stuff into a timeline: it

helps keep everything clear and very often helps you discover connections within the
material that you’d otherwise miss.
-Help keep the focus on the main theme. Reporters being the novelty-fixated creatures
that they are, sometimes they will wander off the main tributary of the project. Gently
steer them back. You will have to be the one to keep a clear idea of your destination and
how you will get there
-At some point when the reporting is far enough along, it’s often good to ask for a story
memo – not even really a story draft, but just a summary of all the evidence gathered thus
far. That is a good way to sniff out weaknesses in the reporting.
- Once reporters are ready to focus on the main text, resist the urge to do the writing
yourself. Push them to improve in their own voice. Sometimes, when the story flow is
wrong, you might outline a new structure and allow them to do the rewrite. On deadline,
you often don’t have that luxury, of course.
-Whatever you do, don’t let your people spend 90 percent of their time reporting, and
then write in a rush. Get drafts early. Press for more detail on the anecdotes, to make your
examples come alive. Sound out the best narrative editor at your paper for advice. Sweat
the writing until the stories sing.
Managing your reporters
-Make time to check in with your reporters every day. This seems obvious: all reporters
need time to talk out stories, but it’s amazing how this essential time can get squeezed
out. Don’t get so swept up in meetings or administrative work or email that you’re not
serving as a good sounding board.
-Sometimes it’s good for everyone’s mental health, reporters and editors alike, to take a
break in the middle of a long project to crank out a shorter-term story. I’ve found it can
really help blow out the cobwebs.
-Sourcing: Another key role for the line editor on investigative work is to vet the
sourcing. Generally, I don’t think reporters should be permitted to use sources that can’t
be identified to their editors. Sometimes in this new legal environment, that can be tricky,
but even when they can’t share the name, you should push reporters to figure out how
close the sources are to the subject, and how authoritative is the sources’ knowledge. If
the sourcing feels thin to you, trust your gut. It’s a good sign that you probably need to do
more reporting.
-Always be looking for opportunities to leverage your assets and work with other parts of
the paper. Consider teaming your grittiest junkyard dog with your sweetest writer, or a
young and promising beat reporter with a seasoned investigator.
-Prioritize. Protect your staff. As a reporter, one thing I absolutely valued from editors
was a willingness to make the tough decisions about what NOT to cover. This can be
painful when you’re the editor making the calls that result in good stories, even great

stories, going undone or not being done as well. But there’s no way to do top-level
investigative work without letting some things go.
-In every long effort, there are always tough moments when reporters wake up at 3 a.m.
and decide their whole story is stupid or wrong – or they simply can’t stand to look at it
and need to be revved up again. It’s vital that you are able to pull your reporters out of
that funk, keep them believing. One thing I’ve learned is that it’s possible to have those
moments as an editor, too, when you think dark thoughts like: “Why did I let them sell
me on this?” or “Am I going to have to go out on the interviews myself, or what?” But
when they happen, it’s a really good idea to keep them to yourself.
Managing your bosses (and the rest of the newsroom)
-As a reporter, I used to say, only half joking: No good can come out of a conversation
with a senior editor. Obviously I figured out pretty quickly that I had to learn a new
approach when I took over the I-team.
– Learn how to get support for your work throughout the newsroom - very important for
not only your own effectiveness, but your reporters’ well being. This can be painful for
reporters. One thing I loved about reporting was that your job has almost nothing to do
with saying the right things at meetings. But if you’re not an effective salesman for your
reporters’ work, your reporters will lose heart and the work itself will suffer, since you
won’t have the space and the play you need to make an impact.
-It’s necessary of course to get buy-in from the top editors. But it’s every bit as important
to make friends with the key people who you need to help deliver the goods: The photo
assignment editor. The graphics people. The sharp layout guru. Maybe most important is
the editor who holds the key to the prime real-estate: 1A Sunday. Try to get these people
involved and enthusiastic about your project. Solicit them for ideas on presentation and
even how to stage the stories early on. Show drafts when they’re in good shape (but NOT
before…you don’t want them to get a misimpression that you have a dull project from an
early draft with a bad lead.)
-Don’t become a separate island walled off from the rest of the newsroom. It’s important
that you, as editor, as well as your investigative reporters, be considered a resource for
the entire newspaper – on how to frame records requests, in figuring out what documents
could help a story, in suggestions in working sources or in helping to talk beat reporters
through a difficult story.
-It’s also important to let people know how that they won’t lose ownership of a tip if they
bring it to you. One way to approach it is to make it their option: they can do the tip
themselves, if they choose; they can do it with help; or they can more or less surrender it.
It’s their call.

