TIPSHEET
Getting the most mileage out of your broadcast investigation
2007 IRE Conference, June 8-11
Phoenix
David McKie
CBC News Investigations
1-613-288-6523 (office)
1-613-290-7380 (cell)
David_mckie@cbc.ca
THE SUBJECT MAT TER (page two of PowerPoint)
-choose a topic that has important public policy implications. Examples include, drug safety, food
safety, workplace safety
-matters of public policy that have the greatest impact:
In developing the idea, “the watchword for government copy is substance over process, advises Carl
Sessions Stepp. “ The good stories stress the impact of government action or inaction on real people
in real life. Often, government’s impact is formidable. Here is a starter list of things government
does or decides. Whose streets get plowed during a snowstorm? How fast do police respond to
emergencies? How thoroughly are meat plants inspected? How safe are your savings? Who can own a
gun, control air traffic, perform heart surgery, manufacture drugs, use lasers on your eyes? What
standards are enforced for child-safety seats, airplane engines, home electrical wiring, natural gas
pipelines, heart pacemakers, school bus brakes? Who oversees car dealers, nursing homes, nuclear
power plants, street food vendors, foster parents? If a hurricane hits your town, who arrives for help?
If you are marooned at sea, who rescues you? If you get imprisoned in a foreign country, who visits?
If you work in a coal mine, clash with a harassing supervisor, or work with toxic chemicals, who
enforces the rules? If you lose your job, who supplies benefits?
“Government news coverage may be boring, but government is not. The challenge: Show the
impact of your story.” 1
THE METHODOLOGY (page two)
-develop a document and data state of mind by casting your net as widely as possible for the greatest
number of records. Examples: databases, minutes of meetings, coroners’ reports, audits, reports,
briefing notes
-hand-in-hand with this state of mind is the necessity to identify the players: is there a regulator;
what government department; advocates; victims; winners; losers..
-plan ahead and give yourself enough time to file access-to-information or freedom-of-information
requests, build contacts and find characters for your stories. The depth of the information must be
able to support many programs and follow-ups
-try to let the data drive your story: For instance, in the first round of our investigations into adverse
drug reactions, we discovered that the number of serious side effects involving kids being reported to
Health Canada between 1997 and 2003 had tripled. The finding itself became the main story, with
the opening day focusing on three little girls: one who died, the second who was born with serious
birth defects and the third who had become so dangerous after being drugged up on anti-psychotics
that she had to be removed from her parents home (http://www.cbc.ca/news/adr/personal/). On
subsequent days, we followed up with stories of particular drugs such as anti-depressants and the acne
drug Accutane. We told the story of a Democrat Congressman whose son committed suicide while on
Accutane. And we explored the search for solutions on both sides of the border
-Each set of stories brought people back to our web site, kept the story alive and allowed us to
develop sources. For instance, the second part of our workplace safety series – Out of Sync –
produced a source within the Ontario Ministry of Labour who contacted us through our web site

-use E-journalism (educate, engage and empower) and the web to enhance your stories and reach a
larger audience for a longer period of time….
-We were also able to give our workplace safety stories more life by focusing on numbers for the
provinces and the industries that were the most significant for them: oil and gas in Alberta,
manufacturing in Quebec; ferry workers in Nova Scotia
STORY LINES (page 4)
-extensive data also allows for greater accountability. The fact that a department may keep poor
data on workplace inspections or adverse drug reactions or water quality can become an important
story with officials and politicians being held accountable
-but the accountability doesn’t always stop with the government department. In our adverse drug
reaction series, we questioned physicians about the need to increase the reporting of side effects; the
need for electronic medical records that would allow them to keep track of serious side effects in
certain patients (In the case of 15-year-old Vanessa Young whose death was linked to the stomach
drug, Prepulsid, it took her family physician three weeks to have his secretary go through the paper
files in his office to find out if any other patients were also on the drug)
WHICH STORIES GO FIRST? (page six)
-in our adverse drug reaction series, we chose to lead with kids over seniors based on the arguable
belief that people care more about kids than they do seniors. The kids stories in Faint Warning also
allowed us to explore other themes such as the degree to which drugs are not tested in kids and the
struggles that the FDA and Health Canada endured to ensure that such testing could be carried out
-we were also able explore a prescribing phenomenon called “off-label” prescribing where doctors are
allowed to give drugs to patients to cure ailments they were never intended to treat. Since few drugs
are tested in kids, most of the drugs such as anti-psychotics, anti-depressants, and even Viagra, are
prescribed off-label.
-with seniors we examined the use of anti-psychotics in nursing homes. The same week our series
aired, the FDA issued black box warnings warning doctors not to prescribe anti-psychotics to seniors
to control dementia. Health Canada eventually followed suite
-In our first workplace safety series, Dying for a Job, we examined the phenomenon of violence
suffered by workers in the health care industry. According to our analysis of the workplace safety
data obtained from the provincial workplace safety insurance boards, workers in the health care
industry were 5 to 12 times more likely to file a claim for violence than workers in any other
industrial sector, including those that encompass the police. Our findings resonated, and were echoed
in two studies ( one by Statistics Canada and the other by an Ottawa-based think tank)
-in choosing the time to run Dying for a Job, we chose the week of April 28, which is the national
day of mourning for workplace accidents and deaths. On the subsequent anniversary, we did a followup based on a tip that we received from a source within the Ontario Ministry of Labour
GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THE WEB (page 7)
-We uploaded a searchable version of Health Canada’s adverse drug reaction database online. The fact
helped give Faint Warning the impact that it had
-For our workplace safety stories, we created charts and graphs for our findings and independent
stories that gave much more background that would have been possible on the air
BUILDING THE TEAM (page nine)
-having a broad base of information buttressed by data allows you to pick and choose the best stories
for broadcast
-find a producer who understands and can help sell your stories – and the follow-ups -- to the bosses
-include your online colleagues from day one and allow them the time to find ways to give the stories
value through special features that can use the material doesn’t make it into your stories: features
could include, slide shows; discussions with experts; discussions among participants;

1

Carl Sessions Stepp, Writing as Craft and Magic: second edition (Oxford University Press, 2007), 125

