Scott A. Zamost
Investigative Producer
WTVJ-TV/NBC 6
scott.zamost@nbc.com
(954) 622-6308

The Time Squeeze: Getting On Air and Getting There Fast
STRONG FOCUS
A strong focus is the key to tighter, shorter investigations. Zero in on what is really
important and choose the strongest character or characters for the story. A three or 3 -minute
piece forces you to make hard choices when you are used to airing stories double that length.
What is the most important point and what is secondary?
MULTI-PARTS
If there are distinct elements, pitch multi-part stories. We divided “Citizenship For
Sale” into laying out the scheme in part one, then in part two revealed the reaction of the
Indian tribe after we traveled to North Dakota to track down the chief. In this case, we thought
two parts worked. Of course, each part must stand on its own so part two included a brief
reiteration of our findings. Another technique is to produce a shorter piece for the late news,
then air the full piece in an early newscast the next day.
FORESHADOWING
In a longer investigation, it helps to use the foreshadowing technique. Take the first 30
seconds to tell the viewer what to expect with some teaser quotes. But in a slimmed down
version, you need to get to the point right away. For example, we produced two versions of
“A Matter of Security,” our investigation into charges of unmanned posts and overbilling in
Miami-Dade by Wackenhut. The shorter version eliminated foreshadowing and other
elements, but the long version kept it, making it easier to follow.
LIMIT THE CHARACTERS, BUT NOT THE RESEARCH
One of the biggest challenges in a tight investigation is character development. After
all, how well can you really get to know someone’s story in three minutes? Tighter means
telling the story with fewer main characters, and may even mean just one. This may work to
your advantage with a more focused piece, but you really have to choose a strong, compelling
character.
You know you’ll have to limit the number and length of sound bites, but the depth of
the research should remain the same whether it’s a three-minute or six-minute investigation.
SAVE IT FOR THE FOLLOW-UPS
We sometimes shoot more than we know we’ll include in the original story. But we
also know that we’ll probably use that interview in a follow-up. While we make hard choices
in the actual on-camera interviews, we plan a series of short follow-ups as warranted. That
keeps the story on the air.

