Digging deeper into sports stories - on and off the court
Christine Willmsen
Seattle Times investigative reporter
cwillmsen@seattletimes.com
206-464-3261
Public Records: There are a number of public records that can put you on the trail of a
great in-depth sports story. Here are some examples of places to find documents that can
lead you on the right track.
1. Booster clubs and other sports associations are nonprofit organizations that file 990 tax returns
with the federal government. These public records contain data on expenditures and revenues.
Search on GuideStar at www.guidestar.org for the 990s or ask the club for its reports.
2. Check criminal and civil records of coaches, administrators and players. This includes property
records, arrests, convictions, traffic violations, lawsuits, liens and more.
3. State high school athletic associations can hold valuable information. Depending on the state
you can get documents regarding recruiting violations, residency issues and the penalties for
players and teams. They also conduct open meetings that you can attend.
4. Request any complaints lodged against a sports program at the high school or college level.
You can determine who and how the school or university investigated the complaint and the
results of it. Keep in mind a district or college may deny you records based on the Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). They may have a right to redact the students’
names but not to deny you the documents.
5. Ask for personnel and disciplinary records for the athletic department staff, specifically the
coaches, assistants and volunteers. Also make this request to any previous school districts or
colleges so you can review any potential misconduct at previous places of employment. Some
coaches come from private schools and leagues so be willing to talk to former players on the
teams and their parents as well as the competing coaches.
6. Make requests periodically for correspondence from universities between the athletic
department and the NCAA or whatever governing body oversees them.
7. If you’re looking into college recruiting, ask for the sports department’s detailed expense
reports to find out where they are traveling, what they are eating and who they are entertaining.
Also pay attention to foreign athletes in high schools and colleges, specifically how they came to
the United States, where they are living and who first contacted them.
8. Keep rosters of students playing sports during previous seasons. They are valuable in tracking
players who move from team to team and contacting past players.

