Making CAR stories sing (or numbers are dull, people are not)
Amy Pyle, Projects and Investigations Editor
The Sacramento Bee
apyle@sacbee.com (916) 321-1050

2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix

Choosing the right topics (think people)
•
•

•

Use data runs not just for the macro (overarching trends and phenomena) but
also the micro – pinpointing individuals who reflect or illustrate your data.
Go out and find those people. Use them to develop narrative lines for your story,
not just snapshot examples. This gives you the “why?” and “how?” (Example:
Story on a spike in unsolved homicides in one Sacramento neighborhood, where
the increase was attributed – by victims’ families and cops alike – to a rise in
gang rivalries and the resulting unwillingness of witnesses to come forward.)
Back it up with documents and experts. This could give you the smoking gun
(who’s responsible) or evidence to support your wider premise, preferably
discovered through your interviews with experts and/or victims (OK, this can only
marginally be defined as “people,” but it’s still colorful). Where documents are
relevant enough, use snippets as part of graphics in the paper and hyperlink to full
documents on the Web. (See: http://www.sacbee.com/797/story/114035.html, an
investigation of paramedics and EMTs with criminal pasts, faked training and
substance abuse problems, with hyperlinks as well as side links to short vignettes
built from documents, which also ran in the paper.)

Present them in interesting ways (think people)
•

Try alternative storytelling techniques (Example: Story on spike in youth
suicides, where an introduction summed up the numbers, interlacing them with
people, then four very human vignettes illustrated aspects of the trend.)
• Use multiple platforms for delivering information – keep the in-paper graphics
simpler, put the deeper work on the Web (www.sacbee.com/static/live/news/ada
an interactive map in an investigation of the prolific activity of Americans with
Disabilities Act litigators. The paper version showed suits filed by two local
attorneys in a central area of the city; the online version showed all of their suits.)
• Focus in on one corner of the data – graphics can show full data run or just that
corner, or both, but story delves deeply into a personal story or narrative.
(Example: Sidebar to investigation of abuse of Latino forest workers, The
Pineros: Men of the Pines, focused on van crashes, but told it through one
horrific crash, in Maine; an online graphic included full statistics.)

Some other alternative reporting approaches (yeah, more people):
•
•

Find the people first, then run data to illustrate where they fall in the spectrum –
or otherwise tailor the runs to the story you want to tell
Build your own databases to figure things out that people want to know (In
“Unequal Opportunity” we built a database to track school inequities by sending
a team of reporters out to every high school in our region to count microscopes
and basketball courts, read history texts, flush toilets, etc.)

