Presenting projects: From graphics to the Web*
*Or how to make your visual partners less homicidal
Amy Pyle, Projects and Investigations Editor
The Sacramento Bee
apyle@sacbee.com (916) 321-1050

2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix

Investigative findings and visual potential often have an inverse relationship
– the better the findings, the weaker the visuals. So how to avoid a sea of
gray?
For starters, teamwork: everyone shares responsibility for the
presentation. Photographers and reporters are a natural team, but add on the
graphic artists, the designer/layout person and the Web designer. They are
present and invested at the first project meeting and continue to sweat the
details with you all the way through proofing the pages and Web elements.
1) Tough: Abuse of Latino forest workers who thin and plant, often on
public land.
Visual challenge: Gripping photos (yay!) with competition from important but complex
chartable information (uh-oh).
Solution: Let the photos win – mostly; put charts in lesser positions (in this case on black
and white pages, reserving color positions for photos); get creative with graphic elements
on the Web, including links to primary source documents. (www.sacbee.com/pineros)

2) Tougher: Proliferation of Americans with Disabilities Act lawsuits.
Visual challenge: Perpetrators are attorneys; victims are business people (and
taxpayers)…Dull and duller.
Solution: Present findings in multiple ways – profile boxes on the state’s most prolific
attorneys; snippets of e-mails and documents, used in paper graphics and as links on the
Web; map the problem, locating suits filed by the two busiest local attorneys and make
that map interactive on the Web; diagram solutions by showing a hypothetical business
and highlighting conflicts between state and federal disability law – conflicts at the core
of many of the lawsuits. (www.sacbee.com/ADA)

3) Toughest: Paramedics and EMTs with criminal pasts and substance
abuse problems.
Visual challenge: Plenty of graphics but few photos (a couple of booking mugs, one
photo spread on a paramedic caught and sent to prison and generic ambulance shots.
Solution: Scattered mug shots in profiles of various cases gleaned from documents, info
graphic showing how morphine intended for patients can be stolen without detection;
hyperlinks to key documents online. (www.sacbee.com/projects - scroll to paramedics)

