www.farmsubsidy.org
Winner of the IRE Freedom of Information award 2006.
By Brigitte Alfter (brig@mail.dk) and Nils Mulvad (nils.mulvad@kaasogmulvad.dk)

The project:
Subsidies paid to farmers and others under the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy amount to
approximately 55 billion a year, more than 40% of European Union’s entire annual budget, or around 100
a year for each EU citizen. Farmsubsidy.org is a project coordinated by EU Transparency, a non-profit
organisation in the UK and Kaas & Mulvad, a data consultancy in Denmark. The aim is to obtain detailed
data relating to payments and recipients of farm subsidies in every EU member state and make this data
available in a way that is useful to European citizens. The project has brought together journalists,
analysts and campaigners in 15 countries.

Supporters
EU Transparency and DICAR (Danish International Center for Analytical Reporting), which founded
farmsubsidy.org, have received funding for their farm subsidy transparency work from the following
sources: William and Flora Hewlett Foundation ($276,000), the Open Society Foundation (22,800) and the
European Social Fund (60,000). In addition, the various organisations and individuals involved in the
project have their own sources of funding. Now we got a new, big funding from William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation. We are applying for more funding.

Network coordinators
The farmsubsidy.org network is coordinated by Nils Mulvad, Jack Thurston and Brigitte Alfter. Status on
networking: After two years with a loose network before 2005 and two years with a more coordinated
network, we are currently in a phase, when networking needs more attention and communication tools
like a password protected common blog are introduced.

Publishing big datasets
The quality and structure of farmsubsidy data differs very much from country to country. We fight to get
data out in a quality where it actually is possible to follow amounts to a single recipient from different
countries, schemes and years. Then we also build data in the same structure for online search to make it
more easy to people (including journalists) to find information on recipients.

Status on data:
Partly or good data from 18 countries: 2004: Denmark. 2005: UK, The Netherland, Sweden, Estonia – some
in Belgium and Spain. 2006: Czech, Slovenia, Portugal, France, Slovakia, Lithuania, Latvia, Finland, Italy,
Hungary. 2007: Ireland. We run cases in France, Poland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Hungary and
against the commission. Austria has denied. No initiative yet: Malta, Cyprus and Luxembourg. 2007:
Bulgaria and Romania join initiative.
The EU-Commission has decided to open for data on CAP-recipients in 2009. Other subsidies will be
opened in 2008. But the quality of information seems to become rather poor. We work for getting high
quality data.
From Sweden we in April 2007 got a copy of the files on recipients and payments they hand over to the
EU-Commission. The data are very detailed and provide us with better possibility to analyze. We try to use
this for getting same kind of data from other countries.

Tasks:
Conduct analysis, make stories and run cases for access. Maintain and develop website. Work for better
regulations of formats of data in 2009. Putting up a transparency-index defining the important data we
need and measure all the countries according to that index. Be very clear on where they don’t live up to
standards.

Freedom of information
This project brings the US way of working professionally for data to Europe – especially to countries, which
have not tried it before or have a strong opposition against transparency like Germany, Spain, Italy,
Hungary etc. We’re building experiences and recommendations into the farmsubsidy-website.

Your possibilities:
This is difficult to do on your own. Find partners for stories on American investors, farm-billconsequences, WTO-negotiations or how farm subsidies to the developed world have an impact in
developing countries like the Dominicanian republic.

