1

CBC NEWS INVESTIGATION - DYING FOR A JOB
The series was entitled, Dying for a Job The series ran from April 23
to April 29
http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/workplace-safety/dyingforajob.html

The Idea
Five years ago when we began wondering about the state of workplaces
after yet another April 28 national day of mourning for workers who
died on the job had come and gone.
Media outlets usually mark the day, using the same anecdotes from
workers and family members of workers who had either been killed on the
job or seriously injured.
While the coverage was adequate, it had failed to push the issue of
workplace deaths and injuries in new directions necessary to encourage
a new dialogue. But clearly new trends seemed to be emerging.
Entry point – Some workplace safety insurance boards were advertising
that workplaces are safer.
AHA moment: An increase of feel good ads?? Usually some PR person’s
idea masking something else. Workplace safety insurance boards pointed
to the declining number of accepted accident claims as proof that their
advertising campaigns and advocacy initiatives with employers were
rendering Canadian workplaces safer.
Does this make sense? Counter point
At the same time we notice that more ads warning of danger to young
people. This growing number of ads were urging workers in certain
sectors to be careful.
Some of these campaigns focused on young workers, and forestry workers.
The latter was experiencing a higher-than-usual number of deaths in
B.C. But yet we kept on hearing from certain classes of workers about
problems they were having dealing with issues such as strains and
violence. We wanted to take the stories beyond the anecdote to find out
if these specific concerns about workplace safety were indicative of
any trends. And we were also interested in determining whether the
claims by the workplace safety boards of safer work environments could
be backed up by any statistics.

We decide to investigate by negotiating for data from all across the
country, which had never been done before leading to an exclusive
analysis of workplace safety trends.
Our analysis of death and serious injury statistics demonstrated that
this claim that workplaces are safer is dubious at best, especially for
certain occupations.
We also examined coroners records for workplace deaths as well as
census data and general statistics on workers and safety issues.
Findings - The number of workplace deaths had increased by about seven
per cent from 1993 to 2004.

2
And there seemed to be no effort on part of the provincial governments
to learn lessons from coroners’ juries over the past 20 years or so.
The recommendations, everything from increased training to better
safety controls on dangerous equipment, remain tucked away, and were
not shared from jurisdiction to jurisdiction
Result – some workplaces are not getting safer even when workers are
paying with their health or even their lives.
Serious accidents - has failed to level off and have actually increased
for certain industrial classifications such as health care workers.
Violence on the job:
Our major findings focused on health care workers, strains of all
kinds, and the inability of provinces to learn lessons from coroners’
jury recommendations, and the lingering effects of exposure to asbestos
in the workplace.
a) According to the data, we determined that workers in the health care
and social services industry (workplace insurance boards categorize
workplaces into “industrial sectors”), were anywhere from six to 12
times more likely to file claims related to violence on the job, mainly
from patients. This rate is significantly higher than workers in any
other industrial sector including police and security.
Strains
As well, strains of all kinds continue to be problematic, resulting in
more than half of the claims paid out by workplace safety insurance
boards, and costing the Canadian economy billions of dollars in lost
productivity.
b) More than half of all claims accepted by the all the boards,
excluding, the Yukon and Saskatchewan, were for strains of all kinds.
Asbestos
Death and injury claims are increasing in certain jurisdictions – this
despite reductions in Asbestos mining, and the enforcement of asbestos
abatement programs,
For example, in Quebec there were nearly 300 fatalities reported in the
10 years from 1994 to 2003 from Asbestosis or Mesothelioma. During the
same period Alberta reported 120 deaths.
Coroners juries into workplace deaths
Most provinces conduct coroners’ investigations into workplace deaths,
but yet those recommendations are seldom shared among jurisdictions;
this, at a time when the workplace deaths continue to be a problem. How
many of those deaths could have been avoided had more of these
recommendations been followed? That is a question we continue to
ponder.

3
Tips and observations as you go along
More AHA moments. How could it be that the number of lost days was
going down, when we were discovering the injury rates was going up??
Statistics only told part of the story. In every province there is a
significant degree of under-reporting.
Why??
The high cost of premiums, and pressure on employees to return (on
“modified work plans”) to work and refrain from filing a claim.
This allowed the governments to say that fewer days were being lost –
and imply that things are getting better.
And, finally, over the years due to cuts in workplace inspectors,
employers are being urged more and more to police themselves. Self
reporting leads to issues.

1. Major types of documents, data used and FOI used
Websites of the workplace safety boards extensively to view the
statistics they had been posting on injuries in general and read what
the boards had to say about those stats.
To get beyond the summary tables, we had needed to access to the more
detailed data sets that tracked instances
Nature of injury,
Body part injured,
The number of days off the job
Jurisdictional data
Though the national association called the Association of Workers’
Compensation Boards of Canada kept statistics culled from the
provincial boards to keep track of trends such as injury rates, it
denied us the data.
This denial forced us to go to each jurisdiction for its data.
(In the US you won’t have this difficulty.)
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/
Coroners records
As well, we began building a national database that tracks the
recommendations of coroners’ juries into work-related deaths, and
worked with a group of volunteers with the Toronto-based Workers'
Health and Safety Legal Services Clinic. The legal clinic’s database is
a smaller version of the one that we built, in that it only focuses on
coroners’ reports in Ontario from 1986 to the present.
Statistics
We also used the workplace statistics from Statistics Canada, and
employed federal and provincial access-to-information and freedom-ofinformation laws, respectively, to ferret out concerns that bureaucrats
had about workplace safety. For instance, we uncovered a memo from the
Ontario Labour Minister’s briefing book that lamented the fact that the

4
province had yet to enact a regulation to deal with violence after a
coroner’s jury in the spring of 2000 recommended just that after a
worker at OC Transpo shot four of his colleagues and injured two others
before turning the gun on himself on April 6, 1999.
Human sources
We used experts in workplace safety to help put our results into
perspective. We also ran our results by Workplace B.C.’s director of
corporate planning and development, as well as officials with the
boards across the country. We spoke to injured workers, their unions,
and labour lawyers.
Choosing compelling narratives draws in your audience/readers.
Statistics are about people not numbers.
Choose multiple angles from your data to allow more
partners/reporters/programs to participate in your series.
This includes the web producers who need exclusive angles. Increase
impact.
Results
Precipitated a national debate about workplace safety in Canada, and
worked with the Toronto-based Workers' Health and Safety Legal Services
Clinic to build a database that will help lawyers and members of the
public in Ontario conduct searches to find out about certain types of
deaths..
Our findings about health care workers also made headlines in media
outlets
And our findings were also reflected in two major studies conducted
since our work went to air.
1/In its study entitled Five Deaths a Day: Workplace Fatalities in
Canada, 1993-2005, (http://www.csls.ca/reports/csls2006-04.pdf) the
Ottawa-based Centre for the Study of Living Standards, concluded that
the rising numbers of workplace deaths were still a problem in Canada,
and that the number of people dying due to exposure to asbestos had yet
to reach its peak. These are two major conclusions we reached in Dying
for a Job.
2/Statistics Canada, in conjunction with the Canadian Institute for
Health Information and Health Canada, conducted a survey (the 2005
National Survey of the Work and Health of Nurses) of some 19-thousand
nurses to determine the problems they were experiencing on the job
(http://www.statcan.ca/Daily/English/061211/d061211b.htm). About a
third of the nurses surveyed reported that they had high levels of
stress, and more often than not, that stress was related to the
violence and chronic pain they were experiencing. Over one-quarter of
nurses who provide direct care reported that a patient had physically
assaulted them in the previous year the survey was conducted. And in
the previous 12 months, more than one in three nurses experienced pain
serious enough to prevent them from carrying out their normal functions
every day. As was the case with the study conducted by the Centre for
the Study of Living Standards, these findings reflected what we had
discovered in Dying for a Job: that nurses are part of a health care
industry that are six to 12 times more likely than workers in any other

5
industry to book of time work due to violence; and that strains of all
kinds result in more than half the claims filed to workplace insurance
boards.

Academics using our data
Some of the leading experts in the field of workplace safety -including Katherine Lippel
(http://www.chairs.gc.ca/web/chairholders/viewprofile_e.asp?id=1915),
who holds the Canada Research Chair on Occupational Health and Safety
Law -- have also shown an interest in our findings and have requested
the chance to review our data. Robert Storey – who is an associate
professor of sociology & labour studies at McMaster University in
Hamilton, Ontario – wants to use some of our workplace safety data for
his classes.
Watch for the tripwires:
APPLES – ORANGES - CODES
After receiving the databases from the workplace safety insurance
boards, we had to find ways to make the tables compatible in order to
come up with the national trends that made headlines.
A big challenge was coding for the industrial groups. We received four
separate methods for identifying the industry amongst the provinces.
For instance, Ontario supplied 47 industry designations, Nova Scotia
gave us 611, and Manitoba had 914.
With effort, we were able to translate some of the province data to the
standard North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) system
used by Statistics Canada and the USA.
This translation allowed us compare claims to published workforce
figures. According to the U.S. Census Bureau: “NAICS was developed
jointly by the U.S., Canada, and Mexico to provide new comparability in
statistics about business activity across North America.” This is what
we were able to achieve by translating the industrial codes into one
classification system. Unfortunately we had to do it. In your case you
can skip this phase!
Violence
We decided to focus on violence as a category for claims because there
had been a high profile shooting at the Ottawa bus company called OC
Transpo. A disgruntled worker walked into one of the depots on the
evening of April 6, 1999, shot and killed four co-workers and injured
two others before turning the gun on himself.
In the spring of 2000, a coroner’s jury recommended that the federal
and provincial governments adopt regulations to deal with workplace
violence.
So we wanted to find out what had happened since. To date, only
Saskatchewan and B.C. have such regulations to deal with workplace
violence.

6

We wanted to see what kinds of workers were filing the highest number
of violence-related claims. In order to determine the rate, we used
workforce numbers from Statistics Canada as the denominator. We figured
out the claims per 1000 workers. To our surprise, health care and
social service industrial sector came out ahead in every jurisdiction.
The violence stats had to be interpreted carefully. The comparison by
industry (sector), showing Healthcare and Social Assistance as most
susceptible to violent incidents, does not reflect individual
occupations. For example, police officers are (not surprisingly) still
ahead of nurses in claims for injuries due to violence (per capita).
So, for the industry comparisons, Healthcare and Social Assistance must
be viewed as a group, which is exactly what we did.
Asbestos
We had similar challenges in determining trends for workplace illnesses
related to asbestos. That information is contained in two “nature of
injury” fields: the first field contains codes; the second a
description. After consulting experts, we used two search terms:
Mesothelioma and Asbestosis to conduct our queries. The most
significant results showed up in Quebec, Ontario and Alberta. In the
latter, the number of injuries increased by 400 per cent between 1994
and 2004, and the number of deaths increased steadily from 1981 to
2003, dropping off significantly in 2004.
In Quebec, which did separate the death and injury stats, the deaths
tailed off by 36 per cent from 1993 to 2003,
But during the same period asbestos-related injuries increased by 762
per cent (from 13 to 112) and the days taken off work increased by 28
per cent.
In that province, we were also able to break it down by sector. It
turned out that most of the deaths and injuries were occurring in
construction, forestry, mining, fishing, oil and gas and manufacturing.
What’s tricky about workplace illnesses due to exposure is that the
claim may be filed well after the initial exposure. Consequently, the
statistics show huge dips, and then spikes, reflecting the fact that in
any given year, there may be a number of workers who have finally
succumbed to their illnesses years and years after their initial
exposure. So it’s difficult to tell the entire story by just examining
the raw statistics.
Strains
Figuring out strains was more straightforward. As was the case with
asbestos, we consulted experts to make sure that we included all the
necessary codes for injuries such as repetitive strain injury and back
strain. Once we had a complete list, we ran the queries on all the
databases. It became one of the biggest headlines in the series and is
likely happening where you live:

Strain injuries of all kinds account for more than half the time-loss claims that
workers file provincial compensation boards. That’s one of the trends to emerge from a

7
CBC analysis of databases we’ve obtained from provincial workmen’s compensation
boards using freedom-of-information laws.
Workers in many occupations are straining their necks, shoulders, backs and arms.
Their pain is forcing them to consult doctors, and take time off work.
We also built a national database of coroner reports into workplace
deaths, and used it as a lookup resource for additional information.
The Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety keeps such as
database online. One can go to their site
(http://www.ccohs.ca/products/databases/fatalityreports.html) and use
the database as a lookup. The problem is, it can only be used in this
way. The only way to find information is with the exact name of the
case. There is no way to run general queries, looking for trends.
WE HAD TO ASK THE CENTRE FOR THE DATABASE BEHIND THE INTERFACE
We received it in Access. Using the form view, and additional coroners
reports from Ontario, we were able to create a database which became a
much more flexible lookup tool, also allowing us to run queries on
certain sectors such as mining, and zero in on recommendations that had
focused on themes such as the need for more training.

This database led to a story about the ways in which data from
coroners’ juries remain on dusty shelves, and unavailable to
governments themselves, workers, unions and safety advocates, all of
whom could learn from the recommendations.
David’s story.
We also discovered that despite repeated pleas for more on-the-job
training, this continued to be a problem that plagued many
workplaces, especially those employing young workers. The sharing of
the recommendations and responses to coroners’ jury recommendations
could save lives, which is one of the reasons that Statistics Canada
has begun collecting such information for the purpose of building a
national database for deaths of all kinds, not from accidents that
are work-related.
These results drove the stories and helped us find the personal
anecdotes. In addition to conferring with the officials mentioned
above, we also spoke to people at the Canadian Centre for Occupational
Health and Safety.

Conclusion:
The work that started off as simple questions about how safe are
Canada’s workplaces ended up becoming two groundbreaking series.
Stats Canada and the Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safey
reflected our results in subsequent studies for the Study of Living
Standards. This demonstrated to us that we were on the right track.

8

We continued our investigation with a series we’ve called “Out of
Synch” which was broadcast in January 2007.
http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/workplace-safety/
We took a look at the ability of the provinces to investigate workplace
accidents, not only in the traditional sectors such as manufacturing,
mining and forestry, but also in non-traditional sectors such as health
care and educational services. We conclude that many inspection regimes
across the country are out of synch with the realities of a changing
workforce that employs fewer people on the factory floor and more
people in offices, behind computers and health care setting such as
hospitals, and more people who work nights and weekends.
To help reach these conclusions, we relied on databases (in many cases
obtained through freedom-of-information requests) from jurisdictions in
Canada and the United States that track workplace investigations. We
used labour force statistics from StatsCan. And negotiated for
databases that track prosecutions. Using a similar methodology employed
in Dying for a Job, we looked for national trends, which we hope will
continue to contribute to the emerging national debate about the true
state of our workplaces and the steps policy makers and politicians
should be taking to bring about needed reforms.

