Skytales:
Military Dispatches
2007 IRE National Conference
Phoenix, Ariz., June 9, 2007
Michael Fabey, Pentagon reporter
Aviation Week & Aerospace Daily
mike_fabey@aviationweek.com ; fabeyships@aol.com
703-553-0102 (Pentagon office) 202-997-0262 (cell)
www.aviationweek.com
Military Mindset
When it comes to using databases and other computer-mined information to
track trends in the military, consider changing IRE to intelligence – instead
of investigative – reporting and editing.
That’s what we’re doing, we’re cribbing together bits and pieces, creating a
mosaic using our own efforts, to paint a picture that’s likely never been
sketched before, or at least not in the way we’re likely to do it. We’re
looking at reports, data and information from different vantage points –
drilling down or stepping back – and stitching together a fabric that we hope
makes sense of it all and puts it into a perspective that readers will find
understandable, valuable and usable.
That’s much the same thing that intelligence officers do in the services and
agencies we cover.
Barbarians at the Gate
Like it or not, that’s how the media is often viewed by officers, grunts and
public affairs officers of the military bases, posts and events that need to be
covered. The general view is that reporters are only after the big and bad
stories.
Often the first thing that new defense or military reporters must prove is they
are more than just headline hounds. They must show public affairs officers
and other “gate-keepers” they want to cover their beats fully and accurately.
That process starts before the first meeting. As with any beat, reporters for
these areas must become instant experts on the post, weapons and whatever
else falls under their watch.
There are several ways to do this. First, try the trade press (Aviation Week,
Aerospace Daily or other publications); business-related wire services with
strong military coverage (Bloomberg or Dow Jones); and of course, books

(the best primers I have found include any of the Tom Clancy non-fiction
books such as Fighter Wing or Carrier – depending on your particular beat –
or Ed Offley’s Pen & Sword, which many consider to be the modern-day
bible for military coverage.
Read. Learn. Study. Then go to see the gatekeepers.
Person first, reporter second
One of the biggest mistakes reporters often make in the first meetings with a
military public affairs officer is to act differently because the other person is
usually wearing a uniform and must be reached by going through armed
guards.
Frankly, it’s just another person. As is the reporter.
It’s important to strike a relationship on that note. Ask about family, musical
tastes or favorite foods. If the setting’s not right for that, then speak plainly
about your desire to be fair and accurate. Ask if there’s something that’s
gone uncovered that should be written about. Establish contact.
To show your commitment and sincerity, cover the little things. The services
love pomp when they activate a unit, have a major promotion or go through
another change that would cause barely a ripple in the civilian world, but
means a great deal in the military one.
Attend these. Even if you don’t write a story, just being there will pay off.
When you go, hand out your cards – to everyone.
Don’t stop there. Find out where the soldiers, sailors and the other grunts
hang out. What bars, restaurants, and coffee shops do they frequent? Go
there and make yourself known. Don’t come on strong, just get to know
them.
Get to know their families, too. The spouses of service members in the same
units often form social support groups. And, like anyone else, they join
religious organizations, send their kids to schools and even take trips to the
mall.
The sourcing’s much the same if it’s a defense contractor that’s being
covered. Learn all that you can, establish relationships and source, source,
source.
Convince your editor the importance of doing the little stories, the ones that
go on the inside pages – or even just get photo and a cutline – just so you
can get your name out there.
Name recognition in this business is extremely important.
Once you start to prove yourself, then the PAO will start to trust you for
some juicer stories.

Request to go on training exercises, great for experience, education and
color. Be prepared for soggy, sleepless weekends.
It’s time to invest in a good pair of boots, sleeping bag, flashlight (with a red
lens), flip-flops for the military showers and a well-made rucksack or duffel
bag.
Ask for familiarization rides in Bradleys, tanks or jet fighters. Now we’re
talking some serious fun. And we’re getting to know the beat very well.
As early as possible, ask for an interview with the commanding officer. Be
prepared to provide a biography, general description of topics to be covered
and make sure the ground rules are clearly established.
DO NOT SCREW UP THIS FIRST CONTACT.
By that I mean be punctual and respectful. Dress like you mean business.
From this all good things can flow, or be stopped from flowing.

Contracts, a primer
Contracts are the bread and butter of how the Pentagon and rest of the U.S.
military agencies do business. They provide the roadmap of how money is
being spent and how it’s likely to be spent – a sense of what the military
thinks is important and what isn’t. Learning how to obtain, read and analyze
contracts, then, is key to becoming a successful defense or military reporter.
Equally important is learning how to understand the contract process.
Before there are contracts, the Pentagon provides industry – and savvy
reporters – a pretty good idea of what the military wants, needs and,
sometimes, even what it’s willing to pay.
Every day, on www.fedbizzops.com the military and other government
agencies broadcast such feelers as broad agency announcements (BAAs),
requests for information (RFIs) and requests for proposals (RFPs).
The BAA tells of a basic agency or military service need for a certain
technology, system or capability. The RFI is more specific, telling of a
specific needed requirement, capability or piece of equipment and asking
industry for details of cost and general feasibility. The RFP is the most
specific – it not only tells what military or other government agency wants,
but also provides details on how it wants it.
These announcements and requests are not only good for forecasting, but
they’re also useful when programs go awry, busting budgets and deadlines.
Another place to find what the government plans to acquire, especially from
a technology standpoint, is to try the U.S. Patent Office site:
http://www1.uspto.gov/index.html. For example, the government or

researchers tied to the government has obtained patents for a range of
technologies for capturing signals intelligence – a nice way of saying
eavesdropping.
Getting Started
To get a general idea of the contracting activity for a certain program, piece
of equipment or other parameter, you can check online at
www.defenselink.mil
Go to the site map and under releases you’ll find contract announcements,
which provides a daily listing of most DOD contracts going back more than
a decade. You can also search this site for contracts using company name,
contract number, service, etc. The site is also a great portal for many
military web pages, including the home pages for all the services.
A caveat here (and a cautionary tale when dealing with any government
supplied “constants” like contract numbers): humans still input much of the
information on the defenselink site and they can make mistakes. I sent a
week banging my head on the desk because a contract number I thought was
correct was off by a single digit.
Armed with the right information from the site – such as the contracting
authority – you can ask for actual copies of the contract itself.
Mod-ern Methods
Make sure you also request the contract modifications.
In covering local government, they’re often called change orders – many are
costs that were “encountered” or “discovered” after an original contract was
signed.
One key difference between a local government change order and a contract
modification on a multi-billion-dollar aircraft carrier is that, as strange as it
seems, there’s a much smaller level of scrutiny on the bigger-buck carrier.
Modifications often go unnoticed. Congress, once it approves even the
largest of military contracts, rarely keeps keen tabs afterward.
The lesson? When you ask for a contract, ask for all the modifications, too.
All of them.
I found out from one of the modifications that one of the biggest Reagan
carrier increases came after the Navy and contractor installed new
communications system without following any of the proper testing and
procurement procedures.

I later used the contract modifications to determine how much money the
Navy spent a day to build a carrier in a story I wrote about allegations the
contractor had improperly installed shields on the ships meant to protect
them against missiles, torpedoes and mines. Company workers said they
were ordered to do the work wrong on purpose – and then told to cook the
books to make it appear the job had been done correctly.
In the case of the modifications, using FOIAs, communications experts I
snagged on www.profnet.com and contractor expert sources, whose trust I
had earned, I was able to put together a database linking extra costs and
money shifts between carriers, which is illegal (shifting money between such
accounts is not allowed.).
In putting together the database, I opted for the simplest and most necessary
fields – contract number, modification number, what the change was for, the
increase or decrease.
I used Access. For small databases like this, it’s one of the easiest.
Then I went from local to national. I secured the federal contractors database
from IRE and scrutinized the fields. I saw one that would specifically
identify whether the entered contract cost was a modification or original
contract.
For bigger databases like this – where I’d be reviewing millions of records
over more than a decade – I opted to use Foxpro. I like the 2.6 version of it.
I had to use a Foxpro “patch” I got online because of the faster computer I
was using. You can get one by typing in the error message into
www.Google.com

Defense Dodges
The services often don’t want to give up information on their contracts and
public affairs officers will say and try just about anything to drive a reporter
away.
Dodge # 1: We’ve never done that before or No one’s ever asked us for that
before
That refrain is common among many public affairs officers. It implies that
because no one’s asked for information, a contract or a database before, it’s
not publicly available.
Make them cite specific reason for their “denial.”
Or tell them that it’s a publicly funded contract or a database of publicly
funded contracts, and you want the publicly releasable portion of the
information.

If ALL else fails, try a Freedom of Information Act Request. But a warning
here – these requests can mean extra days, weeks, months or even longer.
I managed to avoid filing a FOIA for the aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan
construction contract after a Navy public affairs officer tried the “we’venever-done-this-before routine.”
The PAO then tried Dodge #2. You’d need a forklift to handle all of the
records…
OK, what the captain actually said was that I’d need a fleet of trucks. He
said the copying fees alone would cover our payroll at the newspaper.
I told him to give me electronic copies of the work.
Always do that. You’d prefer electronic anyway – and for bigger databases
it’s a must.
Despite my request for electronic, he sent me paper. And I guess he was
talking about a fleet of Tonka trucks, because the document weighed in at a
whopping 174 pages, or roughly the size of a third of the telephone book in
Newport News, Va., where I was working.
When you get a military contract, scrutinize it. Look for numbers, dates,
costs, names – any pertinent information that can be put into a database.
DO NOT start putting together a database straight away. Look through every
page of the contract first. You want to identify trends, costs and any other
information that can be grouped, counted or anything else a database
manager can do.
Like anything else in this business, there’s a good bet that the contract may
be only the beginning of the story.
Building blocks
If you want to start smaller, you can build your own database using public
sources.
For example, www.defenselink.mil can be used to trace contracts through its
searchable online text records. At Defense News we found every
development contact for the $250 billion Joint Strike Fighter – the
Pentagon’s most expensive project ever – and built our own database we
used to show the Defense Department had already spent or contracted for
$39 billon of the $40 billion the government had set aside to develop the
plane. With another six years to go, the program was sure to bust its budget
and when we showed our figures to analysts they agreed and we had a story.
In putting together the database, I opted for the simplest and most necessary
fields – contract number, modification number, what the change was for, the
increase or decrease.

Military databases abound for those who want to find them. Here’s a short
list of some general ideas.
Go to U.S. Army Combat Readiness Center https://crc.army.mil/home/ to
get a handle on just how much of a problem Apache accidents had become.
The Stats/Reports links on the left side of the page are particularly useful.
When the 3rd Infantry Division got ready to deploy for its return trip to Iraq,
two Apache pilots died in an in-flight training accident. I checked with the
Readiness Center at Fort Rucker to get a handle on just how much of a
problem Apache accidents had become. I found that Apaches accounted for
the some of the most costly accidents in the service.
I sent a FOIA to the center for all of its accident records going back decades.
I used FoxPro and SPSS to slice, data and mine the data to show, among
other things, that the Army had suffered more accidents during peacetime
than war years and that the biggest accident danger were those who rode in
land vehicles without seatbelts.
Along the same lines, I sent a FOIA to the Coast Guard and used the CAR
software to document the daily danger the service’s helicopter’s pilots faced
– and those the aircraft would try to rescue – because of underpowered
engines.

Deadline Contractor CAR
When IRE released an updated federal contractors database last fall,
Aerospace Daily wanted to take a look at how the war was affecting the
available money for other programs. We distilled the data from the overall
federal database to locate the Pentagon entries. From there, it was a simple
matter of sorting the data and identifying the programs that matched up with
the codes.
Some “deadline” work requires a little more effort.
As the Pentagon prepared to replace its aging satellite constellation network,
I decided to look at what would be involved in such a program: what
capabilities the military needed at what cost. In reviewing the $100 billion
effort, though, I came across another facet: satellite secrecy. Most of the
contracts I was trying to examine dealt with classified programs and could
not be identified easily. In some cases, sources helped guide me. In others, I
tailored my queries to find contracts dealing with “space services” or
“telecommunications.”
During the reporting I also put online contract information in Microsoft
Excel spreadsheets and Access database manager for further analysis.

When the analysis was done, I learned that most of the satellite contracts
were classified. Classified satellite programs had grown by one-third
between 2001 and 2004, as had military contracts overall.
Doing Recon
The military loves records. It keeps them on everything, and, best of all, it
loves to put them into databases.
Here are some things to keep in mind:
Anytime the military wants to buy anything, there’s a record of it: a request
for bid, a contract, an agreement of understanding…
The military often breaks down purchases by weapon systems, states – even
Congressional districts. The Pentagon does this so it can lobby to keep
funding. Reporters can use this to track funding, contracts, etc. fairly easy. A
good place to start:
http://www.dior.whs.mil/peidhome/procstat/procstat.htm.
Also try www.defenselink.mil – navigate to the contracts page, which has a
daily listing of contracts and a searchable archive.
IRE has an excellent federal contractors database – try www.ire.org
You may have to build your own databases, depending on the contracts you
want to analyze or deconstruct. There are some things the military services
simply don’t want to track.
Look for small databases to build yourself. It’s a great way to see how
databases work, how they can be queried and how the information can be
diced and segmented.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office, or GAO, publishes an annual
overview of every major weapon or weapon system – and with a thumbnail
sketch of issues and problems with each. Go to www.gao.gov
The folks at globalsecurity.org also offer analysis of not only weapons,
systems but just about everything military – including bases, policies and
issues. The site is www.globalsecurity.org Another helpful organization for
such analysis is the Federation of American Scientists – www.fas.org
Looking for experts? Try www.profnet.com
For the some of the most recent programmatic/cost info on the Pentagon’s
largest programs, try: www.acq.osd.mil/ara/am/sar/ .
Tools of the Trade

There are some types of software that it will be essential to have and know
how to use – or to know someone in the newsroom who and knows how to
use – to properly mine the military data trove:
-- a spreadsheet program like Excel;
-- a database manager – most use Access now, but some old-timers like me
prefer FoxPro;
-- a statistical program like SSPS (OK, this may not be essential, but I have
found it very valuable).
There are other tools that would be helpful. One is an electronic file
organizer to keep straight all of those reports, databases and sources. I like
SourceTracker from newsengin.
And I also find digital cameras useful. I take shots of a scene the same way I
would take notes – and I take pictures of documents that I can’t copy for one
reason or another.
Computer-Assisted Reporting
Remember, computers represent just another tool.
Too often, reporters rely on CAR to try to do all the work. They throw out
graphs and charts and numbers to impress everyone with all the work
they’ve done – making the readers perform a mental juggling act to keep it
all straight and to relate to the story. After you’ve found the right Web sites
or squeezed the juice from the right database, find the people behind the
facts. You must tell readers what it means – and especially what it means to
them.
This is not a new concern. In his 1978 book Investigative Reporting and
Editing, Paul N. Williams, quoted CAR reporters at the time: “As the
reporter works more regularly and closely with computers…he is in danger
of losing touch with the people and reality that the people constitute.”
Williams also wrote of the : “…gradual shift from the old style of reporting
on spectacular single incidents and personal crimes to more original and
conscientious reporting on the systematic operations of American society…
The thoughtful reporter then, the, is led to contemplate the institutions that
condone, fail to control, or even foster corruption.”
Often, it can be difficult to find the “people factor” in reporting about
defense contractor cover-up or state-of-the-art weapon. Reporters must find

metaphors, anecdotes and other means to help the reader, to make the
readers think and act.
Look for ways to compare, to engage the reader – to have fun.
Look for inspiration on how to do this well from those who have done it
best.
Read, for example, Black Hawk Down or Thunder Run. No book’s captured
the fighter jock mentality like The Right Stuff, even after all of these years.

Patience
It’s better to strike out – to let a story go that’s just not there – than to put
something into print that’s not quite right.
That’s especially true when reporting on defense contractors.
These companies do important work, but their major raison d’etre is to make
money. They could give seminars on how to fillet a reporter and even a
newspaper if a story’s off the mark by even a little.
And remember, a story can be factually accurate – and still quite not right.
Consider this item we ran on our Aviation Week web blog, Ares:
The $69 billion contractor – not
By Michael Fabey
Defense experts agreed – the digital slicing and dicing simply didn’t make sense.
An Aerospace Daily analysis of data from the National Institute of Computer-Assisted
Reporting (NICAR) showed the number-one Pentagon expense for 2006 was for
“architecture and engineering services” – some $70 billion worth, nearly four times
the amount spent for the next biggest bill for fixed-wing costs.

Loren Thompson of the Lexington Institute echoed the concern that the
expenses likely included items not normally associated with architecture and
engineering services.
“Honestly, I don’t know what to make of that,” he said. “It doesn’t match up
with any budget planning.”
Indeed it didn’t. And it matched up even less under further investigation.
The number one contractor for such services – for about 30 listed contracts or
modifications worth about $69 billion of those $70 billion went to a small Pittsburghbased company called Earth Savers Inc., the records showed.
And the total all really centered on one contract worth about 99 percent of the total, the
records showed.
Turns out the records were wrong.

Apparently, NICAR says, someone at DOD inadvertently moved a decimal point over a
few places, making a contract with tens of billions instead of single-digit millions.

Defense Department spokespeople say the Pentagon doesn’t keep track of
such data in this manner and won’t comment on such analysis.
And at Earth Savers, folks say they have no deals with the Pentagon worthy
anywhere that amount.
Asked if the company would like to have such a contract, a spokesperson
only laughed.

Tread carefully. But do tread, with the proper low threshold of indignation.
We have a public duty to scrutinize these companies – and the military we
pay for.

ODDS/ENDS

Procurement Statistics
•

100 Companies Receiving The Largest Dollar Volume Of Prime Contract
Awards (P01)
o Fiscal Year 1996
o Fiscal Year 1997
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999
o Fiscal Year 2000
o Fiscal Year 2001
o Fiscal Year 2002
o Fiscal Year 2003
o Fiscal Year 2004

•

100 Companies Receiving the Largest Dollar Volume of Prime Contract
Awards for RDT&E (P02)
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999
o Fiscal Year 2000
o Fiscal Year 2001
o Fiscal Year 2002
o Fiscal Year 2003
o Fiscal Year 2004

•

Prime Contract Awards (P03) (no longer produced)
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999

•

Prime Awards of Contracts, Grants, and Agreements for RDT&E (P04) Educational and Other Nonprofit Institutions Only (no longer produced)
o Fiscal Year 1998

•

Prime Contract Awards, Size Distribution (P08)
o Fiscal Year 1997
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999
o Fiscal Year 2000

•

Summary of Procurement Actions ("Format Sum")
o Fiscal Year 1997
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999
o Fiscal Year 2000
o Fiscal Year 2001
o Fiscal Year 2002
o Fiscal Year 2003
o Fiscal Year 2004

•

Summary of Contract Actions of $25,000 or Less - DD1057 Summary
o Fiscal Year 1997
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999
o Fiscal Year 2000
o Fiscal Year 2001
o Fiscal Year 2002
o Fiscal Year 2003
o Fiscal Year 2004

•

Companies Participating in the Department of Defense Subcontracting
Program (P14)
o Fiscal Year 1998
o Fiscal Year 1999
o Fiscal Year 2000
o Fiscal Year 2001
o Fiscal Year 2002
o Fiscal Year 2003

•

Procurement From Small and Other Business Firms (P16)
o Fiscal Year 2003

Special Queries/Tabulations
Some of these queries may take several minutes to complete.
Here are some tips for viewing, printing, or saving your report:
· Click the 'Printer Friendly Version' link in the upper right hand corner of the
report screen before sending your report to the printer.
· Use landscape orientation on your printer when you print your report.
· Use the smallest font on your browser to view all columns.
· Use the 'Export' link in the upper right hand corner of the report screen to save
the output in one of several formats on your computer.

General Interest
o
o
o

o

o

o

ST06. Dollar Summary of FSC and Service Category by Company.
(PDF) FY2004 FY2003 FY2002 FY2001 FY 2000
ST08. Awards by Weapon System, Contractor, and Location of
Performed Work. (PDF) FY2003 FY2002 FY2001
ST25 (FY1999 through FY2004 - States and US Territories). A single
year listing of the dollar summary of Prime Contract Awards by
State, County, Contractor and Place.
ST25M (FY1999 through FY2004 - States and US Territories). A
multiple year comparison of dollar amounts of Prime Contract
Awards by State, County, Contractor and Place.
ST26 (FY1999 through FY2004 - Overseas Locations). Dollar
Summary of Prime Contract Awards by Country, Contractor and
Place.
ST26M (FY1999 through FY2004 - Overseas Locations). A multiple
year - multiple country summary of Prime contract awards.

Small Business Interest
o

ST28. Contract Awards by FSC and Purchasing Office.
FY2004(XLS) FY2004(PDF) FY2003 FY2002 FY2001

SAMPLE FOIA REQUEST
Vickie M. Hendrix
Freedom of Information Act Officer

U.S. Army Safety Center
Aug. 6, 2004
Ms. Hendrix:
I am the military reporter for the Savannah Morning News. Under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, I am requesting copies of or access to the
Army’s computer aviation safety database of aircraft accidents and incidents, and that
database’s record layout.
The Army is augmenting its aviation forces in our region and with the recent Apache
accident and other incidents, we want to review the safety history of the aviation corps.
If there are any fees for searching for, or copying, the records I have requested, please
inform me before you fill the request.
As you know, the Act permits you to reduce or waive the fees when the release of the
information is considered as “primarily benefiting the public.” I believe that this request
fits that category and I therefore ask that you waive any fees.
If all or part of this request – including any specific record or field -- is denied, please cite
the specific exemption(s) that you think justifies your refusal to release the information
and inform me of your agency’s administrative appeal procedures available to me under
the law.
If possible, I would like to receive the data in a computer-searchable form, on CD rom,
for example.
I would appreciate your handling this request as quickly as possible, and I look forward
to hearing from you within 20 working days, as the law stipulates.
Feel free to call me if you have any questions or concerns. My office number is 912-6520381. My cell number is 912-665-0503. My e-mail address is
mike.fabey@savannahnow.com and the address for the newspaper is Box 1088,
Savannah, GA 31402-1088.
Thank you for your time and consideration.

Sincerely,

Michael Fabey

Posted 02/13/06 14:17
Pentagon Is Opaque About Satellite Funding
By Michael Fabey
Developing government satellites is big business.
Just how much is open to debate. Even professional auditors in the White House’s Office of
Management and Budget report they have problems tracking satellite and other space-related
programs for publicly acknowledged contracts.
When it comes to classified programs, like those that fund the government’s eavesdropping
satellites, there’s no public way of tracking the money, say analysts who cover the industry, like
Loren Thompson of the Lexington Institute. “It’s all deeply embedded in the Pentagon’s
operational and maintenance accounts,” he said.
But some measurements of the work can be gleaned from the public record.
A Defense News computer analysis of some 3 million contract and modification records from
2000 through 2004 shows that U.S. agencies made more than 2,100 deals worth $1.2 billion for
satellite telecommunications and related work.
U.S. federal agencies issued about 35,000 contracts and related modifications for general spacerelated work, worth about $40.2 billion, the analysis showed.
Space work could include software, equipment or other com-ponents for any type of space work,
including but not limited to satellites.
Military officials acknowledge they are putting a lot of financial resources into space. The U.S. Air
Force, in particular, sees satellites as one of its key components of air and space dominance.
Speaking about space radar, Gen. Frank Faykes, the Air Force’s budget director, said, “This is a
critical capability for our intelligence community.”
The service wants $266 million for space radar research and development in 2007, more than
twice the $98 million appropriated this year.
For Global Positioning System (GPS) III research and development, the 2007 request of $315
million is nearly four times the $85 million appropriated in 2006.

Air Force Maj. Michael Moyles of Strategic Command says there’s likely to be a shortfall in
satellite resources required, even with the added GPS capability.
During a briefing at the Satellite 2006 conference Feb. 7 in Washington, Moyles said there will be
greater need for satellite services, in a stronger relationship with commercial satellite providers, to
meet the military’s needs.
Meeting that need, he said, is going to require changes in the way the military does business.
“We’re going to need to streamline the acquisition process.”
The current acquisition process, says Moyles and other military officers, makes it difficult to get
satellite resources where and when they are needed. It also makes it difficult to track Pentagon
spending on satellite and space services.
The acquisition records analyzed by Defense News were provided by Investigative Reporters and
Editors (IRE), an international group of journalists. Using a FoxPro database manager and SPSS
statistical software, Defense News analyzed contractor records between 2000 and 2004. Data for
2005 is not available yet.
About 800 of the satellite-related contracts were for programs listed as “classified or nondiscernible,” the records indicate. The total number of all federal government contracts and
associated modifications for classified programs gleaned from the records shows an increase to
about 446,000 in 2003 from about 281,000 in 2001, an increase mirrored by space and satellite
work.
The government changed its reporting methods, and the classified breakdown was unavailable
for 2004.
It is impossible to tell from the data how much work in the satellite realm is deemed “black,” or
secret, such as the Future Imagery Architecture program. The records do not indicate how much
money is flowing to classified satellite work.
The costs of operating some of the Pentagon’s classified spy satellites would easily be at least $5
billion a year, Thompson said.
Opaque Reporting
The Pentagon’s reporting methods don’t make it any easier.
“Tracking the DoD space budget is extremely difficult, since space is not identified as a separate
line item in the budget,” the U.S. Congressional Research Service (CRS) reported in November.
“DoD sometimes releases only partial information (omitting funding for classified programs) or will
suddenly release without explanation new figures for prior years that are quite different from what
was previously reported.”
The CRS report estimated the total — classified and unclassified — space budget at $19.4 billion
in 2003, $20 billion in 2004, $19.8 billion in 2005 and a requested $22.5 billion for 2006.
How much is black, and how much is for black intelligence satellite programs like the Future
Imagery Architecture, is impossible to determine with publicly available data.
The Defense News computer analysis provided another glimpse into the financial impact of such
projects.
The analysis identified 2,175 contracts and associated modifications under the broad heading of
“satellite telecommunications” or “radiotelephone.” These deals would cover all satellite
development work — some tasks would be for land-based operations of the networks — but the
government’s reporting methods make it impossible to precisely determine the in-space satellite
operation and development costs.
The largest percentage of contracts or modifications, about a third per year on average, were
Pentagon jobs. The Air Force, U.S. Navy, the State Department and Army Corps of Engineers
each accounted for an average of about 10 percent of the contracts. NASA accounted for about 5
percent. •
E-mail: mfabey@defensenews.com

