First Day on the Beat: Investigating Cities and County Government
Investigative Reporters and Editors -- Phoenix -- June 9, 2007
Andy Hall, reporter, Wisconsin State Journal
ahall@madison.com 608-252-6136

Neighborhood basics
10 steps to figure out which areas of your community are thriving and
getting their fair shares of resources -- and which aren't.
1)Cultivate sentinels. Persuade sources to help you keep watch over fragile neighborhoods. Among
the options are United Way officials and volunteers on United Way panels, neighborhood and beat police
officers, politicians with city or county government, neighborhood associations, community center staff
members, Community Development Block Grant officials at city and county levels, religion leaders, day care
providers, landlords, housing inspectors, low-income housing officials, probation and parole agents, food
pantry workers, lenders, real estate agents, Parent Teacher Organizations, school principals and
teachers, school employee unions, neighborhood business owners, or social workers for county agencies or
school districts, bus drivers, private security agencies in schools and neighborhoods, literacy agency officials,
attorneys (private and public defenders) specializing in cases involving immigrants and low-income
residents.

2)Get out there. Be seen, and begin seeing things for yourself. Put serendipity to work for you. Take
stacks of business cards and head out for public meetings. Get yourself invited to private meetings such
as get-togethers between landlords and police, or Head Start or Even Start sessions with parents and children.
Think beyond meetings: Go along when Thanksgiving turkeys are delivered to the homes of low-income
residents. Invite sources for pizza or coffee. Solicit diary writers. Get out of bed and be there when the school
buses pick up children in the morning.

3)Dig into data and reports. Use 211 database, http://www.2-1-1.org/ to see if it's available in your
area, to focus upon specific issues. Find online version, acquire an electronic copy, or at least persuade
sources to look up information for you. Read current and former neighborhood task force reports, CDBG
reports, grant applications and follow-up reports (especially Weed and Seed grants), police neighborhood
newsletters, e-mail lists of all sources including government and nonprofit agencies, blogs focusing upon
local issues, groups focusing upon specific issues such pro/anti-referendum, special education, Block Watch.
Use current and former phone directories. Read packets provided to members of local board: See what they
see. Use maps to understand what's where in your community -- and to show your readers and viewers. Turn
to American Factfinder at www.census.gov but don't overlook the availability of more current, local data
gathered by agencies (low-income families in school-attendance areas, child abuse reports mapped by area,
for example).

4)Ask: Am I connected?
Journalists need ties to all types of residents, including:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Upper, middle and low income
Majority and minority racial and ethnic groups
New arrivals and natives
High, middle and low academic achievers
Single-parent, two-parent, extended family
Pre-kindergarten, elementary, middle and high school
All geographic areas, especially troubled neighborhoods
Special education, talented and gifted
Empty nesters
Single
Nursing homes, assisted living, halfway houses, homeless shelters, single-family homes, apartments

5)Figure out what matters most. Which neighborhoods, and which issues, cry out for coverage?
6)Find characters to help you tell the story. If the choices aren't obvious, seek advice from key
sources. Now that they know what you need, they may offer fresh ideas.

7)Use numbers to help focus your reporting. What types of data, and what layers of geography, do
you need? What's the best way to get it?

8)Read your notes -- then go back with more, and better, questions. Remain humble. Sources
respect you, and may open up, when you acknowledge you don't yet have the full picture. To spot
shortcomings, it helps to organize findings in a spreadsheet, database or document to summarize key
interviews, listed by issue.

9)Be guided by relentless curiosity.
10)Be driven by a passion for holding powerful people and institutions accountable for
their actions.

