DEALING WITH ETHICS, ANONYMOUS SOURCES AND THE PUBLIC

IRE WATCHDOG JOURNALISM WORKSHOP
LAS VEGAS, NEVADA
SEPTEMBER 17-18, 2007

Doug Pardue
The (Charleston, S.C.) Post & Courier
(843) 937-5558
dpardue@postandcourier.com

Mary Fricker
Santa Rosa (Calif.) Press Democrat
(707) 823-4411
maryfricker@hughes.net

Ethics hotlines and online resources
Society of Professional Journalists
(317) 927-8000 x208
www.spj.org/ethics.asp
The Poynter Institute
(877) 639-7817
www.poynter.org
Poynter and the American Society of Newspaper Editors have developed an
Ethics Tool: 10 steps to help you make a good ethics decision on deadline.
www.poynter.org

Ethics cases
from
The Society of Professional Journalists
Cooperating with the Government www.spj.org/ecs1.asp
It began on Jan. 18, 2005, and ended two weeks later after the longest prison standoff in
recent U.S. history. The question: Should your media outlet go along with the state’s
request not to release the information?
Offensive Images

www.spj.org/ecs2.asp
Caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad didn’t cause much of a stir when they were first
published in September 2005. But when they were republished in early 2006, after

Muslim leaders called attention to the 12 images, it set off rioting throughout the Islamic
world. Embassies were burned; people were killed. After the rioting and killing started, it
was difficult to ignore the cartoons. Question: Do we publish the cartoons or not?
The Sting

www.spj.org/ecs3.asp
Perverted-Justice.com is a Web site that can be very convenient for a reporter looking for
a good story. But the tactic raises some ethical questions. The Web site scans Internet
chat rooms looking for men who can be lured into sexually explicit conversations with
invented underage correspondents. Perverted-Justice posts the men’s pictures on its Web
site. Question: Is it ethically defensible to employ such a sting tactic? Should you buy
into the agenda of an advocacy group — even if it’s an agenda as worthy as this one?
A Media-Savvy Killer

www.spj.org/ecs4.asp
Since his first murder in 1974, the “BTK” killer — his own acronym, for “bind, torture,
kill” — has sent the Wichita Eagle four letters and one poem. Question: How should a
newspaper, or other media outlet, handle communications from someone who says he’s
guilty of multiple sensational crimes? And how much should it cooperate with law
enforcement authorities?
A Congressman’s Past www.spj.org/ecs5.asp
The (Portland) Oregonian learned that a Democratic member of the U.S. Congress, up for
re-election to his fourth term, had been accused by an ex-girlfriend of a sexual assault
some 28 years previously. But criminal charges never were filed, and neither the
congressman, David Wu, nor his accuser wanted to discuss the case now, only weeks
before the 2004 election. Question: Should The Oregonian publish this story?
Using this Process to Craft a Policy
www.spj.org/ecs6.asp
It used to be that a reporter would absolutely NEVER let a source check out a story
before it appeared. But there has been growing acceptance of the idea that it’s more
important to be accurate than to be independent. Question: Do we let sources see what
we’re planning to write? And if we do, when?

Bias is an ethics issue
Two recent studies of media bias by economists:

“A Measure of media bias,” Tim Groseclose, Department of Political Science, UCLA,
and Jeff Milyo, Department of Economics, University of Missouri. November 2005.
www.polisci.ucla.edu/faculty/groseclose/pdfs/MediaBias.pdf
“What drives media slant?” Matthew Gentzkow, Graduate School of Business University
of Chicago, and Jesse M. Shapiro, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2007.
faculty.chicagogsb.edu/matthew.gentzkow/biasmeas052507.pdf

