Bullet-Proofing a Watchdog Story
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Keep this goal in mind: Every detail of your published story should be traceable
to a document or source. Every. Last. Detail.
1. Be organized in your work habits.
a. I keep a phone log in Excel; I record the date, time, person, employer,
topic and phone number of almost every call I make. If the call is an
interview, I try (with mixed success) to include in the log the page
number of my notebook where my interview notes begin.
b. Transcribe your most important interviews, whether from handwritten
notes or tape, as soon as possible. Don’t wait. You may not remember
what that squiggle means two weeks later.
c. Keep documents carefully arranged in folders or binders. Re-read
documents occasonally to see if you now understand them in a
different light.
d. Prepare a detailed chronology and a “who’s who.” I have built these
files in Word for many years. I’m thinking of switching to a wiki – and
linking my chronology and people items to scanned copies of
supporting materials.
Remember: A computer is your friend. It forces you to be organized.
2. Cast a wide net.
a. Look for every document that might have a bearing on your story. Then
read it. If the document refers to other documents, find and read them
too.
b. Send public record requests to federal, state and local agencies early
in your reporting. Keep track of when you sent them. Bug recipients as
soon as the legal deadline passes.
c. Reach out to targets early. Don’t wait until the week (or day or hour)
before deadline. If you do an early interview, nothing prevents you from
going back later and asking, “Why did you steal the money?” If your
target is a faceless agency, ask for a tour and talk with key managers.
d. If targets don’t respond to phone calls, e-mail them. If they don’t
respond to e-mails, send them certified letters asking for an interview
and listing key questions. Nothing in the final story should surprise your
target.
e. At the end of every interview, ask, “Is there something else I should
ask you?”

