Digging into Nonprofits:
IRS Form 990
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714-796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com

I love IRS Form 990. I confess this reluctantly. Accountants will tell you that the
990 is poorly designed, incomplete, even misleading. All true. I love it anyway.
The 990, like democracy, is very bad but much better than the alternatives. Here
is an abridged reader’s guide to the nonprofit form that everyone but me loves to
hate.
First some basics:
1. Every IRS-recognized nonprofit making more than $25,000 a year is
supposed to file a 990. The weasel words in that last sentence are “IRSrecognized.” Churches aren’t required to seek IRS recognition or file a 990.
2. Nonprofits are supposed to file 4-1/2 months after the close of the fiscal year
(May 15 for charities using the calendar year), but they can get an automatic
90-day extension (to Aug. 15 for the calendar year crowd) and, by filing a
simple form, an additional 90-day extension (to Nov. 15 for calendar year
filers). Many do just that. As a result, the information on the 990 may be
nearly a year old by the time you get it.
3. Because of the lengthy delay in filing 990s, little information is available on
newly organized nonprofits. But you can find out the most vital fact – whether
that new charity raising money for athlete’s foot is legit – by going to the IRS
website. Visit http://apps.irs.gov/portal/site/pub78 to learn if a particular
charity has won tax-exempt status.
4. Nonprofits have to give you their last three years’ 990s. Repeat: have to.
You’ll find all the details on page 10 of that torrid bestseller, “Instructions for
Form 990 and Form 990-EZ,” available at the IRS website.
5. 990s aren’t always accurate. I’ve heard estimates that 80 percent of all 990s
have some flaws — usually minor flaws like failing to check all the boxes, but
sometimes major holes, particularly on the schedules listing top officers’
salaries. My beloved 990 has flaws because its daddy, the IRS, just doesn’t
care; the IRS audits less than 1 percent of all 990s.
6. The second best website on the entire World Wide Web is
www.guidestar.org. If you don’t know why, register for free and start
downloading 990s to your heart’s content. (Sorry, GuideStar. I love you, but I
love www.census.gov more. I can’t help it; Census has more numbers.)
7. There are charities and then there are private foundations. Foundations get
their money from, and are the personal playthings of, the wealthy – the
wealthy dead like Andrew Carenegie and John D. Rockefeller or the wealthy
living like Bill and Melinda Gates. Foundations report their finances on the

-1-

990-PF. Although the two forms are quite different, if you know how to read a
990 you’ll do just fine when you encounter a 990-PF.
.
Page 1: Who are these guys?
Line A: The fiscal year, if different from the calendar year.
Line B: Watch for check marks indicating if this is an initial return, amended
return or final (going out of business) return.
Line J: This tells you what type of nonprofit the group is. Most nonprofits are
501(c)3’s; donations to them are tax-deductile. But occasionally you’ll find a
501(c)4 accepting donations — raising a question of whether donors know their
contribution is nondeductible. See Line 84.
Page 1: Where the money is
Lines 1 thru 3: These lines tell where most nonprofits make most of their money
— donations (Lines 1a and b), indirect donations like United Way (Line 1c),
government grants (Line 1d), program service revenue like hospital bills or
college tuition (Line 2) and membership (Line 3).
Line 9, special events: Remember all those society page photos of well-dressed
men and women at charity functions? Here is where you see what the charities
spent to attract the Beautiful People. Special events often are money-losers,
designed more to get big donors’ attention than to get their money. The money, if
things work out, will come later.
Lines 13-15: How they spent it. This is a summary of the material in Part II.
Lines 18, 19 and 21: It’s a misconception that charities aren’t supposed to make
money. If they don’t make money, they die. These lines tell you whether the
charity made money last year (Line 18) and whether its assets are growing or
shrinking (Line 21 minus Line 19). Line 20 is rarely used.
Page 2: Where the money goes
Part II Functional Expenses: First the bad news. This section is easily
manipulated. And we journalists are partly to blame by insisting that fundraising
is bad and programs are good. So the accountants have devised rules to let
nonprofits shift costs from the bad side of the ledger (fundraising) to the good
side (programs).
The “Lake Wobegon effect” also plays a part here. Nonprofits pay attention to
their peers and want to make sure that their program service ratio (programs
divided by total expenditures) is above average.
Bringing this whole game to its logical extreme, many nonprofits pretend they
have no fundraising costs. A while back, I crunched some numbers from
GuideStar and concluded that in 2003 94,000 charities had somehow raised $21
billion without spending a penny on fundraising. Imagine waves of envelopes
flying into a nonprofit’s office, opening themselves, plucking out checks,
endorsing and depositing them and sending thank-you letters to the donors, all
without any effort on the charity’s part. If only writing stories were that easy.

-2-

Lines 22 and 23, grants and gifts: This is a traditional benchmark for charities —
gifts to needy individuals and groups. It’s always useful to check these numbers
against a charity’s public promises.
Lines 25 and 26, officers’ and employees’ pay: Source of a thousand stories. See
Part V and Schedule A for details. Lines 25b (former officers) and 25c
(disqualified persons) are new; they’re designed to pick up fat severence checks
and to focus attention on people with unusual financial sway over a charity.
Line 30, professional fundraising fees: Another hot button.
Line 43, other expenses: Many charities add up a bunch of items and stick them
here. Watch for the words “See Statement x.” It means you have to thumb to the
back of the 990, find Statement x, and see where the money really went.
Joint costs: This is where charities are supposed to tell you how much money
they spent on fundraising but listed as program expenses. Note the words
“supposed to.”
Page 3: Program service accomplishments
The idea here is simple: Break out expenditures by goal. The descriptions of
each goal scarcely vary from year to year. The dollar amounts, however, may
change significantly.
Page 4: Balance sheet
This section is the detail behind Lines 19 and 21 on page 1 — assets and
liabilities at the beginning and end of the fiscal year. A big swing in any of these
numbers is potentially a story.
The balance sheet isn’t as sexy as income and spending, but any accountant will
tell you it’s vital. The first great charity expose — the Sun Newspapers of
Omaha’s 1972 takedown of Boy’s Town — revolved around the reporters’
discovery that Boy’s Town was sitting on a mountain of money while crying
poverty. It probably helped that the Sun Newspapers’ owner was the nation’s
most famous student of balance sheets, Warren Buffett.
Line 48, pledges receivable: Always worth checking. This tells you how much
money they’ve been promised. If a big donor is wobbly, it will show up under Line
48b, “allowance for doubtful accounts.”
Line 50, receivables from the bosses: If a charity is loaning money to its key
people, you’ll find the loan here. The phrase “disqualified persons” refers to
people with unusual sway over the organization, including officers who are paid
over $100,000 a year.
Line 54, investments: Small charities often live a hand-to-mouth existence. But
bigger charities and virtually all private foundations have extensive investments.
It’s always a good idea to look to see how and where charities are investing their
money. Charities are under a lot of pressure to make “socially responsible”
investments. At the same time, if they lose money on their investments, the
public ultimately loses too.
Lines 67 thru 69: Nonprofits typically get three kinds of donations — unrestricted
money that they can use for any purpose (Line 67); restricted donations
earmarked for a particular purpose, which remain “temporarily restricted” until

-3-

they’re spent for that purpose (Line 68); and endowments, known in accountingspeak as permanently restricted funds because only the interest can be spent
(Line 69). A charity might have a bunch of money that it can’t spend.
Pages 5-6: Who runs the place
Part V-A lists the officers and directors, along with their pay. This is a great
source of information about the people who really run your community. HIghprestige charities such as universities and art museums routinely recruit moversand-shakers for their boards. Prominent people volunteer for board seats for the
chance to rub shoulders (and make deals) with other prominent people. Part V is
one of the best ways to document high-powered networking. Part V-B on Page 6
provides the same information for former officers and directors. This section of
the form has been beefed up to catch insider abuses like those exposed in recent
years at the James Beard Foundation in New York. There are going to be stories
galore here.
Line 75b, family: Find out if any of the top people are related to or do business
with each other.
Line 75c, payment from related groups: Another way to find out if there are
related groups helping to pad, uh, pay the top bosses.
Line 75d, conflict of interest: Does the charity have a conflict of interest code?
The form leaves the next question to you: Why not?
Part V-B, compensation to former top employees: Here’s where you can find out
if anyone was paid to go away.
Pages 6-7: Gotcha!
Part VI is a long list of questions designed to identify charities that aren’t playing
by the rules or that are more complicated than they first appear. With a few
exceptions, the “No” box should always be checked.
Line 80, related organizations: This tells you if a charity is actually part of a group
of charities controlled by the same people.
Line 83, public disclosure: This is one of the few lines where “Yes” had better be
checked. If a charity ever balks at giving you its 990, ask how they answered this
question last year.
Line 84, nondeductible contributions: Potentially very interesting. Donations to
social welfare organizations, regulated by Section 501(c)4 of the tax code, are
not deductible. Whenever you spot a 501(c)4 listing donations on Line 1a, look
here to see if they told donors not to deduct it.
Line 90, state filings: Most states require charities soliciting money inside their
borders to file a copy of the 990 there. This line tells you how widespread a
charity’s activities are.

-4-

Schedule A: The nitty gritty
Part 1, compensation of top employees: At many nonprofits, people without a top
title make big bucks. Here’s where you’ll find the top five. Why just five? Because
the 990, my imperfect love, asks for only five – and only if they make at least
$50,000.
Part II, compensation of top vendors: At many nonprofits, vendors get most of the
money. Here you’ll find the top five, and, alas, only the top five. But if you’re
looking for professional fundraisers, you have an alternative: commercial
fundraiser reports filed in many states, including California, New York, Illinois and
Pennsylvania.
Schedule B: I’m a giver, not a taker
This schedule is public but hard to get. I don’t think I’ve ever found it on
GuideStar. And after you read the restrictions, you may decide it’s not worth the
effort.
Schedule B lists everyone who gave the charity $5,000 or 2 percent of total
donations (Line 1), whichever is greater. Now for the “but.” The IRS lets
nonprofits withhold donors’ names. So all you’re left with is the amount of each
big donation and whether it was a personal (cash) or non-cash donation. But
even that threadbare disclosure can be useful. It will tell you at a glance just how
big the organization’s top tier donations are.
Some of the secrecy is just silly. Major nonprofits like hospitals, universities and
museums routinely honor big donors by placing their names on walls, paving
stones and above the main entrance. Many nonprofits also have donor
recognition programs. If you’re interested in a particular “platinum donor,” the
nonprofit probably won’t tell you how much he gave, but they’ll be happy to tell
you what the minimum donation is to become a platinum donor.

-5-

