Downloading
Campaign Finance Reports
from Cal-Access
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
The California Secretary of State maintains an online database of campaign
finance reports. The database, known as Cal-Access, covers candidates for the
Legislature and statewide office as well as initiative committees. All donations
from 1999 to the present are online.
You can easily download information from Cal-Access to Excel. This tipsheet will
walk you through the steps.
You can get to Cal-Access two ways, via the Secretary of State’s home page,
http://ss.ca.gov/ or through the direct address, http://cal-access.sos.ca.gov/.
Let’s take the scenic route.
At the Secretary of State’s home page, click on “Campaign & Lobbying
Information” (circled).

-1-

This brings us to the Cal-Access home page. Remember, you can get here
immediately through the http://cal-access.sos.ca.gov/ address.
On the Cal-Access home page you can type a candidate’s name directly into the
search box (circled near top left) or click on Advanced Search (below the search
box) or Campaign Finance (circled at lower left) to go to a search form. This
tipsheet will cover the search box. Search forms are a little more complicated, but
the procedure for downloading information is identical.

Go to the search box and type in a name. In theory, Cal-Access accepts names
four ways -- last name (Schwarzenegger), first and last (Arnold
Schwarzenegger), last-first (Schwarzenegger, Arnold) and partial last name
(Schwarz). In fact, the last-first combo doesn’t work as well as the others. After
you type in a name and hit return or click on the “Go” button, you’ll get back a list
of committees.
A search on the partial name Schwarz returns 29 committees, candidates and
major donors, including candidates named Schwarz (Karen, Kathy and Harry),
Schwarze, Schwarzbach and, oh yes, Schwarzenegger. Click on one of the
underlined committees to go to that committee's reports. As for the committees
that are not underlined, Cal-Access has nothing on them; they are too old (pre1999), too new or too small.

-2-

Now it gets interesting. When we click on an underlined committee name, we get
several choices.

-3-

First you have to decide which two-year election cycle you’re interested in. The
choices are the current cycle (2007-2008) or Historical. If you click on Historical,
you’ll get four additional choices: 1999-2000, 2001-2002, 2003-2004 and 20052006.
Next you have to decide what kind of information to grab. You can get a neat
summary table by clicking on General Information. Click on Contributions
Received to learn who gave money to your candidate or committee. Click on
Contributions Made to see who got donations from that committee. Expenditures
Made provides a list of vendors. The Late Contributions and Electronic Filings
buttons are invaluable during the last weeks of a campaign.
For purposes of illustration, we’ll choose the 2005-2006 cycle and Contributions
Received for Schwarzenegger’s California Recovery Team, the governor’s main
political action committee. Arnold uses the Recovery Team to raise no-limit
contributions for his initiatives. When we click the buttons, the page instantly
displays a long list of contributions:

There’s a lot of useful information here, but the most useful bits are near the top.
First, Cal-Access is showing you all contributions. You can narrow the slice to
loans, “monetary contributions” (aka cash and checks) or “non-monetary

-4-

contributions,” which include things like free office space, plane rides and food for
campaign functions, by clicking on the appropriate button on the Contribution
Type portion of the page. The other really useful bit on this page is the one I
circled, the line that reads “Download these results: Microsoft Excel.” You’re
probably thinking, “It can’t be that easy.” Well, it really is that easy. Click on the
download button and here is what you get:

Resist the temptation to open the file. Instead, click “Save,” give it a more
imaginative name than “export.xls”, stash it on your hard drive and open it. This
is what you’ll see:

-5-

If you know Excel – and if you’re serious about covering campaign finance you
owe it to yourself and your audience to learn Excel – you can now dig deep into
Arnold’s finances. You easily can sort it by donor to find several donations from
the same person or by amount to find the largest donations. With a little more
work you can subtotal by donor to identify the largest donors, filter to find all
donations from a particular place or company, even figure out how much money
arrived on a particular day.
Here is the result of a minute or two of work. I hid a couple of columns, then
sorted by donation, biggest first. And it turns out the biggest contributor to
Schwarzenegger’s California Recovery Team is … Schwarzenegger! Not that it
did him much good. He and his friends spent tens of millions of dollars in 2005
promoting four initiatives. All four went down to defeat. As the Beatles sang,
money can’t buy you love. Once in a while it can’t even buy victory on Election
Day.

-6-

