Money & Politics
On the Web
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Dozens of websites cover campaign finance and lobbying. Here are some of the
key sites.
Official sources:
Federal Elections Commission (www.fec.gov): Includes campaign finance reports
filed by candidates for president, U.S. Senate and U.S. House of
Representatives. The data download is somewhat clunky. The FEC is adding
new features, including a fun national map of contributions for president.
Internal Revenue Service
(http://www.irs.gov/charities/political/article/0,,id=109644,00.html – or go to
irs.gov, click on “Charities & Nonprofits” and then click on “Political Orgs”): The
IRS collects disclosure reports from Section 527 groups, which funnel six- and
seven-figure donations into national campaigns. The data download here makes
the FEC site look user-friendly.
Campaign finance disclosure laws vary widely among the states. In most states,
the secretary of state collects and disseminates reports. For a link to your state’s
election officer, go to followthemoney.org, click on “Links” at the bottom of the
home page, and then click on “State Disclosure Offices” near the top of the next
page. Here are the links for a few Western states:
• California: http://cal-access.sos.ca.gov/
• Nevada: http://secretaryofstate.biz/elections/
• Arizona: http://www.azsos.gov/election/
• Utah: http://elections.utah.gov/
Secondary sources:
Many websites clean up and analyze federal and, to a lesser extent, state
campaign finance and lobbying reports. Here are some of the best.
Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org): This is the uber-site for
federal campaign finance and lobbying. Simply indispensible. It did some of the
first detailed reporting on the 527 committees during the 2004 presidential race. It
also has a database on federal lobbying.
Center for Public Integrity (www.publicintegrity.org): This nonprofit does
investigative reporting with a clean-government emphasis. It looks closely at the
effects of donations and lobbying on government action.

Campaign Finance Institute (www.cfinst.org): CFI is a think tank on campaign
finance.
National Institute on Money in State Politics (www.followthemoney.org): “Why
look at money in state politics?” asks a headline on this website. The answer is
clear: because there’s a ton of money, and it’s shaping the debate on many big
issues from abortion to health care to property rights. This site features state-bystate searches for donors as well as a nationwide “power search” tool.
Initiative & Referendum Institute (www. iandrinstitute.org/): Coverage of what
Western states do best – punt major issues from the legislature to the voters.
Takes a more academic approach to initiatives than the National Institute on
Money in State Politics.

