Justice: From Arrests to Death Row
Megan Clarke/ The Atlanta Journal-Constitution / mclarke@ajc.com / CAR 2008

Criminal Records Resources
1. Department of Corrections: inmate and conviction files, potentially rich
data files
2. Court clerks – not usually electronic
3. Local Law Enforcement Agencies
4. District Attorney: intent to seek death filings, investigative records,
memos, victim pictures (one file even had the victim’s diary)
5. Defense attorneys
6. Medical Examiners – death certificate database
7. Victim’s families
8. State Bureau of Investigations
Gold Mine
The majority of state correction departments keep very detailed information on
inmates. Some keep data on inmates’ previous convictions in the same file. In
Georgia, that includes number of children, IQ, next-of-kin and even HIV test
results.
Building Database with Criminal Records
-GUI is helpful…especially when you have more than one person entering data. It
also helps when reporters are entering data from criminal records from several
different court houses.
-Code book is key: Create a very clear record layout and codes for variables. Be
consistent: “Yes” and “No” should be the same code throughout the data.
-Do test runs: Have reporters enter in 100 records and check their accuracy. It
also allows you to see if you included all the variables needed for analysis.
-Do spot checks: pull random files and check for coding accuracy. Sometimes
having two fields capturing overlapping data is good – you can check one against
another (ie a field for “rape” and a field for “sex crime involved”).
-Keep a paper record: Make sure every data entry is backed up by a paper or
another electronic record so you can factcheck anything at any point (and in case
reporters on the project change).

----MORE--Seeking a Statistician
Do your research: Read previous studies. See if they have taken a clear stance on
the issue. Avoid press whores, or people whose credibility would be challenged
because they had made it clear they had an agenda. Consider having them sign a
freelance agreement in order to prevent them from publishing before you do.
Find another statistician to look over the methodology.
Crime Online
-Think Clicks and Interactivity. We posted the following:
-quizzes
-video interview with murder victim’s father
-interactive map of percentage of death penalty cases by court circuit
-data (in Excel format for easy use for readers)
-record layout
-criminologist’s report
-geek box: how we did the story

