Writing, editing and presenting the data-driven story
Robert Benincasa, database/projects editor, Gannett News Service
Doug Haddix, projects editor, The Columbus Dispatch
NICAR – Houston
Feb. 28, 2008
WRITING – Benincasa
EDITING – Haddix
Proper coaching and editing along the way will give the reporter and the editor the tools
needed for a powerful story and compelling presentation.
Plug in early. A data-driven story requires a different approach than more traditional
stories. First, understand the data skills and capabilities of the reporter. Adjust accordingly,
spending far more time with a reporter who’s tackling CAR for the first time. The editor needs to
understand the data work, sign off on the methodology and make sure that the findings are triplechecked. Some editors have the data skills themselves to handle this. Others will need to partner
with someone else in the newsroom to ensure that the data work is valid and accurate. Otherwise,
you might be faced with a data-driven correction or retraction.
Prosecute the data. Apply the same standards of quality to questions about the data that
you ask about sources, documents, reports:
• What does the data tell us? How do we know that?
• What does the data NOT tell us?
• What’s incomplete about the data?
• Is there other data that can help give us a fuller picture or cross-check these findings?
• Is this the most current data available? When will new data be released?
• Which experts, officials or bureaucrats regularly use this data?
• Have you talked with them extensively about its strengths and weaknesses?
Outline the story. Mention an outline and many reporters have horrifying flashbacks to
junior high school. You don’t need Roman numerals but you do need a written plan of how to
structure the story. It can be simple: five key themes that will be covered, in the order that they
should appear logically. Or it can be more elaborate on a blockbuster package or multi-day
series: a detailed story budget with key themes for each story and sidebar, with detailed listings
of graphics and photos.
Find the best homes for your data. Graphics and text boxes can be a CAR story’s best
friends. Let them do the heavy lifting so the story can contain only the most significant numbers
and findings, as well as the most relevant background and context. Nerd boxes keep the nerds
happy without turning off readers who care less about the analysis and more about the results.

Insist on clarity and relevance. All of us have written or seen data-driven stories that
read like bureaucratic mush: all trees and no forest, mounds of minutiae, too many numbers, no
“real people.” Don’t make the readers work so hard to grasp the key findings and understand the
point of your story. Use conversational language as much as possible; readers will be pleasantly
surprised.
Require everyday people as sources. Surely, this data-driven story has something to do
with the way we live our lives. Use the data to find key sources whose lives reflect the key
findings. Use the data to find places to report (e.g. the rural census tract in Ohio with the highest
percentage of subprime mortgages).
Read a printout of the story on paper. Without fail, as an editor, I always find things in
a printout of the story that I miss or fail to consider while reading on the computer screen. If you
have graphics or text boxes, print those out and read them with the story. Cross-check all
numbers in the stories against the graphics or text boxes.

PRESENTING – in print – Haddix

Partner with your page designers. Gurus in design talk about the “points of entry” on a
page – elements that readers scan as they decide which stories to read. Make sure that your
designers have enough “points of entry” for the CAR story, which sometimes can be a little
intimidating to readers. Offer to help with logos, headlines, photo captions, pull quotes/text and
other design elements. For a multiple-story package, take responsibility for giving your designers
a detailed story budget that includes accurate, updated lists of photos, graphics, text boxes and
other design elements.
Give designers the tools to do their job well. The only people who hate a 50-inch story
with no visuals more than designers are readers. Plan early for photos, graphics, text boxes, etc.

PRESENTING – on the Web – Benincasa

