Fueling a good story
Using data to investigate Big Oil and renewable fuels
Paula Lavigne – The Des Moines Register – plavigne@dmreg.com - 515-745-3428
With oil prices topping $100 a barrel and consumers feeling pinched at the pump,
the nation is turning more toward renewable energy sources such as ethanol and
biodiesel. Think this is just a story for the Corn Belt? Think again.
A Congressional mandate passed last year requires the use of 35 billion gallons
of renewable energy by 2022. That would be roughly more than 10 percent of
today’s total petroleum consumption.
The demand for food-based fuels has helped push corn and soybean prices to
record highs. That means the price of your sodas, cereal, meat, milk, and
anything else made with corn, corn syrup, or a corn-fed animal is going to cost
more at the grocery store. And so will the price of tortillas in Mexico and tofu in
Japan.
Also consider that the merger of corn and oil marries two of the most politically
connected, highly subsidized, internationally traded, and competitive industries,
and you’ve got great potential for data.
Suggestions here can help you report on both renewable energy and on the
petroleum industry in general. These are just the tip of the iceberg as more data
on renewable fuels are appearing almost daily.

Renewable energy basics
The Renewable Fuels Association at www.ethanolrfa.org has statistics
showing the number, location and capacity of ethanol plants (refineries)
nationwide.
(Although don’t use their figures on international ethanol consumption.)
National Biodiesel Board at www.biodiesel.org has similar information for
biodiesel consumption and facilities.
National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition at www.e85fuel.com also has general
ethanol information as well as information on the number and make/model of
flex-fuel vehicles (meaning those that can run on 85 percent ethanol).
American Coalition for Ethanol at www.ethanol.org has less data than other
sites but it has a decent roundup of ethanol-related legislation and incentives by
state.

Ethanol Promotion and Information Council www.epicinfo.org is primarily an
industry supported group that helps market ethanol to the general public.
The Des Moines Register’s biofuels site at
www.DesMoinesRegister.com/biofuels . Yeah, it’s shameless self promotion, but
we’ve got a lot of national and international data and links to recent reports on
our site. Plus we have some basic information on how ethanol and biodiesel are
made, how a flex-fuel car works, etc.

Subsidies, incentives, more taxpayer $$$
U.S. Department of Energy
www.energy.gov
The DOE funds renewable energy programs through several departments
via grants to private companies, universities, non-profit entities and
research agencies. It also spends money on bioenergy projects internally.
About 42 states received a total of $700 million from 2001 to 2007 and
that figure is only expected to grow.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
www.usda.gov
The USDA hands out a lot of money for both research and production
incentives through the following programs: Cooperative State Research,
Education, and Extension Service has the primary responsibility of
granting money to public and private entities, most of which are
universities; Farm Service Agency’s Commodity Credit Corporation
bioenergy program. Payments are based on the plant's annual increase in
gallons of biofuels produced; USDA Rural Development also offers
grants and loans to businesses, producers, and other rural enterprises for
building, operating or improving biofuel plants and investing in new
technologies or developments that further innovations in biofuels.
IRS Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit or “Blender’s Credit”
This is the most important. The credit is 51 cents a gallon for ethanol and
$1 a gallon for biodiesel made from agricultural products (50 cents for
biodiesel from restaurant grease). It actually goes to the refinery (the oil
company that buys ethanol to mix with petroleum) but it theoretically gets
passed down to the ethanol producer through higher prices.
You can generally figure the total subsidy by multiplying the plant’s
operational capacity by the amount of the credit.
Renewable Fuels Standard
This is a mandate, not a subsidy, but it is what will keep the ethanol
industry alive. The RFS also pits ethanol producers against Big Oil in a big

way. Congress approved a new RFS in 2007, mandating that the nation
use 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel by 2022. You can keep up with the
rules at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/ . The RFA has a good
explanation here http://www.ethanolrfa.org/resource/standard/ .
State and local subsidies/incentives
From Alaska to Texas, states have established their own mandates and
incentives. The Renewable Fuels Association does a decent job of
tracking them (www.ethanolrfa.org) . A 2007 study by a decidedly antisubsidy group also put them together well.
It’s at : http://www.iisd.org/publications/pub.aspx?pno=904
These policies are fluctuating rapidly at the state level. Check with your
state’s tax, energy, agriculture and legislative research offices to find the
most recent information.

Environment
Environmental Protection Agency
www.epa.gov
The EPA has information on violations at biofuel refineries in its
Enforcement and Compliance History database at http://www.epaecho.gov/echo/
U.S. Department of Energy Argonne National Laboratory
http://www.transportation.anl.gov/software/GREET/
The GREET model is a nifty multi-layered Excel workbook – with a bit of a
learning curve – used to compare emissions (CO2 , smog, etc.) of different
types of fuel (gasoline, diesel, ethanol, hydrogen, etc.) among different
types of engines (direct-injection, electric, etc.). And it calculates the
process of making and delivering the fuel to the consumer as well.
State/county natural resources, environmental regulators
Whichever agency in your state regulates air permits, water pollution, etc.,
should have data on the environmental impact of any type of refinery. This
is often under the agriculture department’s bureau of weights and
measures but also could be within your state’s environmental regulations
department as well.

Politics
Campaign contributions and lobbying. Farmers and big oil. Does it get any more
political? Big oil tends to spend more money on campaign contributions whereas
the ag sector focuses on lobbying.

Center for Responsive Politics www.opensecrets.org
CRP has flagged Political Action Committees and individual donors by
industry, so you can try to narrow in on petroleum and gas vs. alternative
energy and agriculture.
Biofuels are under Miscellaneous Energy and Alternative Energy
Production & Services.
However, those categories includes biofuels as well as wind energy, fuel
cell technology and solar, so you need to know the companies you’re
looking for.
Also look at the lobbyist reports.
http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp
You might have to do a lot of digging here looking at individual reports to
see that big player like Wal Mart and Goldman Sachs lobby alongside
Archer Daniels Midland and the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition when it
comes to biofuels.

International trade
Energy Information Administration http://www.eia.doe.gov/
Whether you’re researching oil, ethanol or any other kind of fuel, this is the place
to go to find import, export and consumption data, as well as retail gas prices.
Under “Petroleum > Imports/Exports & Pipelines” (especially under this sublink
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_move_top.asp) you can sort and select by
country of origin/destination and product. For ethanol, you want to choose
“Oxygenates – Fuel Ethanol”
Company level – (sorry, long URL)
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/company_level_imp
orts/cli.html
This tells you exactly which companies imported how much of what type of
fuel from which country into which port. I was surprised at this level of
detail.
The EIA also has a link for Alternative & Renewable Fuels
(http://www.eia.doe.gov/fuelrenewable.html) but I find that it doesn’t provide the
type of detailed information that the links under Petroleum provide.
My last EIA plug: If you can’t find something, or just need an expert, the EIA folks
are incredibly helpful in pulling data, explaining topics, and just pointing you in
the right direction. You can find them by topic at:
http://www.eia.doe.gov/contactus.html
U.S. International Trade Commission
http://dataweb.usitc.gov/
USITC also provides trade data, although you might need someone to talk you
through using its database and finding the right product codes. Fuel ethanol has
a different code than beverage ethanol (aka vodka).
USDA Foreign Agricultural Service

http://www.fas.usda.gov/ Useful for finding out production, exports and imports
or other countries.
Attaché Reports: http://www.fas.usda.gov/scriptsw/AttacheRep/default.asp
On the attaché reports, you can search by biofuels as a commodity and bring up
individual country profiles. These are kept fairly up to date and are including
more countries under biofuels all the time.
Manchester Trade
http://www.manchestertrade.com/index.cfm
This is a private consulting service that tracks trade data and developments in
many areas, including biofuels.

Automotive
U.S. Department of Energy : Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
http://www.fueleconomy.gov/
This site has data on gas prices and on mileage for various automobiles, which in
some cases includes mileage estimates for both gasoline and biofuels. Includes
the number and type of biofuel-compatible automobiles. It also has a lot of basics
on how different engines and fuels work. And it has a database
http://www.eere.energy.gov/afdc/fuels/stations.html of alternative-fuel refueling
stations (from ethanol to liquefied natural gas). It has a nifty feature that lets you
plan your travel route in conjunction with the type of fuel (or electricity) you need.
The same link provides a count of all renewable fuel stations by state.
National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition at www.e85fuel.com also has general
ethanol information as well as information on the number and make/model of
flex-fuel vehicles (meaning those that can run on 85 percent ethanol).

Other
Securities & Exchange Commission www.sec.gov has information on several
biofuels companies, even some that aren’t publicly traded. Wall Street was
investing in more and more biofuel ventures, so it’s likely your company has
some information in here.
State and federal courts also can be a good source for investigating biofuels as
the industry faces more environmental criticism and perhaps some shareholder
lawsuits over lost profits.
Congressional testimony covers the gamut from automakers arguing over fuel
efficiency to the petroleum and ethanol makers battling over the renewable fuels
mandate last year.
Food prices If you’re interested in the impact on food prices, you can find a
wealth of data on commodities at the Chicago Board of Trade www.cbot.com and
the USDA Economic Research Service at www.ers.usda.gov , with a detailed
report on food expenditures at
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/CPIFoodAndExpenditures/Data/

