NICAR Conference
Houston, TX

February, 28 2008

INTRANETS THAT WORK*
Ideas for Building Something Not
Merely Cool But Useful Too

*Results vary. You may, or may not ,end up as chipper as this clip art man.
In the years that I’ve been involved with
data-driven newsroom intranets, there
has been much discussion of technology
– what to use for page coding, for data
storage, etc. – but little discussion of the
big picture. What do newsrooms actually
need? What role should the CAR
specialist play? And, more recently, what
should be put online for readers?
I’d like to offer up a few ideas here that
pertain to everything BUT technology. I
believe that you can do almost anything

a newsroom needs with any number of
tools, and I will even go so far as to
admit that I am totally lacking in
expertise on the subjects of which server
is fastest and which scripting software
offers the most wizards.
But I do have some opinions about
content and how an intranet should fit in
with an overall CAR program. I’d like to
mention some of these, and then open
up the floor for discussion.

GET WITH THE PROGRAM: An intranet can’t be an entity unto itself.
If you just stick content up in internal cyberspace, you’re basically
guaranteeing yourself a thick layer of cyberdust. At the Ledger, the
CAR intranet is a component of a much larger CAR program. We call
ours “Standardized Town Reporting,” and every local reporter on our
staff knows that it’s their job to bring meaningful statistical context to
their community coverage. When numbers are bandied about by
sources about demographics or taxation, they are armed with facts.
When they need to determine the most or least of something, they can
do it themselves, without bugging me, and without having to learn
database software. Which segue’s into point two…
SOFTWARE SKILLS GOOD, DATA SKILLS BETTER: I have not
seen the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, but I
have seen some pretty good reporters emerge from spreadsheet
classes without a clue about how to use software on their job. My
philosophy has always been to get data, not software, into the hands
of reporters and show them, via easy-to-use intranet tools, how
certain databases can smarten their daily stories and spark enterprise
Robert Gebeloff
The Star-Ledger
Rgebeloff@starledger.com

NICAR Conference
Houston, TX

February, 28 2008

ideas. Instead of telling reporters about the Census, I put the data on
their Web browser in a well-organized fashion, allow them to easily
move from state level to county level to town level, provide them with
a Web-based ranking tool, etc. And I do the same for more than a
dozen other datasets. If they then want to learn software skills, they’ll
go into their training with a specific mission in mind, and they will be
more likely to succeed.
BE A DATABASE EDITOR: The title database editor can mean many
things, but in this case, I speak specifically of the process of editing
databases for staff use. Everything we stick on our intranet is cleaned
and vetted, not just for accuracy but for meaning. Ask not just what
databases are important, but what fields are important. What queries
will your colleagues need most? What derived fields might be useful?
LINK, LINK, LINK: For most of us, intranet content can be placed
into two general subgroups—person-level data and community-level
data. Wherever possible, it’s extremely useful to tie it all together.
Create an all-in-one search that runs a person’s name through every
person-level database in one swoop. Standardize all town-level data
on CENSUS FIPS codes and provide an all-in-one community search.
Tie data together wherever it’s useful – if you standardize tables as
you go along, it will be a snap to marry, say, Census data into a data
set of crime stats.
DRILL, DRILL, DRILL: If you’re working with a dataset containing 75
fields, don’t feel compelled to provide everything at once. Be a
database editor. Figure out what the key fields are. Then if the user
wants more, allow them to drill down to the full record.
LEARN TO RANK: If there’s one feature that journalists can’t get
enough of, it’s ranking. Providing name look-ups provides a simple
fact, but if you let reporters rank a dataset using various categories
and setting various parameters, then they’re playing with data. Next
thing you know, they’ll be generating ideas and making enterprise.
DON’T THROW OUT YOUR NOTEBOOK: Some CAR folk hesitate to
get involved with intranet work because they fear the time
commitment will draw them away from other work. The truth is:
Intranet work is time consuming – at first. But once you’ve got the
skills, the time commitment drops. And if you make something useful,
the rewards will make up for the lost time.

Robert Gebeloff
The Star-Ledger
Rgebeloff@starledger.com

NICAR Conference
Houston, TX

February, 28 2008

ONTO THE WEB: If you’ve taken on the responsibility of gathering
and cleaning public records, and you’ve built an interface that makes
them accessible to the staff in a useful way, why stop there? Many
papers now have extended their intranets outside of the firewall for
readers.
In late 2005, we began moving some of our databases online to go
with stories in the newspaper based on the data. This culminated in
the 2007 launch of New Jersey By The Numbers, a full-fledged section
of the paper’s Web site containing more than 40 different search
options.
Some tips/observations from this experience:
1) Online databases may or may not draw gigantic crowds.
However, they will draw DEEP crowds. Your users will stay on
the site a while and run numerous queries – this will make your
Web people love you.
2) It’s relatively easy to put simple look-ups online – such as
payrolls. The better sites have value-added – ranking tools,
comparison tools, things that bring the numbers to life and give
users context.
3) Deal with privacy concerns the same way as you would for a
news story. Public employees might object to having their
salaries posted – but does the public’s right to know outweigh
these concerns? etc.
4) Online, we’re not just competing with other newspapers, we’re
competing with other information providers, such as Trulia,
Greatschools, city-data.com. Think of what you can bring to the
table that these sites can’t.
5) Consider “open” design standards. The future will likely involve
merging your data into the Web site in many ways – a story
about crime might take a slice of your crime database as an
insert. This is more difficult or impossible if you’re using a
proprietary design system.

Robert Gebeloff
The Star-Ledger
Rgebeloff@starledger.com

