Quick‐hit CAR Stories
Sarah Okeson
Investigative Reporter
Florida Today
sokeson@floridatoday.com
2008 NICAR conference

Being ready to do quick‐hit CAR stories is a lot like cooking. It helps to have a well‐
stocked kitchen and be organized. Here are some of the stories that have been done at
Florida Today and elsewhere with fairly common databases.
1. Sex offenders and voter registration. James Dean at Florida Today looked at a
proposal that would ban registered sex offenders from voting at schools, daycare
centers and parks. He found that 138 sex offenders or predators are registered to vote
in Brevard County. The proposal hasn’t been passed by the county government.
2. Parcel data. John McCarthy at Florida Today used parcel data to look at developers
with land that gets an agricultural tax break. Some developers use Florida’s “greenbelt
law,” which allows counties to assess farmland at below‐market value. McCarthy found
that 90 landowners in the county received new agricultural assessments last year on
nearly 4,0000 acres of land, saving $1.1 million. Among them was Lennar Homes, one of
the nation’s largest homeowners.
3. Accident data. Jeff Schweers at Florida Today built a database of fatal accidents in
2007 in Brevard County and looked at where they occurred and what some of the
common factors were. He found that alcohol, speed and carelessness were some of the
leading contributors to fatal accidents and that fatal accidents had decreased from
2006. ¶
4. Fires. Ellen Gabler and Ben Poston at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel looked fire calls
and used the database to find that most houses that burn down don’t have smoke
alarms. About 42% of the residences without detectors were in the city's poorest census
tracts.
5. Booze. Mike Wilkinson at The Detroit News looked at statistics from the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission and found that the favored drink to get plastered on was
vodka with sales up about 16 percent since 2005. Overall, per capita drinking in
Michigan has fallen with beer consumption down the most.
6. Overtime. Terri Langford at the Houston Chronicle looked at overtime among prison
guards in Texas. She found that a move to eliminate most overtime by the Texas

Department of Criminal Justice, replacing it with comp time, could be contributing to a
rising turnover rate among prison guards.

If you have common databases on‐hand, you can return to them again and again, and
your stories will become more sophisticated as you grow more familiar with the data
and think of other things you can look into. I did several other stories using
transportation data that grew out of the quick‐hit accident stories I did with other
reporters.
I found that a state program to target speeders by setting up speed zones on I‐95 with
higher fines didn’t actually target counties with high speed‐related accident rates on the
interstate. The speed zones were in the counties of lawmakers who had supported the
bill. Florida hadn’t analyzed crashes using numbers for how much traffic was on the
interstate.
I also did a story on high‐risk drivers using FARS data and local court data. I noticed that
some of the drivers in prison for killing people while drunk still had valid driver’s
licenses. Brevard County wasn’t reporting some DUI convictions to the state
Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles, and the clerk of court said there
were probably other cases out there like that. He emailed me a spreadsheet, and I
found 15 drivers in Brevard County with DUI convictions that weren’t on their records.
Five of them had valid driver’s licenes. The state sent out letters suspending their
licenses.

