Sarah Okeson
investigative reporter
Florida Today
sokeson@floridatoday.com
2008 NICAR conference

Good consumer stories use thorough reporting from documents and CAR plus looking at
the people behind them. Here are some of the basics I’ve used in researching consumer
stories.
1. Nexis. I spent more than a decade in a shop that doesn’t have this and was thrilled to
discover the joys of Nexis at Florida Today. My best Nexis moment so far was finding the
criminal background of a top executive at a home remodeling company I’ve been writing
about. At first I thought it must be just someone with the same name, but when I got his
mug shot I knew it was him. An assistant statewide prosecutor is currently coordinating
possible criminal charges against the officers of the business.
2. Better Business Bureau. http://welcome.bbb.org/. I usually run firms through my
local Better Business Bureau to get a sense of how many complaints they have against
them. Get to know the head of your local Better Business Bureau.
3. Regulatory agencies. Find out what agencies regulate what you’re writing about. I’ve
gotten a lot of help from the Florida Department of Business and Professional
Regulation on various stories. I also discovered that Florida has an agency that regulates
oranges (makes sense) when I was writing about a citrus dealer. It turned out the
agency had a file on him including a letter where he was called an embarrassment to the
industry.
4. Court records. Always a good source of information. I run people through Brevard
County’s online court records to see what lawsuits they have against them. I looked at
the divorce records of the citrus dealer. I also found that he had been sued by other
citrus companies and prosecuted by the state Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Services.
5. Look for good anecdotes. Find interesting people. I talked to a man who was dying
from brain cancer when he was ripped off by an unlicensed contractor selling hurricane
shutters who also happened to be one of our advertisers. For the citrus dealer story, I
talked to the couple he had sold land to on eBay for $9,200 although its appraised value
was $276.
6. Improvise. Don’t be afraid to look at your story in a different way. I visited the stand
of the citrus dealer and became curious about the orange juice it was selling. He had
asked me not to return to his property so I asked my husband to swing by the place to

pick up some orange juice after he picked our kids up from school. According to the
label, it was organic. I was suspicious of this because of his past troubles so I figured out
who regulates orange juice in Florida and asked them about it. They paid him a visit and
found that he was buying orange juice from someone else, taking their label off and
putting his on. We put a pdf on our web site of the agency’s order to stop selling juice.

