Stan Ketterer
Associate professor and
graduate coordinator
School of Journalism & Broadcasting
Oklahoma State University
Phone: 405-744-8270
E-mail: stan.ketterer@okstate.edu

Steps in a CAR Story: From a Question
to Data Analysis, Reporting and Writing
Computer-assisted reporting is increasingly using the methods of social science. Overall, social
science research is conducted in a systematic way to help ensure the integrity of the results. If the system
is flawed, the results will be flawed. It is based on an analysis of empirical, or real world, data. The
results of the research are public, including the method. This approach allows others to replicate the
method, including checking it to determine how well it works.
This handout contains a systematic way do a CAR story from starting with a question through
data analysis, reporting and writing. It combines traditional social science methods with the process
approach to news writing, developed by Don Murray and refined by Christopher Scanlan, Roy Peter
Clark and others. Essentially, the process approach divides news writing into five steps: idea, report,
organize, draft and rewrite. When the data analysis is completed, reporters will generally have ideas for
their stories. These ideas will help them know where to begin the reporting and writing process. As with
all stories, they must still report the story, including verifying information if needed, and write it in a
way that makes it compelling to readers, viewers, listeners and users.
The steps below are divided into three sections. The first section involves starting with an initial
question and obtaining the data. It is the same for all stories involving computer-assisted reporting. The
second section involves analyzing the data. The data must first be screened and cleaned. Then, each
variable is examined as a whole to get a basic understanding of it, including trends. Next, groups within
variables are compared to determine if they differ. Groups are then compared across variables to
examine possible alternative explanations for difference. The third section involves reporting and
writing the story. Overall, the process is the same as for all stories. The data analysis normally generates
an idea. Reporting must follow to confirm that it is a story and to determine why and how it affects
people. Once the reporting is completed, the story must be organized. Then, a draft is written based on
the outline. The draft is polished and flaws are fixed during rewriting. Finally, editors, page designers
and others complete the task and the story is published.
Overall, the steps must be completed in order. Consequently, they are presented as a checklist
with short explanations and each step can be checked off when completed.
Initial Question to Obtaining Data
 Step 1: Start with a question. Begin with a question, usually involving the relationships
between variables such as: Do teacher salaries differ by gender? You can develop the question
yourself, it can come from a tip, or it can come from your editor or news director. The question
must be newsworthy, so discuss it with your editor or news director.

1

 Step 2: Review previous stories and methods. Examine what others have reported about the
question and what methods they have used to answer it. After you have reviewed your media
outlet’s archive, a good place to go next is the Resource Center at the Investigative Reporters and
Editors Web site (ire.org). It has an archive with more than 20,000 stories, and it also includes
tip sheets from reporters who may have conducted a similar investigation. Moreover, you can
search commercial databases such as Lexis/Nexis for stories and in some cases you may need to
review academic sources, such as with the ProQuest Direct database. During this process, you
may have formed an opinion about the relationship that can be expressed in the form of a
statement. A hypothesis is a statement that predicts the relationship between two variables: Male
teachers will have higher salaries than female teachers. You can test your hypothesis in the
second section. If you are still uncertain about the link between the variables, you can examine it
as a research question.
 Step 3: Determine what data is needed. You need to determine what data is needed to answer
your question or hypothesis. The IRE archive and other sources will likely have mentioned
potential data sources. In addition, you may need to consult government officials and your
database editor, if you have one.
 Step 4: Determine who has the data and request it. Once you have identified the data you
need, you must find out who has the data. Then, you need to make a formal request for the data.
Knowledge of your state’s sunshine law will help you know your rights to electronic records,
which vary from state to state. Make sure you also request the number of records, a record layout
and coding sheet. The number of records will help you know whether you have it all. The record
layout will tell you where the data is situated. The coding sheet will tell you how the data is
coded.
Analyzing Data
 Step 5: Data screening and cleaning. Once you have obtained the data, you must ensure that it
is complete, accurate and coded consistently. All data is dirty. This step must be conducted
before the data analysis begins. If the data is flawed, the analysis will be flawed: garbage in,
garbage out. If you are going to conduct inferential statistical tests, the data also must meet the
assumptions of the test that you are going to use. If not, the test can produce misleading results.
 Step 6: Examine each variable as a whole. Examine each variable separately, such as gender or
salary. Basically, you want to get a better overall picture of the data via description, which will
give you a better understanding of it. You will be describing the variable using descriptive
statistics such as minimum, maximum, average and median. Visual representations, such as
charts and graphs, can help you see overall trends.
 Step 7: Examine groups within variables. Now, you can compare the groups within variables,
such as males and females. First, you can examine the descriptive statistics of the groups, such as
the average salaries for females and males, to see if they differ. Then, you can use an inferential
statistical test, such as a t-test, which is used to compare two averages, or means. The inferential
test will tell you whether the averages are statistically significant, meaning the difference is more
than you would expect by chance or random variation.
 Step 8: Examine groups across variables. If you find group differences within variables, such
as salary differences between females and males, you can further examine the relationship by
2

examining other variables that might influence it. In our example, the difference in salaries might
be affected by other variables, such as type of job, education, tenure in district, and previous
experience. If the gender differences in salary persist when the effects of these variables are
considered, it provides more support for a direct relationship between gender and salary. If the
results are mixed, it helps identify when differences persist and when they do not, giving a more
nuanced understanding of the relationship.
Reporting and Writing
 Step 9: Idea. At this point, the process approach to news writing takes over. Your analysis
should have given you an idea and possible focus for a story. Talk it over with you editor before
proceeding to the next step.
 Step 10. Report. Conduct your reporting with your idea as your possible focus. As with all
ideas, it may or may not turn out to be a story. In some cases, you must verify the information in
the database, such as a criminal record. Fact checking is an important part of reporting. Just
because it is in a database, does not mean it is correct. Talk to all who are responsible for the
situation and to those who are living it. You must put a human face on the story and tell how it
affects people.
 Step 11: Organize. Once you have finished your reporting, meet again with your editor.
Determine if it is one or more stories. It is also a good time to bring in other newsroom
personnel, including photographers, graphic artists and page designers. Find the focus or theme
of your story, and do short outline of the main points that you will be covering. Failure to
organize the story is often the key flaw in the writing process.
 Step 12: Draft. Once you have organized your story, use your outline as the road map to write it.
Everything in the story should relate to the theme.
 Step 13: Revise. Remember to save time for revision. It will likely take several, including
revisions requested by your editors or news director. Allowing time for revision can mean the
difference between a good story and a compelling one.
 Step 14: Publish. Also, allow time for your editors to do their work. If it warrants prominent
display or if it is part of a series, allowing time for page design and presentation will be more
important. Finally, it is ready for publication.

3

