1

NNICAR
CAR for money and politics
Bill Allison
Sunlight Foundation

David Heath
The Seattle Times

James V. Grimaldi
The Washington Post

ballison@
sunlightfoundation.com

dheath@seattletimes.com

grimaldij@washpost.com

•

LOBBYING. Find lobbying reports at the Senate Office of Public Disclosure, http://sopr.senate.gov/.
PDFs with amounts of money paid to lobbyists, the issues on which they lobbied, sometimes the agencies
they lobbied and who hired them. In addition, the primary place of business in the U.S. and the interests of
foreign governments and foreign companies in those clients when disclosed.
DOJ’s Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) web site can provide information on the names of
lobbyists for foreign entities. At the Dept of Justice, someimes there is more in the file to review and copy
the files there http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fara/.
The Center for Public Integrity has taken a stab at a comprehensive lobbying web site.
http://www.publicintegrity.org/lobby/ Includes 2.2 million records from the Senate's Web site from about
200,000 lobbying forms (and amendments) filed since 2000.
The Center for Responsive Politics maintains a lobbyist database:
http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp but it is not as inclusive or as organized as Political
Moneyline, http://moneyline.cq.com Downside for MoneyLine is that it is duplicative and includes former
lobbyists (such as dead people).
Washington Representatives, which also has a web site, www.lobbyists.info offers an up-to-date site
of registered lobbyists. Lacks historical data. Paid site but offers free, 5-day trials. Often includes more
timely information than SOPR because they fact-check the Senate filings.

•

CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS. Track the political cash flow across several states: IRE’s Campaign
Finance Information Center has a database that includes contributions and how the candidates spent their
donations. In some cases, it includes money flow to and from political action committees (PACS),
candidate committees and party committees. http://www.campaignfinance.org/ Tips about stories:
http://www.campaignfinance.org/background.html
In addition, some quick sites: We track federal campaign contributions by individual, company or
industry at www.opensecrets.org, the Web site of the Center for Responsive Politics. It is free and
accurate.
CRP codes donations to make them more accessible than they are on the Federal Election
Commission site, www.fec.gov. You can also search by individual donor or employer at the FEC Web site:
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/disclosure_data_search.shtml. And if you want total control over the
data, you can download all the campaign data and create your own database:
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftp_download.shtml.

2

Another site run by Congressional Quarterly, http://moneyline.cq.com requires paid registrations.
Organizes material a little differently than CRP. Generally charges for additional information, but might
give free pass or special deal for smaller news organizations or students.
FECinfo also has reliable lobbying information. Selected state information at The Institute on Money
in State Politics http://www.followthemoney.org/
•

527 GROUPS - IRS DATA. Sorry for the ugly URL at the end of this entry—what do you expect from the
the Internal Revenue Service? The IRS has made the disclosures filed by section 527 organizations—the
independent political committees that can raise money in unlimited amounts from any source—searchable,
albeit with a cranky, complicated, squint-inducing interface. You get raw data from the search, but right
now it’s the best thing going on 527s. The data is available here:
http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoAdvanced8871Search.action

•

FUNDRACE 2008, which can currently be found on the Huffington Post Web site at
http://Fundrace.huffingtonpost.com, tracks presidential donations on a Google map, allowing users to drill
down to the street address. It’s a very useful site for tracking presidential fundraising. The site was
originally created by EyeBeam, a nonprofit that’s Web and design oriented rather than a money-in-politics
shop. Fundrace uses data from the FEC.

•

THE CENTER FOR PUBLIC INTEGRITY tracked payments from campaigns to campaign consultants
in the 2004 election (available here: http://www.publicintegrity.org/consultants/search.aspx). This is a very
useful tool for finding out who the big players are that actually shape the national electoral discourse, and
it’s also worth checking to see which campaign consultants moonlight as lobbyists for special interests in
their spare time. The data is out of date, but you can cross reference the names of consultants in CPI’s
database with expenditure from House or presidential campaigns at CRP’s Open Secrets site to find out
where these guys are working now.

•

PRIVATELY FUNDED CONGRESSIONAL TRIPS, FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES, STAFFER
SALARIES. A new site called Legistorm, http://www.legistorm.com/ has recently been launched by a forprofit company. This Web site has the most extensive online information on congressional trips, financial
disclosure forms and congressional staffer salaries. Right now, it is free, but I expect that they will start
charging for data. Hopefully, they will have prices that media can afford, but that remains to be seen. This
is a true advance. Previously, most of these materials had to be obtained in person from the House or
Senate -- salaries could be pulled from published reports. The company has input the data and created a
very usable Web site.

•

TRIPS. Congressional rules permit lawmakers to take trips paid by private companies, nonprofits,
universities and other outside groups as long as legislators limit what they take to what the rules call
"reasonable and necessary expenses." CQ PoliticalMoneyLine, http://moneyline.cq.com – formerly
www.fecinfo.com – also has analyzed privately funded travel from 2000 to 2006 as disclosed by members
and senators.
Recently, the Center for Public Integrity took Medill’s database and updated it and added staff
travel. http://www.publicintegrity.org/powertrips/. The Center for Responsive Politics also tracks trips at
http://opensecrets.org/travel/index.asp.

•

EARMARKS. Taxpayers for Common Sense, www.taxpayers.net, has pulled together all earmarks for
fiscal 2008, an impressive feat. You can download their full detailed excel spreadsheets, which lists the
earmarks in all appropriations and authorization bills and includes the Congressional sponsor for each
earmark, the amount and the recipient. TCS does its own in-depth investigations of particular earmarks, and
are great consultants for those planning to track their own members’ earmarks. Online at
www.taxpayer.net. (Disclosure: Taxpayers for Common Sense is a Sunlight grantee.)

3

The Sunlight Foundation and TCS have posted a wiki version of the database at
http://earmarkwatch.org and an interactive map, allowing you to see where the earmarks go geographically,
at http://sunlightlabs.com/earmarks/.
For a detailed analysis of legislation by tracking bills, try www.MAPLight.org, which provides the
support and opposition bills garner from interest groups and the campaign contributions given by those
interest groups to members of Congress and for the state of California. The site lets users tracks the day-byday, vote-by-vote, impact of political contributions at the federal level. This analysis is based on databases
available from the Center for Responsive Politics at www.opensecrets.org and from official records of the
Library of Congress via GovTrack.us. The resulting database of bills, voting records, and campaign
contributions powers the search engine at MAPLight.org and enables people to see the links between
dollars spent and votes cast in Congress. The site allows users to search by bill, interest group or by
legislators, and also allows similar searches of the California legislature and state Senate. What makes this
site particularly useful is that it provides timelines showing legislative activity alongside contributions,
breaks down the amount of money received by lawmakers from interests opposed to or supporting a
measure (and includes how the member voted), and provides very good graphics showing how the money
is spent. It’s also a very data rich, dense site; be sure to watch the very helpful, 6-minute long tutorial
before digging in. (MAPLight.org is a Sunlight grantee.)
The Seattle Times has 2007 defense earmarks tied to Congressional sponsor, campaign donors and
lobbying activity at http://www.seattletimes.com/favorfactory.
•

CONTRACTS. www.Fedspending.org – a project of OMB Watch – combines data from the Federal
Procurement Data System and the Federal Assistance Award Data System to create a free, searchable
database of federal government contracting and spending. The database allows users to search contracts and
grants by state, congressional district, contracting agency or type of award, and shows where the money is
being spent and whether it was competitively bid. The site was such a hit that when Congress passed the
Federal Funding, Accountability and Transparency Act, requiring the Office of Management and Budget to
provide the same data, the government used OMB Watch’s interface to build its own USASpending.gov.
(FedSpending.org is a Sunlight grantee.)
The Contractor Misconduct Database can be useful when looking for information on federal
contractors. The government awards contracts to companies with histories of misconduct such as contract
fraud and environmental, ethics, and labor violations. In the absence of a centralized federal database
listing instances of misconduct, the Project On Government Oversight (POGO) is providing such data
about the top 50 contractors. The site is available at www.contractormisconduct.org.
GovTrack.us is a user-friendly version of Thomas, the Library of Congress’ site for information on
Congress. GovTrack.us centralizes information on the legislative process into a Web site that can actually
be searched, easily, to find information. Users can search through member of Congress profiles, bills, votes,
and committee action. Users can also create their own Congress-tracker by subscribing to email updates or
by creating RSS feeds to keep informed on the latest developments related to bills, issues, members of
Congress and committees.
Also, the Federal Contracts Database on IRE’s Campaign Finance Information Center. Search for
federal contracts awarded to a particular business: a great place to start when looking at contracts awarded
to companies in your area, or work being performed there. http://www.campaignfinance.org/ You can also
search all contracts at a new government site, http://usaspending.gov or at http://fedspending.org. It shows,
among other things, whether the contract was competitively bid.

•

GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS – a project of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington
(CREW) (http://citizensforethics.org/) that’s also supported by Sunlight – is an online, searchable
compendium of documents acquired from government agencies through the Freedom of Information Act by
CREW, Sunlight, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Project on Government Oversight and Public
Citizen. GovernmentDocs.org provides an online review process that enables people across the Internet to
review, tag and comment on any of the thousands of pages of these previously obscure government
documents. For reporters, I highly recommend looking up the congressional correspondence logs that

4

Sunlight started acquiring from all federal government agencies in Jan. 2008, and posts in a messy but
searchable format on GovernmentDocs.org.
•

TRADE PRESS AND NEWSLETTERS. Most industries have a trade magazine, newspaper or newsletter
covering them and the regulators that regulate them. Many of these can be found on Nexis or Factiva sites,
or are kept in agency libraries.

•

PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS. Nearly every industry has a trade group or professional association,
often based in Washington and state capitals, to represent the industry’s interests. Find the group and get
their publications. Many are online. The Encyclopedia of Associations is available in libraries and online,
but not free, at www.galenet.com The American Association of Association Executives has a Web
directory of associations at http://info.asaenet.org/gateway/OnlineAssocSlist.html takes you to the site of
each association (about 6500 of them), but does not provide a blurb with info about each association like
the Encyclopedia of Associations does.

•

LAWSUITS. Key documents to find a company’s disputes with creditors, employees, rivals, etc. Can be
windows into a company. For our SunCruz story, “Untangling a Lobbyist's Stake in a Casino Fleet,” found
at the Washington Post, www.washingtonpost.com/abramoff, we looked at thousands of documents in
bankruptcy and state court. The SunCruz case led to Abramoff’s unraveling.

•

COMPANY OFFICIALS. The company’s public affairs officers and public officials. Outside public
affairs officials who represent the company. Use discretion depending on the angle of the story. If you can’t
reach them at work, you can call them at home. Get company official names from web sites and from SEC
(see below). Also, Leadership Directories, publisher of government “Yellow Books,” public executive
listings. The web site is http://ldi.bvdep.com and lists the executives at every company. It's expensive but
worth it if you can afford it.

•

FORMER EMPLOYEES AND RIVALS. Employees who have sued the company, though they have an
ax to grind, can often provide inside information. Check lawsuits, get internal directories, get names off
web sites and Google searches.

•

LABOR UNIONS. Often know more about a company than the company officials, where the bodies are
buried. But they also sometimes have an interest to keep the secrets secret. Union officials can put you in
touch with employees.

•

REGULATORS. Rule-making, fines, citations, policy agendas -- often everything important runs through
the federal, state and local agencies that regulate industries. Check rule dockets, warning letters,
enforcement actions, file public-record requests for meetings with officials. e.g., EPA, USDA, OSHA.
http://docket.epa.gov/edkpub/do/EDKStaffCollectionDetailView?objectId=0b0007d480119bf6
All Environmental Protection Agency dockets are found at http://www.epa.gov/epahome/dockets.htm

•

LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES. Find out which legislative and congressional committees have
jurisdiction over the industry. Look at legislation, appropriation bills, hearing reports, investigative reports.
FOIA lawmaker correspondence with regulatory agencies.

•

NON-PROFITS. Many lawmakers have close affiliations with nonprofits. The 990 tax forms for taxexempt, nonprofit organizations are available on Guidestar at www.guidestar.org (free, registration
required). Guidestar’s arrival in many ways superceded the widely used California AG’s Registry of
Charitable Trusts site at http://caag.state.ca.us/charities/. It is still good at some of the harder-to-find
stuff.
The Foundation Center www.fdncenter.org has tax returns and financial info on charities/trusts.
Click on Foundation Finder, http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder.html, which has details and tax returns on

5

70,000 private and community foundations, or to the 990 search engine,
http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder_990.html

•

LAW FIRMS AND LAWYERS. For a nationwide search, try Martindale-Hubbell at
http://www.martindale.com, useful search engine by publisher of the old Martindale hardbound
books.

Some additional sites useful for following the money
Bill Allison, Senior Fellow, ballison@sunlightfoundation.com
To see the full list of project, visit http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/resources

READ the stories and USE the DATABASE: The Seattle Times has 2007 defense earmarks tied
to Congressional sponsor, campaign donors and lobbying activity at
http://www.seattletimes.com/favorfactory.
James V. Grimaldi/Investigative Reporter/The Washington Post/202-334-6000/grimaldij@washpost.com
Investigating Abramoff -- Special Report READ THE STORIES: The Washington Post’s series

on Jack Abramoff www.washingtonpost.com/abramoff
Post’s story on a senator’s e-mark following a fundraiser:
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/metro/interactives/dcschools/ see: PART 5: Lessons in Spending
A Reading Program's Powerful Patron

