Tipsheet
IRE Houston, Feb. 28-Mar 2, 2008
The health beat: drugs and doctors (E)
Feb. 29, 2008
Time: 11:40-12:50 p.m.
Panelists:
Fred Schulte, The Sun
David Heath, The Seattle Times
David McKie, CBC
181 Queen Street
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
1-613-290-7380 (cell)
1-613-288-6523 (office)
1-613-288-6490 (fax)
David_mckie@cbc.ca
http://http-server.carleton.ca/~dmckie/

1) Find out what databases exist in Canada. There are a few databases that come in handy: CADRIS
(adverse drug reactions) NOC (Notice of Compliance) and Drug Products. Health Canada also
tracks vaccines, infectious diseases, and medical devices.
2) What drugs are subject to warnings from regulatory authorities around the globe? Botox,
Avandia and atypical anti-psychotics, to name a few.
3) Find organizations that collect data: in Canada, the main institutions include the Canadian
Institute for Health Information; and IMS Health.
4) Who are the lobbyists and noise makers and what are they concerned about and where do they
express those concerns? A listserv called biojest is one source. So are medical journals.
5) What drugs are companies working on? For instance, there was a piece in the NY Sunday Times
(Feb. 24, 2008) on a top researcher for Eli Lilly & Company and the work that he’s doing to find
the next drug to fight schizophrenia because the anti-psychotics on the market are not working.
6) Who are the other players in the game besides the lobbyists and the noise makers? In the
United States you have politicians such as Charles Grassley who have recently kicked up a fuss
about the overuse and abuse of atypical anti-psychotics in seniors.
7) Develop strategies for keeping on top of the latest trends.
8) Pay attention to sales data: what’s hot and what’s not? And then chart how those drugs are
doing in adverse drug reaction databases.
9) Scour discussion groups to find out what people are talking about.

10) What are the next big drugs companies are researching? The fact that they’re anxious to replace
the older stock might say something about the safety of those drugs.
11) Pay attention to lawsuits.
12) Thinking outside the box: hospital admissions from places such as nursing homes and day cares;
how much are drug companies spending on research compared to marketing? How long is it
taking new drugs in the pipeline to be approved?
13) A word about warning letters: find ways to report on whether they’re working? Are doctors
paying attention to them. If not, why not?
14) Scour past debacles such as the Vioxx recall for lessons learned. For instance, many of the
warnings about the drug could be found in minutes of committee meetings of regulatory
authorities and adverse drug reaction databases.
15) Use FOI to gain access to databases and reports and do the same for other jurisdictions.

