NICAR Annual Conference
Feb. 28 – March 2, 2008
Houston, Texas
Some key aviation databases
Trebor Banstetter
The Star-Telegram
tbanstetter@star-telegram.com

Airline service has been big news during the past few years – and most of that news has
been negative.
Consumers nationwide have experienced delays and diversions at record levels, and there
have been reports of passengers stranded on parked airplanes for hours. In some cases,
passengers have waited at airports for days trying to get a seat on a flight because of bad
weather. Some consumers are pushing Congress to enact passenger protection laws,
while the industry is lobbying for major upgrades to the air traffic control system.
Regardless, some significant stories can be found at every city’s airport, and aviation
experts say things are only going to get worse over the next few years as demand for
travel grows.
The reporter armed with a few key databases can dig a lot deeper into this ongoing story.
Here are a few that are ideal for the CAR toolbox of anyone covering an airport, aviation
or transportation in general. They are all available for download from the Department of
Transportation, at
http://www.transtats.bts.gov/Databases.asp?Mode_ID=1&Mode_Desc=Aviation&Subjec
t_ID2=0
You can also visit http://transtats.bts.gov and select the “Aviation” link in the “Data
Finder” section.
Airline On-Time Performance Data – A basic report card
This database contains on-time arrival data and departure for nonstop domestic flights
operated by major carries. It has records going back to 1987, and data is offered on a
monthly basis. At the time of this writing, the most recent data was for December 2007.
Using Access, you can use this database to determine the overall on-time performance at
any airport, which airlines had the best and worst records at your airport, who has the
most cancelled flights, and whether performance has improved over time. You can also
look at things like how much time is spent between pulling away from a gate to “wheels
up,” or takeoff, or how long it takes aircraft to taxi in after landing.

You can identify the worst-performing flight in any particular time period for your
airport. At Dallas/Fort International Airport, for example, ExpressJet Flight 2973 to
Houston was 104 minutes late, on average, during the month.
The DOT uses this database to produce a national report every month, called the Air
Travel Consumer Report. Those can be found here. While it does have some numbers for
individual airports, it doesn’t dig particularly deeply, nor does it look at how individual
airlines perform at each airport.
The databases are large. The December 2007 dataset, for example, has 614,130 records.
However, you can reduce the size when you download it by filtering for geographic
region. There is also an option to download only the specific fields you’re interested in,
which also helps make it more manageable.
“Form 41” Data - Drilling deep into the numbers
Airlines submit an extensive amount of information to the DOT on a regular basis, on
what the industry calls “Form 41.” That data is culled into a number of databases that can
be downloaded from the agency’s site, and they include an array of financial and
operational records.
Some of the more useful databases include a subset called “T-100” data. It contains
information about every route flown nationwide, and also includes international routes
that begin or end in the U.S. (I wrote an article for Uplink in September/October 2006
which goes into more detail about using T-100 data for stories, and am handing out some
copies at this panel. Copies are also available from NICAR.)
T-100 data includes a flight’s origin, destination, number of passengers, seats available
and other information. It can be used to measure which flights are the most popular,
which airlines are carrying the most people, and which cities are more or less popular
with travelers today.
The data can also be used to calculate a route’s “load factor” – the number of passengers
divided by the number of seats available. The greater then load factor, the more full the
flight. Airlines love high load factors, which in the past year have been averaging 80
percent or more. But for consumers, packed cabins also mean more chance of delay, less
luggage space and fewer options for frequent-flier awards and upgrades.
The data can also provide a clear picture of airline competition at your airport. Has a
discount carrier like Southwest Airlines or AirTran Airways begun to compete? Is it
stealing passengers from traditional carriers like American and United? Is an airline
reporting lower-than-average load factors, which might indicate it will stop service?
For business writers, there is also a host of financial data in the Form 41 financial
database. It can be of special interest, because the information is specific to the airline,
and doesn’t include subsidiaries or related businesses that will sometimes be lumped in
by a parent company on SEC filings.

Origin and Destination Survey – Looking at the dollars
This database can be used to gauge average fares on specific routes. It includes data from
a 10 percent sample of all airline tickets. It’s another large database, but can be very
useful for determining average prices on various routes from your airport.
Most reporters will want to use the database labeled “DB1BMarket.” It contains data
from the survey, and has average fare information. The database, which has quarterly
information, goes back to 1993, so it’s easy to determine trends over time. Reporters can
delve into which routes at the most expensive, and which are the cheapest, and where
prices are increasing and falling.
It’s particularly useful for gauging the impact of new low-fare service, or of the departure
of a discount airline. For example, during the third quarter of 2007, flights from D/FW to
Boston – a route on which American Airlines has a monopoly - averaged $309 each way.
Flights from the airport to Tulsa, where American competes with discounter Southwest,
prices averaged $109 each way.
Other information sources
The DOT also offers data on airline freight and mail carried, airline employees and other
information. The aviation section on TransStats has links to downloads, and also
periodically adds new material.
Several independent firms crunch airline data, and can provide summaries or even raw
data, although there may be a price tag attached. SeaburyAPG
(http://www.seaburyapg.com/tools/apgdat.html) sells an extensive line of airline and
aviation-related databases. It’s geared toward airline planners, but the data has been used
in publications like Aviation Daily. BACK Aviation Solutions (www.backaviation.com)
also sells databases on airline schedules, passengers, fleets, financials and more.
FlightStats operates a website (www.flightstats.com) that offers a variety of performance
information for airports and airlines. The firm will provide reporters with regular updates
on your city’s airport, in spreadsheet form. One advantage of using information from
FlightStats is its speedy release – the firm generally has monthly on-time performance
data within a few days after the end of the month. The DOT usually takes at least 30 days
to provide the same information.
FareCompare crunches airfare information for its site (www.farecompare.com) and
closely tracks changes in ticket prices. The company won’t provide raw data, but they can
be a big help if you’re doing stories on ticket prices, and will usually provide plenty of
examples or some summary information.

