Writing CAR stories so people care
Doug Haddix, projects editor, The Columbus Dispatch
dhaddix@dispatch.com | (614) 461-5082
NICAR – Houston
Feb. 29, 2008

Freshness. Even on a familiar topic, a new twist can make people care again or care in a
different way. Creative ideas win readers. Spend more time coming up with fresh approaches and
less time doing routine stories.
Nosy neighbor syndrome. People love to know information about people that’s usually
not readily available: salaries of public employees, farm subsidies by person, disciplined
teachers.
Strategic reporting. All of the tips require thinking early about how to go about the
reporting, how to avoid the usual suspects, how to find fresh approaches. You can make people
care about your CAR stories only if you have all of the goods you need when it’s time to write.
Use your data to find key people and places for in-depth reporting and scene-setting.
Relevance. Make a connection to readers’ daily lives, their communities, their wallets.
Nerd box or grafs. Write these as soon as you’ve done your data analysis, while you still
understand what you did. Prosecute your methodology. Verify with experts (in the newsroom or
outside) that the CAR work is legitimate and accurate.
Write as you report. Key sections should be written as you report, especially if you’re
trying to capture an important scene or anecdote. Write the key findings as soon as you’re
comfortable with the data results. Those findings might become bullets in the story or a box with
the main story. If you write as you report, you will identify holes in the story that need to be
filled with further reporting. Also, you’re less likely to freak out and feel overwhelmed by the
material.
Story structure. Have a plan for organizing your material, whether it’s a relatively short
daily story, a mid-range Sunday piece or a longer project. The time you invest on hammering out
a structure will be more than made up during the writing, which will go more smoothly with a
written plan. Get buy-in from your editor on the basic structure/approach before you write,
especially if you’re going to take a nontraditional path.

2
Lead. Show mastery of the material by avoiding mushy words and writing with
precision, even with an anecdotal lead. Explore your material with an open mind to determine
the most compelling way to start the story. How do you tell colleagues about your findings? Do
you find yourself using the same key stat or same anecdote to grab their attention?
Understanding. People can’t care about something they can’t understand. Clarity is the
foundation, especially on complicated topics. It’s critical before the story jumps to let readers
know what’s going on. They won’t stick with the story if they don’t know what it’s about – soon.
Lead actors/actresses. Tap into the basic human desire to know more about other people
and their stories. An effective story can use one person’s experience to tell the bigger story or a
variety of people to illustrate key points. Talking heads are necessary but should not be the
central characters (or only characters) in your story.
Digestible information. Design elements can help give the big-picture context, highlight
the key findings and explain the data analysis. Work with designers on headlines, cutlines,
design text. Most readers look at those pieces before they decide whether to read your story.
Reader empowerment. Use searchable databases, street-level mapping and other tools
online so that readers can get the nitty-gritty details that they want. Obviously, there’s not
enough newshole in any paper to do that, so the Web is the way.
Photos. Seeing human faces goes a long way to connecting with readers and signaling
that this topic affects people – maybe there’s even a real story to be told instead of an article
quoting a bunch of talking heads! Use captions for supplemental information, an especially
useful tactic in these days of shrinking newshole.
The power of revision. Build in enough time for revising and polishing your story. Work
closely with your editor on basic structure and approach before you write. Let friends, family or
trusted colleagues read your rough draft (you need people who’ll be honest with you and specific
about what works and what fails – not just tell you they like any story you write).
Multimedia. Words on newsprint are not the only tools on your tool belt as a storyteller,
especially when it comes to CAR stories. Video, interactive graphics, searchable databases and
other multimedia elements can give readers a richer experience and far more detail and
understanding of your story.

