GETTING YOUR WORK NOTICED
Tipsheet – February 2008

Do’s and Don’ts
Raising the CAR profile in your newsroom – What to do:
Juggle well: Strike a healthy balance between quick hit stories and longer term projects.
Find ways to turn stories quickly so that you can buy the time needed to do some more
ambitious work. And do stories that really matter in your newsroom/community.
Jump on breaking news: Be ready to drop everything and respond quickly to any
breaking news situation that lends itself to data analysis.
Be in the middle of the newsroom: Sometimes you need to be off in seclusion, but
being a resource that is available for quick questions in a centrally located spot, has its
advantages. Be near food or coffee (I sit next to the coffee pot and fridge)
Insist on bylines: Don’t let your hard work be diminished or reduced to a tag line. It’s
easier for this to disappear as an issue if CAR folks aren’t data centers. They should be
writing, doing interviews etc…
Find an editor who will help you disappear when you need to. Yes, the panel is called
getting your work noticed, but sometimes you need to hide. It’s important to work for an
editor who will protect you from the constant demand for your skills.
Learn how to say “no, but I can show you how to….” We like to make everyone
happy and do everything for everyone. That doesn’t help them or you. If you can show
someone how to do something for themselves, rather than doing it for them, it helps both
of you in the long run.
Find a service that will help you with posting searchable data on the web. Searchable
data is getting top editors very excited because of the number of web hits generated by
popular databases. With some services, you can post data very quickly without taking up
a ton of your time. You don’t need to be a web programmer. And you don’t have to wait
in line for help from your newsroom’s limited IT resources. Come up with a plan with
your Web folks in how you want to do this and prioritize what sorts of databases are most
important. Simply throwing data online doesn’t help you or readers.
Build an army: Train others in the newsroom to do basic and intermediate CAR. Help
your best students continue to grow to “elite” status. Train the editors – if top editors
don’t buy into CAR and therefore do not encourage other editors to use it, it will go
nowhere. The assigning editor is the make or break point.

Insist on training for yourself: If you’re helping others in the newsroom learn new
skills, make sure you’re keeping your skills fresh and current. And find ways to grow.
But you’ll never do this hiding among the journalists. Get on listservs, take classes, talk
to folks in the real world who deal with the data issues you’re interested in.
Include lots of tips for bulletproofing – both for editors and reporters. Too many people
run with scissors – doing data analyses without checking all the potential pitfalls. Give
reporters and editors a list of integrity checks they must do on their data.
Get graphics involved. If your graphics folks have data and GIS skills, they can do
things that you might need to do.
Get over it. Keeping these skills, tools and data to yourself doesn’t help you or your
newsroom. The more people who use CAR, the more people will need your expertise.
The disciple in his own land…. Find inexpensive ways to bring in “guest speakers.”
When one of your CAR friends is in town, have them do a brown bag. Sometimes the
same thing said by the “outsider” will have more impact than your saying it.
In times of tighter budgets…
Focus like a laser. Do the stories that will have the biggest bang. Get data that will have
lots of uses. Do training for only folks who really are going to turn around and do
something.
Dealing with the Dougs….Not everyone will be a CAR user. Focus on those who want
to use it. If the guy that sits next to you still insists on printing out a database of 2,000
records or requesting only paper documents, let him.

Raising the CAR profile in your newsroom: What not to do:
Buy data from IRE, put it in a drawer and never look at it again: This is not the best
way to get funding for future data requests, if you spend lots of money for data that
doesn’t get analyzed. That said, there are some IRE databases you might want to have on
hand in case of a disaster, plane crash, etc… But choose them carefully.
Propose buying lots of new toys, get your bosses to actually agree, but then don’t
learn how to use them. If you want new software, add ons or new equipment make sure
you have a plan to use them. Buying lots of stuff and not learning how to use it will not
score points with your bosses.
Spend too much time on your Intranet: Intranets can be really helpful resources. When
they’re done right, they get more use. But they can also be a full-time job to maintain and
it’s a thankless job with little or no reward. Many of the things we put on Intranets can be
accessed elsewhere on the Web anyway. So how useful is it? Is this the best use of your
time if you’re trying to get noticed? There are some really useful things you can put on
an intranet and ways to involve the newsroom. But again, it needs to be planned

carefully. Some of it also can be used to show editors the great work that you or others
are doing.
Train people to learn CAR and then leave them to their own devices. Fresh graduates
of CAR bootcamps or in-house training initiatives need to be nurtured. You can’t just
train reporters, cut them loose and expect big returns. Find ways to connect in a formal or
informal way with your trainees so that they are feeling the love and so they are
constantly being challenged to put their newfound skills to use. We just sent two people
to CAR boot camps and required them to complete a “a CAR action plan” so that they
could articulate how they would use their skills. Before you train reporters, make sure
they come to in-house bootcamps with a database and a story idea that they will complete
when they return to reality. And make sure they have their editor’s buy-in to do this.
Panelists
Mark Katches
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
mkatches@journalsentinel.com
Jennifer LaFleur
Dallas Morning News
jlafleur@dallasnews.com

