Better Record Requests
Terri Langford
Houston Chronicle
terri.langford@chron.com
NICAR 2008/Houston
We're better at getting data and records. They're better at hiding
records or dodging our requests.
We're both at the top of our game and they want you to blink. They
know our legal budgets have eroded and editor patience levels for a
prolonged records fight are way down from what they were a few
years ago.
So start planning an efficient attack.
Know Your Law
Sounds simple enough but too many of us are faking our way through
it. Know it like your life depends on it. Don't think you know it. Know
it.
Don't be put off by "exemptions."
Many agencies are using this more often to dodge your requests. Make
them state why the record is exempt. Most agencies are saying this so
they don't have to find the record. Yes, as hard as it is to believe,
they're lying to you so you will go away.
Bulletproof That Request
Before you request, search your AG opinions. Sometimes it's worth a
try to craft a similar request that has lost, if you're working with a
different agency than the one with a rejection position the AG
supported. Another agency may give you something another did not.
But for the most part don't waste time on identical requests that have
already lost. Learn from them and craft it differently so you will get
your information.
Don't Be Coy
Quit hemming-and-hawing about what you what. Knock it off with the
general requests. Zero in on the specific and narrow that request. You
don't have to show all your cards, but agencies do not want to play a
game of 20 Questions with you. You're not being sly. You're wasting
time.

Don't Always Blow Off The Flack
Sure, the flack who's been at an agency two weeks before you called is
probably not going to be the best at knowing where to find the
information you want. (Sometimes that can work to your advantage).
But flacks, especially ones that have been at several state or local
agencies, can often be the best spirit guides when it comes to finding
information. Don't underestimate them.
Look Beyond The Flack
Find the spirit guide, that clerk or statistician, department head,
former employee, lobbyist, advocacy group member who can quickly
give you a sense of what has to be filed.
Trust Your Gut
If you feel like you're getting the run around, you are. As soon as you
sense it, go above the record-keeper's head. Try your agency's general
counsel office or IT department.
Talk It Through
Remember talking? Back in the day, it's what we did before we lived
behind e-mail accounts. It's become too easy to fire off requests via email. Before you hit that send button, call the agency and describe
what you want, then request it.
Stress to the agency that you want them to talk to you before they
refer your request to an attorney.
Learn the Lingo
Learn your agency's language. One person's incident is another
person's enforcement action. One agency's audit is another agency's
review. They sound the same. But flacks and lawyers are becoming
way too slick at dodging our initial requests by playing one mean game
of semantics. Too many requests are now stalled over
misunderstandings about what it is the reporter or news organization
wants. Describe what you want and then ask them what they call this
information. Search government sites and sift through their audits and
manuals. Take a look at department newsletters. You don't want to
wait a month on a request to find out that you asked for the wrong
thing or worse, yet, something they never had.

Understand Record Flow
We backup files on flash drives, hard drives, shared drives. Public
agencies keep their records in several places too. Find out who has to
have a copy of a record. It's doubtful one agency is the only one that
has the record you need. Play one agency against the other. Like
sports teams, there are agency rivalries. Use that to your advantage.
Always ask yourself, who else would have this record?
Never Forget to "Waive"
Always ask an agency to waive fees. Sometimes you have to pay the
agency. But you'd be surprised at what you will get for free, just for
the asking. Want to try an editor's patience and budget? Keep turning
in requests for one-story records that cost $600 and up. Never forget
the power of shame and playful sarcasm. "So you're going to charge
me for something my taxes already paid for you to keep. That's nice."
Sometimes, it does work.
Don't Forget Images
Too often we overlook digital images. More agencies have digital and
audio records for as part of their record-keeping. Nothing helps your
play like announcing that you have a little government audio/video for
the web.

