Tipsheet on investigations of race and policing
By Mark Fazlollah and Dylan Purcell
Philadelphia Inquirer staff writers
2008 NICAR Conference; Houston
mfazlollah@phillynews.com or 215-854-5831
dpurcell@phillynews.com
or 215-854-4915

Topic and synopsis of presentation: Race and Policing.
A three-day Inquirer series in December identified suburban
Philadelphia police departments that had been recording some of the
highest arrest rates in America for minor offenses, for decades.
The departments were nearly all white, and African Americans were
overwhelming hit by the arrests.
The towns often made arrests using local ordinances that legal experts
say violate the Constitution.
The series also highlighted the widespread use of strip searches by
some departments, no matter how minor the offense – a policy that
federal courts have ruled to be unconstitutional.
Those articles and video interviews are available at:
http://www.philly.com/inquirer/gallery/12595781.html

The problems identified in the series are not unique to the
Philadelphia suburbs. Here’s how to check departments in many states.
You quickly can find the most integrated and the least integrated
departments in America:
The Bureau of Justice Statistics surveys of police departments for 2003
gives a national overview of police issues, including diversity at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/lpd03.htm
But the real key is the computerized survey responses from each
department, available through the Inter-University Consortium for
Political and Social Research. It gives a breakdown of the racial
diversity of more than 2000 departments, including all those with more
than 100 officers. It includes a sampling of smaller departments. The
data, in SAS or SPSS, is available at:
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/ICPSR/STUDY/04411.xml
Another way to identify cities and towns that may have policing issues
is to calculate per capita arrests using the annual FBI data from the
Age-Sex-Race files. This can be purchased from NICAR at:
http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/viewdatabase.php?dbaseindex=27
Using that data, the easiest way to tally total arrests is to add the
columns for all race categories for adult and juvenile arrests. It’s
then possible to get per capita arrests for each town. Look for the
most extreme examples in your state as possible pointers for stories.
It important to determine if towns have used high arrest tactics year
in and year out – a practice that criminologists say is problematic.
The arrests in each town also can be broken down by crime and by race.
The FBI provides a translation for each section of the crime code.

Also check what arrest data is available from your state government,
usually the state police agency. Pennsylvania releases monthly arrest
totals by town and by race long before those numbers are made available
by the FBI.
High arrests rates for major crimes can signify good policing. High
arrest rates for disorderly conduct, vagrancy and loitering can raise
questions about racial profiling.
By comparing the arrests figures with census information, it’s easy to
see if minorities are disproportionately arrested for minor offenses –
which are typically discretionary for police.

Many states also have court data that can be sorted by town. That data
can allow reporters to identify people arrested under specific state
and local ordinances. Some states provide the names, addresses, race
and case numbers for each defendant.

Scrutinizing local ordinances:
In Pennsylvania, towns can craft their own local ordinances. For the
series, reporters gave selected ordinances to civil rights lawyers, who
said they appeared to be unconstitutional.
One resource for examining the language of ordinance from towns in many
states is generalcode.com. Access to E-code is:
http://www.generalcode.com/webcode2.html
Be sure to confirm that the ordinance has not been repealed.

