By Mc Nelly Torres
Consumer/Watchdog Reporter
South Florida Sun-Sentinel
mntorres@sun-sentinel.com
2008 CAR Conference
Houston, Texas

Fuel stories and CAR: How you can use data to write
consumer-friendly stories
We all depend on gasoline to move around. We consume it every day to drive to work,
church, buy groceries and take our kids to schools. And when fuel prices jump, we
complain, but we buy it anyway. We need fuel. High gasoline prices, petroleum
corporations, pollution and the environment – all these elements can be explored in your
own backyard because when you combine them, they are great stories that readers care
about. Gasoline itself is an endless topic with so many elements to explore: politics,
money, interest groups, pollution, gas prices, and environmentalists to mention a few.
I have not covered gasoline for too long (I’m currently working on two gasoline-related
stories) but here’s what I learned along the way. I hope these tips will be of some help if
you are interested in writing about petroleum in any way.
•

Do your homework: Use lexis/nexis to find out what others have written about
around the country before you get started with a story. If your newspaper doesn’t
subscribe to this service, search the Web or go to the IRE Web site: Extra,extra!
And look for stories.
• Look for data compile and stored by state regulators: State agencies, usually
the department of agriculture (bureau of petroleum inspection), are in charge of
inspecting gas stations to make sure gas devices are not cheating consumers.
State inspectors check gas pumps for accuracy and also inspect the pump’s
electronics to look for visible tampering with the electronic panel where credit
card data is stored. In addition, inspectors check a metal seal that protects the
accuracy or calibration of the device. A broken seal on a pump’s electrical
system can indicate tampering. Inspectors can fail a gas pup for accuracy or
equipment problems, such as worn-out hoses and broke display panels. They can
also flunk a device if the numbers on the pump start running before the gas is
dispensed or if leak are discovered in the hose or inside the pump.
• Measuring accuracy: Testing devices for accuracy can be a complex process to
understand. Inspectors use a calibration test to measure the accuracy of the pump
by filling a 5-galon container with gasoline. Gas dispensers are allowed a margin
of error of about half a cup of gasoline – a few cents worth of gas, depending on
the price – which is the standard set by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, a non-regulatory federal agency within the U.S. Department of
Commerce. Contact state regulators and request to follow an inspector so you can
learn about the process. They are usually willing to help.

•
•

•

•

How about the quality of gasoline? Gasoline is also tested for quality. Many
gas stations have been found to blend gasoline with water and other substances.
This is illegal. Ask for any electronic data with test results.
Be aware of new regulation: After two years of a hectic hurricane seasons,
which brought problems with gasoline stations that couldn’t sell gasoline due to
power outages or just simply ran out of gas, Florida legislators passed a new law
requiring all gas stations located along the evacuation routes to be pre-wire for
the use of a generator. This was something we needed to keep an eye on to
inform our readers about the gas stations and compliance with the measure as it
went into effect. So when the state provided me with an updated pdf document
listing all the gas stations in the state and their status, I knew I had an easy story.
After we converted the pdf and downloaded the data into a database manager I
was able to determine how many gas stations were complying and how many
were failing to comply. The database listed phone numbers so I called many of
the gas stations and talked to owners.
Look for watchdog and environmentalists groups: Judy Dugan, a former LA
Times journalist turned a consumer advocate, has followed many gas-related
topics in her blog at www.oilwatchdog.org. Dugan is the research director for the
Foundation for Taxpayer and Consumer Rights and oilwatchdog.org. Her e-mail
is: judy@consumerwatchdog.org.
Talk to experts: Try the National Council of Weights and Measures. This group
set the standards followed by most states around the nation. Your state regulators
are members of this national group, which meets several times a year. Note:
Keep in mind that the relationship between the industry and this group is very
cozy and we could say it poses a conflict of interest. Industry types attend these
meetings and they pay for entertainment and meals of NCWM during gatherings.
Judy Dugan has written about this check her blog!

Sources:
The National Institute of Standard and Technology
John Blair, public affairs
301-975-4261
john.blair@nist.gov
Jason Toews, co-founder of Gasbuddy.com, a consumer advocacy site that tracks gas
prices.
Jason@gasbuddy.com
The National Conference on Weights and Measures
240-404-6473
ncwm@mgmtsol.com
www.ncwm.net
www.fuelgaugereport.com
Public Citizen
PIO: Rachel Pleatman
(202) 588-7742
e-mail: rpleatman@citizen.org
American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy

202-429-8873
Steve Nadel, executive director
Energy Consortium Coalition
202-745-4874
Alliance to Save Energy
202-857-0666
Coalition for Vehicle Choice
Ron Defoe
202-628-5164
Clean Energy Campaign
Athan Manual
202-466-5122
American Petroleum Institute
PIO: Juan Palomo or Karen Ritter
202-682-8114; 682-8120
Consumer Energy Council of America
PIO: Ellen Berman
202-659-0404

