By Mc Nelly Torres
Consumer/watchdog reporter
South Florida Sun‐Sentinel
mntorres@sun‐sentinel.com
2008 CAR Conference
Houston, Texas
CAR and Consumer stories: using data and documents to build stories that matter

Whether the stories are about bad contractors, foreclosure rescue scams, product
recalls, contaminated pet food or spinach, consumer stories are personal. Federal, state
and local governments collect data that could be use as the foundation of stories.
Consumer watchdog groups are good sources of information. Look for lawsuits and
complaints filed with state and local agencies to find real people and keep in mind
organizations that specialized on the topic your are researching. They can be a great
source of information. The bottom line here is that consumer stories are human‐interest
stories.
Here to get you started:
Consumer advocates and experts: Keep constant communication with these folks
including your local consumer affairs office. These agencies take complaints from
consumers and the records will be useful as you cover stories. Other sources include:
attorney general office, consumer services at the state level, and state agencies, but also
your local economics crime division and white‐collar crime investigators.
Consumer issues are complex: Consumer issues tend to be complicated. Perhaps you
found the existing laws don’t protect people or the issue has never been addressed. This
will be a constant challenge. Keep a dialogue with your sources because they will be the
ones who can direct you toward the right track.
What are the elements of the story? Who wins? Who loses? Who cares? Ask yourself
this question as you report the story. It does help to understand the underlying issue
and believe me there’s always one or few of those.
Do your homework: The Better Business Bureau might seem like a good resource at
times, but be aware that the BBB is a membership organization. I found that their
records are not reliable and that in many cases consumers think the BBB can help them
with their problems. The BBB is not a government agency. Look through your state’s
incorporation records and licensing agencies. Check your local or state licensing rules
and databases because almost every business needs a license. Also, keep in mind that
blogs could be a source even though their reliability is as good as the author. But most

blogs provide resources so it could be a useful tool. Use google and other searching
engines to see what’s out there on the topic you are researching.
Databases: Look locally first. The consumer affairs office might keep complaints
electronically, but you should also look at your county electronic records and then move
up to the state. Licensing, inspections, occupational licensing, state corporate records,
civil lawsuits and other electronic records are great resources when investigating an
issue or problem.
Put the data online: Readers love to search inspections on their favorite restaurants,
pet food recall and nail salons. But don’t stop there, offer other tools to your readers
like studies you mentioned in a story and you have on a PDF format, why not post it
online too.
Learn about your characters: Use Lexis\Nexis, criminal background check, civil lawsuits,
divorce files, corporation records of current business but other businesses he might
have owned. If he/she is out there to make a buck more than anything else, chances are
that other businesses he/she had before went through the same problems. Also, check
association the business belongs to, its competitors, including former employees and
enemies.
Sorry, no promises here: Evade making promises to anybody you talk to as you begin
delving into an issue. This is something I do from the beginning. I look into the problem
and I’m honest with the caller/reader from the beginning. Sometimes you get results,
but sometimes you don’t. My job is to write the story not to work as a problem‐solver or
mediator.
Regulate the Regulators: A lot of the best consumer protection stories come from
taking a hard look at the government agencies that are supposed to keep us safe
(contractor business, foreclosure rescue firms, nail salons, restaurants and dog kennels).
Take a look at any public records agencies keep relating to their investigations, such as
inspection records. How often do they find problems? What is their caseload? Is it so
high that they are more likely to overlook violations? In short, are they doing their
jobs?
Offer a solution or useful information: When you write the story try to give something
to the reader whether is what to do if he/she is in a similar situation and where to go for
help. I try to get a tip box with each story. Sometimes is dreading, but I’ve learned to
appreciate this because it helps me to write the story. I concentrate on some areas and
leave the other information for the tip box. Try to give readers telephone numbers, Web
sites and organizations.
Look out for the consumer: Think outside the box. Ask yourself: How can I tell this story
differently? Listen what people have to say – you’ll be surprised at what they might

offer. Once you identified what the topic/problem is, look for a consumer advocacy
group. They are everywhere. More importantly, keep an eye on government agencies
because their regulatory role is crucial on consumer stories. And hold them accountable
when government agencies are not doing their job. That’s our job.
Consumer Groups:
Consumer Reports
www.consumerreports.org
www.consumersunion.org
www.consumer.gov
www.consumeraction.gov
www.consumersearch.com, which compiles product reviews from other publications.
www.consumerworld.org
National Consumer League
www.naticonsumersleague.org
The National Association of Better Business Bureaus
www.bbb.org
This is the main ship for the BBB, you can search a national database of companies, but
also find your local BBB.
Consumer Federation of America, a national advocacy group
www.consumerfed.org
The National Consumers League
www.nclnet.org
National Fraud Information Center
www.fraud.org
The Center for Science in the Public Interest
www.epsinet.org
Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing
www.ncinet.org
This coalition works against telemarketing and Internet fraud.
National Association of Insurance Commissioners
www.naic.org

National Consumer Law Center
www.consumerlaw.org
Scam Busters
www.scambusters.com
The American Council on Consumer Interests
www.consumerinterests.org

Government agencies:
Consumer Product Safety Commission
www.cpsc.gov
CPSC list all recalls but also collects data on injuries and deaths caused by consumer
products. The database known as the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System
(NEISS), which list the number and severity of consumer product‐related injuries to
persons treated in hospital emergency departments in the U.S.
Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov
You can search the Web page to see if the commission has sued or taken any action
against a local company.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC
www.fcc.gov
Food and Drug Administration
www.fda.gov
Postal Inspection Service
www.usps.gov
National Association of Attorneys General
www.naag.org
Consumer information clearinghouse
www.consumer.gov

This site has government brochures and information in addition to links to all the federal
regulatory agencies.
Other sites:
www.crimes‐of‐persuasion.com
www.consumeraffairs.com
This is a general site with good leads on scams and other information.
Online complaint sites:
Angie’s List
This is a membership online consumer resource list.
www.angieslist.com

