NEIGHBORHOODS FOR SALE
A Chicago Tribune investigation
By Dan Mihalopoulos, Robert Becker and Darnell Little
Like many U.S. cities, Chicago has changed tremendously during the housing boom of recent
years. To take a truly comprehensive look at this transformation and the politics behind it, the
Tribune sought to track all zoning changes approved by Chicago’s City Council during the past
decade.
1. Deciding to build our own database: The information that the Tribune wanted to analyze did
not exist in electronic form. The city’s website includes a zoning map, so you can look at what
sort of construction would currently be allowed on any specific property. But that data does not
tell you what the site had been zoned for previously and when the zoning was changed.
2. Compiling the paper records: The data on zoning changes existed only on paper, in the
dusty, fat binders of the City Council’s Zoning Committee. Using the committee’s Xerox machine,
we took apart the binders and copied the minutes of every committee meeting since 1998. There
were roughly 250 pages for each of the past 10 years.
3. Entering the data: We hired a company called Amwork Systems Inc., from Aurora, Ill.,
(www.amwork.com) to enter the data into an Excel spreadsheet. The total cost for data entry was
about $2,500. There were nine fields that we asked them to enter for each item on the committee
minutes: the date of the meeting when the decision was made; the date when the proposal had
been introduced; the address of the property that was to be rezoned; the ward; the legislation
number; the old zoning designation; the new zoning designation; the committee’s decision; and a
miscellaneous field for any notes that may have been scribbled onto the agendas by City Council
aides who kept the minutes.
4. Analyzing the data: The database that we created includes data on more than 9,000 official
actions and encompasses more than 5,700 zoning changes. Using Access, we crunched the
numbers to determine whether the changes in zoning permitted new, bigger buildings
(“upzoning”) or smaller ones (“downzoning”) than had been allowed previously. Before running
queries, we assigned values for categories in the city’s zoning code. For instance, the computer
automatically calculated that a change from R-3 to R-5 represented upzoning.
During last year’s City Council elections, aldermen frequently sought to fend off attacks that they
were too pro-development or too anti-development. Our analysis got beyond the rhetoric, ranking
the council members by who was most friendly to new, more intensive development.
5. Following the money: We found a strong relationship between zoning changes and campaign
contributions, with donations from developers to aldermen often coming within days of official
decisions that decided the fate of construction proposals.
Chicago’s ethics ordinance restricts donations from applicants for zoning changes. But we found
that developers frequently get around the restriction by making contributions through other
companies that they have a stake in.
6. Presenting the findings: As we wrote the first part of our series, which focused to a great
extent on our computer-assisted analysis, the cardinal rule was to avoid the Z word—zoning—as
much as possible, for fear that it would give readers the Zzzzzzzzzs.
The entire database, in searchable form, was made available to our readers on the Tribune’s
website, at www.chicagotribune.com/zoning.
dmihalopoulos@tribune.com
rxbecker@tribune.com
dlittle@tribune.com

