Online Investigative Reporting Tip Sheet
The paper trail
Same game. Investigative reporting on the Internet, when done well, is no
different than it is in the print world. Key to any effort is documentation via the
usual suspects: the courts (Pacer — pacer.psc.uscourts.gov — can be a
lifesaver, both in terms of cost and time), government and business filings,
internal agency memos, etc., and of course FOIA. Most of these documents are
publicly available and easy to access — once you have the clues to know what to
look for as a story develops. However, the best stories almost always involve
leaked documents — particularly as the emaciation of FOIA has turned it into
more of an ancient history research tool than a “news”-gathering resource
Be transparent with your readers. For a variety of reasons, maybe worth
discussion, the reality is that most stories that appear in print are deemed more
credible than those published online. As a result, in my opinion, it is important to
make available to the online reader as much of the source documentation for an
investigative story as possible. This can be accomplished by providing links to
the original documents and source material for the story. This helps to add
credibility to your story and also serves as a resource for readers and other
journalists seeking to advance the story. Taking this approach involves accepting
a couple of premises, however — that public records belong to the public and
that good journalism is the fourth rail of the democracy, not simply another pork
belly for Wall Street.

Government whistleblowers – cops, agents and bureaucrats
Ask for proof. Because many of these sources are themselves investigators
(government agents, for example), they normally have access to a wealth of
documentation related to their allegations. Ask for this information. In many
cases, they will provide it — or the documents will somehow show up in your
mailbox.
Maintain trust. These sources often find that efforts to address corruption through
agency channels only serve to turn the government against them. The big lesson
learned in working with sources seeking to combat waste, abuse and corruption
within federal agencies is that they are willing to work with the media, if trust is
established.
Independently verify. Be aware of the source’s motivations and agenda, as well
as your own, and independently corroborate what they are telling you.

1

Informants: cooperating sources, crooks and narcos
Generally, an informant is extremely intelligent and practiced at deception.
Realize that, and respect their ability to manipulate you. That skill is key to their
survival, and they will use it on you. But given those realities, they can provide
extremely valuable insight/information that helps to advance a story.
When dealing with informants, ask them to produce documents, photos or other
evidence to substantiate their claims. And even when they won’t or can’t do that,
you have to work to find that evidence — via the courts, business filings, FOIA or
other sources, etc.
Be very careful about what you say or agree to do. In almost all cases, you are
being used, or possibly set up, to advance an agenda that you do not fully grasp,
particularly in the early stages of an investigation.

Anonymous/online sources
In the case of Narco News, we do receive tips, leads and information via e-mail
from sources all over the planet. As with any good journalism, those e-mail
sources have to be vetted and their information independently verified. It’s really
no different than receiving a news tip over the phone. In either case, you really
don’t know if the person on the other end is who they claim to be, so you have to
verify through documents or other sources that the information they are providing
is accurate.

You will be intimidated
If you are successful to any degree in exposing government misdeeds or the
inner workings of the criminal underworld via online investigative reporting, you
almost certainly will face some blowback. In my case, over the years in pursuing
investigative stories about the drug war, I have dealt with bullets being shot at my
newspaper office; a gun held to my head in the streets; legal threats — including
from the Department of Justice, which filed a motion in court to seize my
computer at one point; and a visit from federal agents (absent a warrant) seeking
to pressure me into revealing my sources.
The best advice I can offer in protecting yourself against this intimidation is to
develop a strong network of people (including friendly lawyers) who will stand in
solidarity with you when these threats do arise. The glaring heat of public
sunshine is the best antiseptic for these dark deeds of intimidation — and the
Internet can be a very effective lens for focusing that sunshine.

2

