Backgrounding People on the Internet
2008 IRE/NICAR CAR conference – Houston, TX

Exercises

Local fire: A towering, black-plumed fire at a near West Side (San Antonio) pallet warehouse
pushed dozens of residents from their homes, blocking traffic for miles as they struggled to flee
from the thick smoke's wide reach. Numerous residents complained about a buildup of trash and
litter at this location. Location: 5317 W. Commerce, San Antonio, TX
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

BRB Publications Public Records Directory: http://www.brbpub.com
Select: TX - Bexar County - Property, Appraiser. Search by property address.
Make note of business name, owner name and mailing address. Notice the decline in property values.
Texas Comptroller Corporation Search: http://ecpa.cpa.state.tx.us/coa/Index.html. Check business Status.
Didn’t notice San Antonio in the BRB listing, so try:
State and Local Government on the Net: http://www.statelocalgov.net/index.cfm
Found: www.sanantonio.gov Notice “Report a code compliance violation.” However, if you browse the
navigation links across the top, you’ll find “Code Compliance.” Click there.
S.A. City Code Compliance: http://www.sanantonio.gov/codecomp/. Select: Search Complaint Violations.
Search by fire location address. Category: All; Dates: 01/01/2000 – 02/30/2008
Go back to State and Local Government on the Net: http://www.statelocalgov.net/index.cfm
and find the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality: Navigate to “Permits, Licenses and Registrations”
Click on “Need to Know the Status of a Permit?” heading. Click on the “Search the TCEQ Central Registry”
Select “Regulated Entity Search” and search for “isaac” in “san antonio” and “Bexar” county. Note the two
locations. View the details.
Armed with all the information you’ve found, it’s time to contact the interested parties: Try 411.com:
http://www.411.com/. Search for property owner, registered agent, and officers by name and/or address. Also
search property address to people living near the fire location.

Gambling list: http://www2.mysanantonio.com/news/graphics/GamblingList1.pdf
Bexar County District Attorney Susan Reed on released "players lists" seized during a police
investigation of an online bookmaking operation run by San Antonio's most infamous poker
player, Richard Henry Lee. The list contains names of lawyers, restaurateurs, real estate agents,
doctors, dentists, car dealership owners, salesmen and others in San Antonio and throughout
Texas who police had suspected were clients of Lee's online site, www.betbsbnow.com. Police
shut the site down during a gambling investigation recently, and no one on the list was
prosecuted.
Can you track down any of these people? Is there an archived version of the web site? Who
owns the domain name now?
Top job candidate: Encarnación Garza, an assistant professor at the University of Texas at San
Antonio, is the top candidate for the Edgewood Independent School District superintendent
position. Garza heads up a principal training program at the university.
Can you verify Garza’s position at the university? What are his qualifications? Has he
published anything and can it be verified? Does he own property in town? Does he have a
criminal record?
Missing pilot: Steve Fossett disappeared September 3, 2007. Can you find his bio and pilot
license? Hint: Get his full name before finding his license. Does he own any planes?

Compiled by Kelly Guckian, Database Editor, San Antonio Express-News

