Joshua Kors / Reporter / The Nation / 646-456-7738 / kors@thenation.com / JoshuaKors.com

How to Pursue a Veterans’ Scandal
Or … 20 Techniques I Learned Reporting the Town Story

In 2007, I discovered something quite disturbing: that military doctors
are purposely misdiagnosing soldiers wounded in Iraq, labeling them
mentally ill in order to deny them medical care and disability pay.
Over 22,500 soldiers had been misdiagnosed in recent years, saving
the military billions in disability benefits. Certainly it was the largest
story I’d ever taken on. To tackle it, I developed a few reporting
techniques — to interview soldiers and gain their trust; how to
approach military officials and PR folks, how to acquire key
documents.
My disclaimer: These techniques have been extremely helpful to me.
They may not help you at all. I say, do what works for you. If you
have a different style, go with it. That said …

Speaking w/ Soldiers
1) Truly care about the soldier you’re speaking with. Remember, you’re not getting a quote or breaking a story.
You’re talking with a person who’s in pain, or has been wronged, or both. He’s living these issues. So is his threeyear-old daughter. When you care, you bring a natural voice of empathy that opens doors to conversation.
2) Were you referred to the soldier by a friend of his? You know from your own experience, people are always
warmer to you if you were referred by their friend. In the military world, that’s doubly true. Being referred by the
soldier’s friend or a veterans’ leader is like a stamp of approval. It’s a great way to start the conversation.
3) Make it a conversation. That means, when the soldier tells a funny story about his family, perhaps you have a
similar story about your family that you can tell. Conversation like that creates a connection and builds trust and
comfort. It’s what opens the door for the soldier to share more personal issues, like medical or psychological
problems.
More than anything, you don’t want the soldier to feel like he’s “being interviewed,” that he’s in the media spotlight
(even if you’re a TV reporter, and he literally is in your spotlight).
4) Ask, “So, what the heck happened to you?” It may be inappropriate to speak like that at work or with your
neighbors. But with wounded soldiers, it’s the way to go. That’s because their wounds become a key part of their
identity. Ask them that question, just like that, and you’re doing more than speaking their language—you’re right with
them, asking the same question they’re wondering.
No other question could show them such respect. After all, wounded soldiers usually feel like the Army and VA
chewed them up and spit them out. Nobody understands them anymore, and nobody cares enough to even ask what
happened. When you ask, they immediately know you care. Right then, you can hear that sigh of relief—finally, they
have someone who cares and wants to listen—and they begin telling you their story with articulate, passionate detail.

5) “What would you say…” In journalism school they teach you, the dumbest question you can ask is, “So, how do
you feel about that?” The question provokes bland, one-word answers, which are unusable for your article. A better
way to get at the information is to ask, “So, what would you say …”—that is, say to fellow soldiers who were just
injured; say to the American people who don’t know what’s happening to wounded Marines; say to the Army doctor
who accused you of faking your injuries, etc. (This question structure is great for interviewing doctors and military
officials too: “What would you say to the soldiers who believe you purposely misdiagnosed them?”, “What would you
say to the military families who are stunned by this memo?”, etc.) No other question so effectively draws people out.
6) Time to be quiet and listen. Once the soldier’s talking, the best question you can ask is no question at all. Sure,
letting them ramble may extend the interview by ten minutes, but the winding narrative may also introduce details (and
characters) you never even thought of. Silence shows respect.
7) Email the next day about a lighter topic. A few hours after people open up to you, they think, “My goodness,
what the heck did I just do?” Giving out sensitive personal information makes them feel vulnerable. Assuage their
fears before they grow by emailing the next day. In your email, you can mention the military issues you discussed in
the interview, but keep that stuff brief. Focus instead on something fun, like the TV show the soldier recommended or
last night’s playoffs. Emails like that allows the good rapport to grow.

Speaking w/ the Military’s PR Folks
10) Be very specific. The military can avoid giving information if your question is vague. Don’t ask, “How many
soldiers have been discharged with mental illnesses in recent years?” Ask: “How many Marines were discharged in
2004 under Regulation 635-200, Chapter 5-13?”
11) Be persistent. Call the military’s representatives. And call again. And again and again. Chances are, they
won’t answer your question the first time you call. Or the second or third. And after three calls, most reporters give
up and move on. That’s no problem for you. Your dialing finger isn’t going to fall off. I called the Army Surgeon
General’s office 43 times (and left, like, 36 messages) before I got an official response from her. The logic is,
eventually, just answer his question so we can be done with him. Perfect.
12) Be nice. When you do talk to the PR folks, be nice. Remember, you’re developing a long-term relationship with
them, as you’ll be going back to them many, many times. Honey really does get you more than vinegar. And no one
wants to be treated like a telemarketer.

When Talking w/ Commanders, Doctors, Army Lawyers, etc.
13) Be extra gentle. Commanders, doctors and Trial Defense Service (TDS) lawyers who want to speak out but are
barred from doing so have entire careers to lose if you burn them. So inch forward carefully and respect their limits.
14) Get a hold of them off-base. Google informed me that one military official had a fitness business in town. So I
contacted him there, where he felt more free to talk.
15) Offer anonymity, if necessary. Anonymity ain’t the best, but if an Army official wants to help you but is scared
for his career and (as often happens) for his safety, go ahead and give it to him. He can lead you to people and
documents you’d never get otherwise. Some of those people might even be willing to put their names on the record.
16) Trigger a reply by telling them what you’re going to print. When you’ve amassed a heap of evidence
pointing to an official’s wrongdoing and he refuses to speak, tell him, “Okay, but so you know, we’re going to print that
you signed Document X.” Saying that can prick an unscripted response, like “But you don’t understand. I was told I
had to sign Document X or else….”

Your Computer & Your Colleagues
17) The trades are a treasure trove of information. For veterans’ reporters, the Army Times (and its twice-daily
news summaries) are must-reads. And go deeper. Are you looking into the Army’s advertising? A trade like
Advertising Age might have a key piece of your story.
18) Set up your Google Alerts. Every time “personality disorder” comes up in the media, I know it. I read the article
and often contact the journalist. My Google Alert also has the names of the top reporters in my field. Every time they
write a piece, I know it and read it.
19) Zabasearch. There are a lot of people finders out there. Zabasearch.com is my favorite. (It’s free too.) Then
pray that the person you’re tracking has an uncommon name. Print out the 35 listings for Ted Ryjowska in South
Dakota and call them all.
20) Find other journalists who can become collaborators. Not every reporter is dead-set on getting an exclusive.
Many don’t see themselves as in competition with you at all. Get to know those reporters. They’ll make good friends,
good colleagues—and down the road, they might have a document (a medical record, a soldier’s phone number)
they’d be willing to share with you.
Get to know what they’re reporting on. Start thinking about how you can help them.

Joshua Kors
“Iraq: Investigating Treatment of the Troops at Home and in the Field”
2008 IRE National Conference, Miami

