INVESTIGATING SENIOR ISSUES
Tips from our one-hour investigation: “Bogus Billing, A Contact 5 Investigation”
Shannon Cake, Jim Sitton & Dave Peterson-WPTV-West Palm Beach, FL
-Keep in mind; many seniors are scared to talk about fraud. We found they fear
retribution, particularly when it has to do with their finances or benefits. In our
investigation, “Bogus Billing,” we appealed to their sense of right and wrong, getting the
story out and getting justice. We also appealed to their sense of obligation to their
children and grandchildren who will suffer from Medicare waste (for instance: Medicare
won’t exist for their children if the fraud continues.) We also promised to turn their cases
over to Medicare so that they would get attention and a response from a human being
(which Medicare assured us.) Many of them still chose not to participate out of fear.
-When you can prove that large numbers of seniors are affected (more than 150 emails
and phone calls from our report), you get politicians’ ears. Seniors are a very organized
and powerful lobby group for several reasons: they have time on their hands to get
organized and they vote!
-One of the big issues for seniors. Their Medicare number is the same as their social
security number. This leads to wide open fraud. It means every time they visit a
pharmacy or lab or doctors’ office, they are turning over their social security numbers to
the minimum wage employees behind the desk. That’s how fraud begins.
-We used spreadsheets and dry-erase boards to lay out all companies and their owners.
We followed the paper trail, connecting the links between the companies on paper. We
found some overlap. Many of the same names, owners or addresses would be posted for
the phony companies.
Resources Used:
State of Florida: Department of State—Division of Corporations
(www.sunbiz.org)
-Get GAO report—this one seems obvious, but too often we simply don’t take the time to
research these. In this case, the GAO report put a clear dollar amount on the fraud we
were seeing on the streets of Florida. $800 million in Medicare money was being wasted.
(Tenacity)
-Don’t take NO for an answer---everyone has a boss. CMS’s head of Public relations at
the time wanted no part in helping out with our investigation and would not provide
anyone to attend our forum. At first, they agreed to attend, then reversed and refused to
attend. Everyone who told me no, I call their boss…until they finally agreed to have a
Medicare exec listen in by phone.

(Helpful hints)

I found lower level staffers in the PR office were quite helpful and acknowledged that
this was a massive mishandling of public money. Later, high ranking CMS officials
came around and almost seemed relieved to share the information and get it out to the
public.

