1
IRE PANEL – MIAMI 2008

“TIME CRUNCH: HOW TO MAKE 2:30 STORIES WORK”
Deborah.Sherman@9NEWS.com

1-WHITTLE IT DOWN
*Research: No shortcuts here. You still have to gather all of the documents and
all of the facts to determine and understand the story. But even if you can’t use the
information in your TV story, you can use it in your web story and stream most of that
raw data on to the web for people to review themselves.
*Producing: Streamline from the beginning. Instead of interviewing 3 people,
consider interviewing one and letting viewers get to know them. Chose one good
character for each side and let them battle it out. Keep the story simple. Pare it down to
its core elements.
*Writing: I prefer to outline my story first, and then eliminate any branches that
are interesting but that don’t stick to the main point. Then, I write the long version of the
story. That is the one that I will pitch to other newscasts and stream on the web.
Then I write the short version of the story, using the script from the long version. I
usually edit on paper and re-write the areas that have been changed. Don’t just cut out
areas and not rewrite. Rarely will the story still make sense that way.
Sum up information for people in tight stories. We used to take viewers along on
a journey with us to uncover information. (We would show how we got the data or
crunching the data). But that is not possible in the shorter versions.
Use your strongest, cleanest example and let that speak for others.
Save your words. When you don’t have time, lose those long investigative team
names. For example, “9Wants to Know found…” Instead, keep it short such as, “We
found…”
*Editing: After you’ve edited it, have several people watch it for flow and feel;
cut where it slows down for them. Don’t let the producers edit it. Let them watch it to
learn where they think it drags, and then edit yourself.
*Graphics: Use graphics to quickly sum up your research. There is not much
time to show how you discovered the data.
*Negotiate: In addition to pitching your story to other shows that have more
time, be willing to take yourself off the air and give that :15 seconds back to your story.
*Consider multiple parts. Some reporters are breaking their stories up into
two—showing one part at 6:00pm, and then driving them to 10:00 with part two. In
Denver, KMGH frequently shows one story about the problem and saves the reaction and
solution story for the next night.
2-NEW PATHS FOR DELIVERY*Follow-up stories or multiple parts: Save your extra interviews, facts and
elements for follow-up stories—and you’ll have several already in the bag.
*Sell the story to other shows. Weekend, morning, noon shows.
*Stream the longer version on the internet.
*Push your stories out to cell phones: Get your link pushed out to mobiles with
a great tease so that people will want to watch the longer version
*Push the details to the internet. Get the statistics, the surveys, the history and
deep background in your web story. Have your web team create a web page devoted

2
solely to your subject where you can drive viewers who want to learn more about it. But
be careful that both your TV story AND the web story have balance. Saying “there’s no
time” is no excuse to not include a subject’s side of the story in broadcast.
*Get it in the newspaper. If you have partnerships with local print media, they
are often interested in the details and documents that TV may not have time to air.

Tips & comments about the time crunch from your colleagues:
-Nancy Amons , WSMV-TV Nashville
Our “special assignment” stories are 3:00; 4:00 on rare occasions, but you have to fight
for it. How to cut time: pare the story down to essential elements. Get to the point
quickly, right off the top. Don’t overshoot; pre-interview and decide who you really need
on camera. Too many interviews make a short story confusing anyway. Select, don’t
compress; don’t try to put too much in one story – tomorrow’s another day
-------------Anonymous Reporter at National Cable News Channel
They want everything tighter and faster. They are holding us now to 1:30-1:45 tape time.
It’s extremely frustrating even though there’s lots of air coverage. Intros and tags are :15.
Tape stuff has to be shorter. It’s a challenge not just because there’s less time to tell a
story, our topics are often very complex. You have to explain science and the business
side of things in a short package.
I am putting fewer faces/fewer interviews in our stories because there is simply no time
to tell their stories. So, there are fewer talking heads and more information.
We tell our producer, just get two talking heads, that’s enough. There’s no time for 3 or
4 interviews.
I hate using :03-:04 soundbites, but sometimes have to.
Even for our audience that is educated and wants to learn, we are operating under more
severe time constraints. This started in the last few months.
-----------------Paul Adrian, KDFW Dallas
We have no time limits. I have done 8:00, 9:00, even 12:00 stories recently.
----------Jeff Burnside, WTVJ-TV Miami
Outboard the web tease. Get the anchor to do it rather than have it consume precious
seconds in your package or tag.
WTVJ Miami has gone from very long form (8 minutes or more) to an unbearable 3
minutes for investigative pieces, with rare exceptions.
Cut two versions: a short one for the main newscast and a longer one for the web and
off-prime newscasts.
My strategy is to get the piece as tight as possible with excellent pacing, and then have
the manager watch it and suggest where it moves too slowly. If it's good, there will be no
"slow" spots and they'll sometimes acquiesce. Of course, sometimes they'll say "figure it
out yourself. Just cut it."
We interview fewer pieces now for the shorter stories. I've dropped 3 complete
interviews for a story before.

3
--------------Brian Maass, KCNC-TV, Denver
I think generally here the content really seems to determine the length. For instance, one
story started at 3:49, then, after editing it, we pared it down to 3:15. There just are no
hard fast rules about length for investigative pieces, although producers always like 'em
shorter! We generally seem to get a script together, if everyone likes it we then cut them
to see how they feel, then start chopping from there. Once in awhile we'll just get those
pieces that don’t seem to have anything to slash, but that’s rare.
The long term investigations, stuff that takes some months, almost always is at least 3:00
or more. I'll do shorter turn stuff, 3 or 4 days of work, and that stuff can be as short as
1:20-2:00 depending on content.
It’s really a moving target, based on the editorial content.
----------------Joel Grover, KNBC, Los Angeles
The time limits we face are constantly changing (3 years ago we had a strict 3-minute
limit, last year there was NO limit, and now, the 11pm producer wants to often view a
long package before he'll take it, as is). However, when we can't get a long package on
the 11pm show, we do one of two things: pitch a second part to the 5 or 6pm show the
next day (that way we get all of our material on the air); or do a longer version for the
web, and tease that at the end of the shorter version.
-------Dave Savini—CBS2 Chicago
We try to keep our tape to 3:00. Nothing is over 4:00. Although the station does make
exceptions. 4:00-4.30 is the longest, and that includes the anchor intro.
-We try to build the stories around a single issue. If we use multiple people, you really
don’t get to know them; there’s no character building in the shorter stories.
Our print stories are longer. That gets into more detail and character building. For print,
we use many victims. If you do a lot of work, can put it all into print.
--------Lynsey D Paulo, KCRA Sacramento
We do face time limits, although they're not always hard and fast.
I usually write my first draft without worrying about time, then go back
and start looking for places to conserve. I try to compress information, rather than pick
and choose what's in and what's out.
We do utilize the web a lot now for web extras, like data base information,
stats or graphs.
Most of my sweeps pieces this book ran between 3 and 4 minutes..
-------Wayne Dolcefino, KTRK, Houston
The average length of our stories is about 4:15 on tape, not counting debrief and tag page
which are done live. We don’t have an established length on undercover stories, but if
it’s over 5:00 you got to defend it more. If it’s 4:15 the people that matter don’t say a
word. The total time is about 5:00. The lawyers add a minute and a half to document
laden storytelling. Once there is legal involvement in the pre broadcast of a story, our
producers know not to mess with the language. Sometimes they will try to cut the
documentation for your allegation, and I would argue that in this day and age it is that

4
documentation, records, hidden camera, whatever that ensures your audience you are not
just talking without reason.
We believe in documentation of our allegations and not reliance on human sources, so we
believe it is important for our audience to see how we get there. Second, I do not believe
in working for two months on a story and then just running it for one night and forgetting
about it the next day. If it is only worth one story, then it probably wasn't worth the two
months working on it. My investigations generally will run two, more likely three nights.
I believe that fallout and follow-ups, like criminal investigations usually ensue after two
nights...and it also helps establish the trail. Our audience seems to enjoy following the
trail of documentation. That usually means 13:00 to 15:00 before an investigation is
complete and I’m not talking about rehashing inside the story. We use debrief pages for
that, and like to reserve the tape for new content.
Obviously producers don't like longer stories, but I have argued two things. One, the
lawyers suggestions usually add significant time. And second, viewers watch stories that
are compelling....and don't put a stop watch on stories. If you begin with something
compelling like a confrontation or a sound bite that is catchy, people will be willing to
hang out, especially if you have the reputation for doing quality stories, and then argue
that the substance of the story will dispel the notion that you are just claiming stuff
without being able to back it up.
-------Shannon Cake, WPTV West Palm Beach
3 minutes is our new limit here. Management is not a big fan of multiple night
investigations, so we sometimes launch a Part 1 at 5, 5:30, 6...and then a Part 2 at 11....
Huge push here now to make it all about the web...so lots of web build-outs on our
stories. Sidebar stories are sometimes written and edited especially for the web as well.
I limit to 1 victim for a 3 minute piece unless I am breaking up into the 2 parts. Frankly,
my investigations and my interviews are much shallower. It's tough to go deep in 3
minutes. If I have one that's going to run long, I try to break up the pieces into segments.
For instance, plant problem in part 1 (whether systematic or bureaucratic), create the
outrage factor by weaving a bit of our undercover video into Part 1 and try to drive early
audience to late shows. When appropriate I often save approach or big reveal for late
night audience. We'll just do a quick recap of problem and right into approach or
undercover. All this to accommodate shorter story times.
Also, if I have multiple victims for a consumer/investigative report, I will profile
strongest victim in piece and bring the rest of victims to the station. We will set up a
forum setting: I will ask: "how many of you paid your money but never got your product"
or "how many of your dogs died weeks after taking them home?” All of the hands going
up at once can achieve what it would typically take a minute to lay out in traditional story
telling format.
-------

5
-Steve Daniels, WTVD Durham
We have a renewed emphasis on shorter investigations – pushed by our Magid
consultant. We were encouraged to run 2:30-3:00 – this month. We had difficulty paring
things down – and most often went about 3:30.
----------Eric Kehe/Chief Photojournalist 9NEWS, Denver
If you are going to shorten your long story for a shorter newscast, you have to rewrite
your story to make sense and take some elements out. Don’t just cut from your script.
Don’t let the producers do it.
Ask yourself what is the crux of your story. The key finding. Then cut from there.
You usually can’t cut out natsound because it’s too short plus it’s used for pacing.
If you cut out reaction from people, you change the feel and the emotion of the story.
Remember, it’s not about the information that you are giving, it’s about the experience
you’re giving your viewers. The emotion that you leave them with will make them
remember the story.
----------Tony Kovaleski, KMGH-TV, Denver
We don’t have any time limits. It’s on a story to story basis. But the reality is, there are
few, good hard-hitting investigations that are 1:30. So, our content rules the time, the
time does not rule the content.
We usually go between 3:00-4:00. Outside of the book, we can go longer. We do have to
make some editorial decisions if we have a lot of meet. We will often off-load the
information to a second part. We like to do the problem in part one and then have the
officials and the reaction or solution in part two.
If we are tight on time, I won’t intro my piece to buy my story :15. But that’s my last
choice; I don’t want to do that.
I write long and cut my stories. It’s rare that my news director asks me for more about a
subject; he usually says cut stuff out. We write long, edit on a-roll, watch/feel it and then
cut from there and make changes.
All of the extra elements go on the web. But that’s a real struggle for me. If we get sued,
how do we justify putting more info in the web story which the subject may think is fairer
and not in the TV story?
I don’t think investigative time will shrink at my station in the future. The station has a
strong commitment to investigative reporting. If anything, they want to put us in more
shows as much as possible.

