Conceiving the investigation:
To generate investigative ideas, you need toread Web sites that drill into topics. Here are some
worth exploring for quick-hit pieces as well as potential projects:
1. Municipal Advisory Councils
http://www.sec.gov/info/municipal/nrmsir.htm
There are four national Municipal Securities Information Repositories, as well as one in Texas
and some other states. These receive notices of material events – such as defaults and rating
downgrades - that affect municipal bonds. You may be able to sign up for notices of recent
filings. Using such notices, over a two year period, the Star-Telegram saw bond defaults
involving low-income housing complexes authorized by one state agency, and that led to a story
about the failure of a housing program. The notices also may disclose that a government entity is
in financial peril.
2. costreportdata.com and ahd.com
These sister companies offer journalists free access to financial information that hospitals submit
to the federal government. With the reports, you can track changes in a hospital’s finances over
time and look at whether they are serving low-income patients.
Using these sites, the Star-Telegram found that a local indigent hospital had aggressively marked
up its charges, particularly in services used primarily by low-income patients. Here are some
easy computations using information on costreportdata.com:
Determine the markup for hospital services (Worksheet S10 has overall ratio; Worksheet
C-1 has breakdown by services)
See what share of beds go to Medicaid patients (Worksheet S3-1)
Look at the occupancy rate (Worksheets D-1)
Find out investments, general fund balance, cash on hand (Worksheet G)
See net income, revenue from various sources and bad debt (Worksheet G-3)
On ahd.com you can look at the employee mix, average length of stay, average hourly pay,
patient origin by zip code, and average costs for the top 20 diagnoses.
3. FDA warning letters database
http://www.fda.gov/foi/warning.htm

A leading medical school/research center didn’t follow the law in the conduct of its clinical
investigations to protect human subjects. A drug company is selling adulterated products. A Web
site is making unsubstantiated claims for a herbal supplement. Workers at a fruit juice company
pick up oranges from the floor and process them. A hospital used mammography equipment that
was inaccurate. Water that an airline uses isn’t sanitary. When FDA inspectors discover these
kinds of violations, they send warning letters, which are posted to this Web site. When
companies respond, the replies are posted as well. With food and drug safety in the news, this
site can give you a picture of the cleanliness of companies in your area. Sign up for the listserv to
get notified whenever new warning letters are sent.
4. Professional licensing boards
http://www.clearhq.org/boards.htm
Complaints against dentists backlogged to 2001. No action taken over a year’s time in response
to grievances against chiropractors. Physicians who fail to disclose felony convictions. Nurse
aides licensed despite being banned for mistreatment of patients. State licensing boards offer a
treasure trove of information about professionals and about how well government protects
consumers. This site offers a list and links to occupational licensing agencies in every state.
5. Government performance reporting
http://www.seagov.org/initiatives/state_gov.shtml
Funny how many story ideas you can get by simply reading reports issued by government
agencies. Some agencies also make their databases available for analysis. In Texas, for example,
the Legislative Budget Board has databases of state contracts and of fines levied by state
agencies. Using the fines and fees database, we saw agencies that rarely collected tiny
percentages of the fines they levied. This Web site is a guide to performance reporting in every
state. State auditors and inspectors general aren’t the only game in town. Other reports often
provide a road map for your own examinations of government agencies.

