Investigative Reporters and Editors / TIP SHEET / 2008 Conference

Watchdogging the Authorities
Topics and tips for monitoring often overlooked aspects of the criminal justice system:

Evidence Management
For years, law-enforcement agencies have caught heat for allowing DNA samples to
languish on shelves without timely analysis. Recently, attention has focused on whether
authorities even keep evidence, such as rape kits, needed to solve cold cases or show
whether a prisoner has been wrongly convicted. Dozens of states still don’t require
retention of DNA, putting it at risk of being trashed. What’s your authorities’ record on
preserving evidence?
• Police and courts are supposed to maintain chain-of-custody documentation. Ask
for the evidence logs or property sheets. These records, usually open for scrutiny
in older cases, chronicle the ``life’’ of the evidence and who handled it.
• The U.S. Justice Department maintains DNA grant applications and companion
reports from states seeking federal funds to test backlogs and train police. Those
documents can reveal unique problems in handling and processing evidence.
Appellate rights
People accused of criminal acts are entitled not only to a fair trial but to an appeal.
While it doesn’t catch all the wrongs, the appellate system helps weed out cases where
defendants are treated unfairly. However, the system doesn’t work for people who can’t
access it. In Augusta, Ga., nearly half of 339 convicts sentenced to prison couldn’t obtain
an appeal because judges failed to track cases and notify prisoners.
•

•

To see if the same problem exists in your area, start with the local trial docket and
look for jury trials. Pull cases to check for indications that convictions have been
appealed. If the defendants aren’t appealing or they are representing themselves
on direct appeal, there’s a problem.
Background information on the appellate process can be found at The National
Judicial College at www.judges.org and the National Center for State Courts at
www.ncsconline.org

Youth prisons
They usually carry euphemistic titles – such as ``state schools’’ or ``juvenile centers.’’
Youth prisons can be a challenging problem to investigate because juvenile records
are usually confidential. Simply determining the names of the individuals housed in one
of these places can be nearly impossible. But there are ways to crack the wall:

•
•

•

Many states have independent, or semi-independent, inspectors general. Their
reports, though heavily redacted, often point to significant problems.
Depending on your state's open records laws, incident reports or summaries of
violations by prison staff – again, sometimes redacted – can be available. Wideranging requests for these records over a period of months or years can show
trends and persistent problems.
Look for websites set up by prison guards and ex-guards who sometimes like to
air their grievances.

For more information, contact the tipsheet authors:
Miles Moffeit, The Denver Post, mmoffeit@denverpost.com.
Sandy Hodson, The Augusta Chronicle, sandy.hodson@autustachronicle.com
Doug Swanson, The Dallas Morning News, dswanson@dallasnews.com

