Digging in the Defense Department medical data mines
Kelly Kennedy · Army Times · kelly@kellykennedy.net · (720)244-0434

1. Always do a literature review. Always. Hit Nexus and look up everything having to do
with your topic. This will tell you what questions haven’t been asked, who you need to
ask your questions of, and what information is already available through Government
Accountability Office reports and Congressional testimony. That’s huge when covering
the military. All the information about the backlogs leading to the Walter Reed crisis was
already out there.
2. After your literature review, Google any report that looks interesting that came up in that
review. It’s probably online. All the budget data for the Walter Reed disability snafu
stories – data that showed the total amount of disability retirement paid out by the
Defense Department had not increased since before the war began – came from Googling
a statutory report I found in a Government Accountability Office report I found in the
literature review.
3. Check these Web sites for reports (Army, by the way, usually leads the other services in
medical collaborations, so Army often has Navy, Marines and Air Force info). This is
where you’ll find suicide data, random information about Chlamydia rates going up in
Air Force recruits; how many folks were hospitalized for brain injuries, psychiatric
disorders or breast cancer; and the mental health assessment teams’ reports that showed
last year that 50 percent of soldiers think torture is A-OK:
a. U.S. Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine: http://chppmwww.apgea.army.mil/
b. Army Medical Department: http://www.armymedicine.army.mil/
c. Coalition Casualty report (how, where and when service members died in
theater): http://icasualties.org/oif/BY_DOD.aspx
4. Talk to the little guys first. They’re not hard to find – check the blogs. If they’re upset
about the way they’re being treated, they’ll be on there. And if one guy is in a bad
medical situation (or good for that matter), he’s going to know others in the same
situation cuz they see each other in the waiting rooms where they can sit all day long
waiting for an appointment. Because it’s military, there’s usually someone who has
decided to try to take everybody else under his wing. Find that guy. Talk to them offpost.
5. When somebody calls you and says something absolutely crazy is going on having to do
with the military, believe her.
6. Talk to the big guys last, and try to already have the answers to the questions you want to
ask. A lot of times, the really big guys – the colonels and generals – don’t know the
details. Their staffs do. Often that’s the civilian staff that has been working that office for
years. Military people usually rotate in and out quickly. By the time you get to the
general, you should just be going for verification and explanation: “Why do you have a
400,000-case backlog?” and not, “How many cases are you behind?”
7. You’ll have to go through a PAO. A lot are really good, but most of them are not deep in
the weeds on the information you need. Sometimes, they’ll give you an answer they’ve
been told to give you without knowing the subject matter, which is fine. Unless you don’t
know the subject matter. Often, the PAO is unwittingly offering up a snow job while
someone behind the scenes is hoping you won’t catch it. Figure out who that person is so
you can give the PAO a name. Demand to talk to that name.
8. Look for the first sergeant. He’s the dad. He’s the one who used to be a private and took
20 years to rise up the ranks and knows the system better than anybody. He’s also out to
protect his guys – that’s his job. The officers are there to plan the battle. If you find a

good Top, he’ll do what he can to fix a bad situation, and that includes handing you four
soldiers who are getting messed around in his company at Walter Reed.
9. Look for the chaplain. Anybody with a grievance goes to the chaplain. Get to know him.
10. Trust that the younger service members are intelligent. Trust that they’re willing to talk
about what they’re worried about, and what makes them proud.
11. Find an expert who’s in the National Guard or Reserve. Often, they’ve been deployed.
Often, they look at the same issues in civilian life. Often, they’re much happier to talk
with you without the assistance of a PAO.
12. If you go to Iraq, stay out of the Green Zone. This isn’t because you won’t see any action
(in fact, you might). This is because the Green Zone is more political than any place else
and they’re used to having media at the Baghdad Combat Support Hospital. There are
several of them. If you go someplace else, the docs will talk to you.
13. Hang with the medics. They know everything from mental health issues to how many
guys are using nutritional supplements.
14. Go into the combat zone already an expert on post-traumatic stress disorder, traumatic
brain injuries and new medical technologies. Stories will present themselves in big ways
if you already know what you’re talking about. The human stories over there right now
are all stress-related.
15. Know what the policy (yeah, every last regulation and policy directive is online) is so you
can compare what really happens in the field to what actually happens. For example,
pretty much every soldier I talked to has memorized the TBI test so he won’t get held
back at the aide station.
Stories online: Blood Brothers – the story of the hardest hit unit in Iraq. One platoon lost nine
men. A 19-year-old soldier threw himself on a grenade to save four friends. A deep-buried
IED flipped a Bradley upside-down, killing the five soldiers and interpreter inside. A second
IED killed four more soldiers. A first sergeant committed suicide in front of his men. And
finally, a platoon refused to go out on patrol because they feared that, because they were so
angry, they would kill everyone in their paths. They were accused of mutiny. Finalist for the
Michael Kelly Award: www.militarytimes.com/projects/flash/bloodbrothers/
Wounded and Waiting: Army Times began reporting this story six months before anyone
ever heard about the mold in Walter Reed’s infamous Building 18. Using DoD budget
reports, Congressional testimony and GAO reports, we showed that not only were the troops
turning down benefits because the waiting times were too long in medical hold units, but also
that soldiers received much lower disability percentages than airmen or sailors, even with the
wounds of war.
http://www.armytimes.com/news/2007/02/tnsmedboards070217/
Traumatic brain injury: Describes why mild traumatic brain injuries are a big deal. For 10
percent of those injured, the symptoms – short-term memory loss, anger, headaches, tunnel
vision, stuttering and seizures – never go away.
http://www.marinecorpstimes.com/news/2007/08/marine_brainmain_070828/

