Using testing for stories
2008 IRE Conference, Miami, Fla.
George Papajohn and Sam Roe, Chicago Tribune | Hagit Limor, WCPO-Cincinnati |
Ellen Gabler, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

1. Choosing what you want to test
A. There’s opportunity for testing in small, medium and large stories - Stories can be based
solely on testing, or you can test to bolster a story. Not all stories must be thousand-dollar projects –
examples: Bacteria in beer lines, the “brand” authenticity of wine at a local restaurant – is that
really Kendall Jackson?, levels of caffeine in coffee.
B. Study the studies - Look at how similar testing has been done. How did they collect the
samples? Make your testing as scientifically valid as possible.
C. What has government done? Scientists and advocates? Tell the experts about your
methodology, and see if they can help you design a better study. You want your story to be
able to withstand intense scrutiny.
D. Using current events/issues as a starting point Bad winter? Test potholes. Proposed
smoking ban? Test air quality in bars and restaurants. Look at every story as a testing
opportunity.

2. How to find a lab
A. Your most crucial decision - If you are going to be doing a lot of testing, it might be
smart to find a lab that can (expertly) test a wide variety of things and answer questions on
the fly.
B. Understand methodology - Think about your reporting goals. Do you just want to know
what chemicals are in a certain product? Or do you also want to know if there is a difference
among suppliers? Think about these things before testing.
C. Check for conflicts - Pick a reputable lab that doesn’t have any conflicts. Labs at
universities are often least expensive, and researchers there might alert you to any unusual
findings.
D. Make sure it understands media spotlight - The lab should understand the reporting
process, and that business owners or others in the story will likely question methodology
and the lab itself as a way to dismiss the findings. Will the lab have someone who can be
quoted on the record? Will that person be able to explain and defend its findings?
E. Tests that don't involve labs - Get creative. Toy tests are old hat but never
underestimate interest in consumer product testing, and not always through a lab, unless you
count human interaction as a real-world lab. Test human behavior under common or
extraordinary circumstances.

3. Costs
A. Can it be done in increments? If the initial findings prove your story, you may find it
easier to get funding for more samples.
B. Can you negotiate the price? You’re a customer and there are always other labs, so
don’t be afraid to ask for a better price.

C. Can you go small, local? Take the perfect world list and see how “good” it might be if
cut in half. If testing food products, think about what local food is popular.
D. How long will it take? Does it cost more for speedier results?
E. Actual costs – Examples: Cost to test for bacteria in water? $22. Cost for lead testing on
one toy in a lab: $37.50 in Milwaukee. For Tribune: between $20 and $50, depending on the lab
and whether it was a rush delivery.for one sample. An XRF scanner cost $3,000 to rent for one
month. In all, the Tribune tests cost about $10,000.

F. Finding "free" lab service – You can still test without a big budget - in university labs
ph.'d's have access to equipment. You can also sometimes use think tanks that are testing for
other purposes, but you have to explain to your reader/viewer and must be sure no viewpoint
can impinge on the legitimacy via interpretation.

4. Methodology
A. Think through protocol for collection - Write it down and follow the protocol, even for
simple tests. Keep the samples. Have the lab hold onto samples for a few weeks in case you
want to do further testing on those same samples.
B. How will you document? Think through how you want to analyze and present the
information. Make sure to include enough information at the beginning, going back can be
difficult – or a sample can be destroyed after testing.
C. Go back to the studies and even government - Others in academia and government
have gone down this path before you; learn from them. Pick their brains; let them critique
and improve your plan.
D. Can you pre-screen? Or does it need to be random? Cheaper pre-screening (using
methods not quite as sophisticated as a lab’s) can save costs and help focus the reporting.
• Consider conducting a random sample. A random sample removes biases you might
have and gives you results that are representative of a larger population. Plus, a
random sample is fair. If you want to name names -- identifying stores where you
bought tainted items, for example -- you might want to do a random sample.
E. How will lab handle quality control? Understand how the lab works and how it checks
its own work.
F. Take readers/viewers along for the ride Explain the science by walking people through
step by step how you conducted the test. People love to watch the process.

5. Pitfalls - what to watch for
A. Consider a dry run - What will it actually be like to walk through a store buying or
scanning products? How long will it take to buy and package items?
B. Play out story and push back - Common attack points: Contamination; lab’s
methodology; lab’s quality; not above legal limit.
C. Be ready to take a step back -Your initial assumptions may have been wrong. Learn
from them.
D. Don't panic or rush- If you need additional testing or research time, make that
investment.
E. Testing the Test The worst pitfall is that you didn't prepare the methodology before.
There always is a possibility of machine failure but you don't do these stories on a deadline
that doesn't allow a delay for retesting.
F. Explain limitations of testing Detail when results only impact limited samples or
behaviors. Explain what the numbers DON’T say/prove.

6. How to approach subjects
A. Early approach is OK - Companies and subjects of stories need time to understand what
you’re doing and respond. Give them plenty of time.
B. Expect criticism and elicit details of that criticism -Continue to ask, Why? Why do
you think methods are flawed or results inaccurate?
D. Involve the lab Will the lab defend its work?

7. How to turn data into people-oriented readable/watchable stories
A. Think people/think visual - These stories aren’t naturals for visuals, so get photo
involved early and look for opportunities. Lab itself may be best opportunity for shots.
B. Make info useful - Can you create a calculator on line or in print? Answer the question,
in print and in graphics: What does this mean to me?
C. Embrace gray areas Don’t overplay health risks. These stories are also about how
government operates and how officials are (or are not) looking out for citizens.
D. Make people part of the test - Gather them to observe or get them to judge
##
George Papajohn and Sam Roe, Chicago Tribune - Associate Managing Editor/Projects,
Reporter, respectively | GPapajohn@tribune.com
Hagit Limor, WCPO-Cincinnati – Reporter | HLimor@wcpo.com
Ellen Gabler, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel – Reporter | egabler@journalsentinel.com

Story examples using testing
•

What’s on the menu? – Eight TV stations across the country tested the fat/calorie
content of food at popular restaurants.
- 78% of food tested over fat-limit promised
- 68% over of food tested over calorie-limit promised
http://www.abc15.com/content/themenutest/default.aspx
•

Bad Beer in Brew City – Raquel Rutledge, of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, tested
beer lines in local watering holes and discovered that lines in some Milwaukee
restaurants and bars are caked with bacteria. Wisconsin, unlike other states, does not
have laws requiring restaurants or bars to clean their keg lines regularly.
www.jsonline.com/publicinvestigator

•

At the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, the Public Investigator Team has a regular
feature called, Under the Microscope, where we test things and find out what is in
them. Some of tests turn into stories, others are just posted on our blog,
http://blogs.jsonline.com/piblog/, under an “Under the Microscope” tag. We’ve
tested everything from lead in dog toys to the accuracy of home lead-testing kits, to
levels of mercury in sushi, caffeine in coffee, and more.

Major investigations
• Toxic Treats – The Orange County Register spent two years investigating the
dangers of lead in Mexican candy. The newspaper tested Mexican candy, its
ingredients as well as dirt and water that may have come into contact with the
candy’s original ingredients – like chili peppers. The 2004 investigation was a
Pulitzer Prize finalist.
• Mercury Menace - The Chicago Tribune in 2005 conducted one of the most
comprehensive studies of mercury in commercial seafood. Reporters bought 162
samples of fish from randomly selected supermarkets in the Chicago area. Rutgers
University tested the samples for mercury, a toxic metal that can cause learning
disabilities in children and neurological problems in adults. Among the findings:
Chicago-area supermarkets routinely sell a variety of seafood highly contaminated
with mercury. Several species were so tainted that regulators could confiscate them
for violating food safety rules. High levels were found in two species for which the
government has not issued warnings: orange roughy and walleye.
• Hidden Hazards – The Chicago Tribune’s 2007 series on dangerous children’s
products, which won a Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting, included a farreaching examination of lead-tainted products. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission called the Tribune's tests the largest and most comprehensive study into
lead in toys ever conducted outside the agency. The newspaper's testing of 800 toys
replicated the often complex steps that government regulators take when determining
whether a toy contains lead and whether that lead can leach out and harm children.
We found 21 toys that exceeded federal or state legal limits for lead. The testing
prompted numerous companies to pull items from shelves nationwide and sparked
both the CPSC and the Illinois Attorney General’s Office to launch inquiries.
More broadcasting testing stories
Smoke Pollution: Hagit Limor at WCPO rented an air quality machine to test air pollution
levels in bars/restaurants before and after a smoking ban went into effect.
Who Hagit used: Matt Shortino at Ashtead Technology in Rochester, NY (585-424-2140)
matt.shortino@atrentals.com or www.ashtead-technology.com
http://www.wcpo.com/content/news/localshows/iteam/story.aspx?content_id=2113522da7cb-4160-a572-7b5e251f46e5
Case-Ready Meat - Hagit also tested case-ready meat, which maintains its health red color
even after it spoils.
http://www.wcpo.com/content/news/localshows/iteam/story.aspx?content_id=d5f35fd11efc-4ba3-8bc3-08ce33750406
Oil Change Claims - Susan Batt of WRTV, Indianapolis, tested claims of local oil chain
"Mr. Lubie" that it was selling a Valvoline Oil change… Turns out they were using the same
low-grade oil for both the more expensive and the less expensive
changes.http://www.theindychannel.com/money/14492546/detail.html
http://www.theindychannel.com/news/14479142/detail.html
The NITON Analyzer - Tisha Thompson/Fox Washington DC supplies this and the rest of
the examples below. She used this machine to get elemental composition in 3 seconds, to

find out how much lead is in children’s toys and jewelry. You can use the Analyzer to test
any element from arsenic to plutonium. Contact: Bill Radosevich, Radiation Safety Trainer,
NITON Analyzers @Thermo Fisher Scientific 612-670-9660 or
William.Radosevich@thermofisher.com
Gold Testing - Every pawn shop in town has a little rock they rub "gold" jewelry on – after
they pour nitric acid on it – it will tell them instantly if it’s 24k, 18k, or even "real" gold.
Contact: local state contact for the National Pawnbrokers Association
http://www.nationalpawnbrokers.org/state.htm has the entire list
Radar Detectors – You can get a decent radar detector for about $150 and clock anything
from speeding cops to school buses to people sledding more than 20mph down icy slopes in
the winter. Just be prepared for the cops to challenge you on the fact you and your gun are
not "certified." She used: Bushnell Radar Gun
www.bushnell.com/general/speedgun_velocity.cfm?section=General%20Use
Potholes - Thompson did the TV version of this story after a NICAR panel on transportation
by the KC Star’s Gregory Reeves. Hook up an accelerometer to your car, drive around the
streets in your city...and see which neighborhoods/streets have the worst potholes and how
"hard" they are on your car. THIS IS A VERY COMPLICATED TOOL – find the
engineering guys in your building for help – or call Gregory Reeves. We used the same
thing Reeves did: $675 version at Crossbow Technologies www.xbow.com
Roach Killers - Start a relationship with your local university’s entomology department.
Thompson teamed up with University of Maryland Professor Mike Raupp, who collected
roaches, ticks…every kind of bug we wanted to kill. We put the roaches in a bunch of
aquariums – gave them food and water – and then unloaded every kind of roach killer we
could buy...from powders to gels to "bombs." We did the same thing with tick collars…and
set up those glow-in-the-dark UV bug zappers to count how many "good" bugs versus "bad"
bugs they kill. While you're at it, see how many mosquitoes those propane tank models
actually catch. Can you say "zero?"
Hand Washing - You can buy it – or you can borrow it from your local health department.
To show how most people never wash their hands, ask them to put a lotion on their hands.
"Glo Germ" is invisible under regular light and simulates "germs." The only way to remove
it is to properly wash your hands for 20-30 seconds. If you don't, you're hands "glow" in UV
light. Where to get it: www.glogerm.com
Water Testing & Other Laboratory Testing - Your boss says "test the water." Um…it’s a
little more complicated than that. The trick with water testing is you have to know exactly
what it is you want to test. Instead of just "pesticides" you have to give the lab an exact list
of each chemical you're looking for. You will need to get specially prepared bottles; some
contain reactive chemicals that must be filled "just right." As a result, lead and copper cost
about $5 a sample – MTBE costs upwards of $60 a sample – not including "certified
results." I recommend lead, copper, Ph, hardness and turbidity (the gunk in the water) for
starters. You can also use labs to test food for fat, calories, carbs, caffeine, e.coli,
salmonella…even the octane in gasoline.
###

