Maud Beelman
Deputy Managing Editor
The Dallas Morning News
mbeelman@dallasnews.com

IRE 2008 Miami
Editors’ Track
Managing the Investigation

Structure the project. Break the investigative process into sections, and remember that
the more time you spend up front, the fewer problems at the end. Phases are typically the
same, though their lengths may vary. The first is research and planning, a preliminary
look at the subject of investigation. Start drafting a project outline here, figure out
methodology. File FOIAs, request data. Have early meetings with photographers, graphic
artists and Web colleagues to discuss alternative storytelling. The next phase is reporting,
retooling the project outline, drafting story outlines and writing. The final phase is editing
print and online, fact-checking, layout/presentation and, if needed, pre-pub legal review.
Create benchmarks for your investigation. Determine how you will judge the project’s
successful progression, or lack thereof. How will you know when you have enough? How
will you know if you should bail out? Do a cost-benefit analysis.
Meet regularly. Doing so at the same time each week creates a sense of pacing and
serves as mini-deadlines, allowing reporters and editors to assess progress, compare
notes, share ideas, sources and leads. On rolling investigations, consider holding brief (15
minutes) update meetings.
Editors take note. Reporters give the highlights of what they’re learning or doing in
these meetings, and that is not always reflected when the copy is turned in. They talk “in
the moment,” and you can capture color or details that might be lost as the reporter labors
under the long write.
Interview your reporters. Some reporters think best by talking out their findings,
problems or strategy. Write yourself a memo later so you can help jog memories, if
needed.
Outline the project and, later, the stories. Outlines show you what you have as well as
what you don’t. A project outline discusses the structure of the overall effort; a story
outline delves into themes/content. There is no one way to do an outline, except to say
that it is not a notebook or brain dump. Good outlines can also help you get buy-in, from
higher-ups and other departments whose help you need.
Build timelines/chronologies. They can reveal connections or holes you did not realize
existed.
Build your foundation with data and documents, and use humans to bring your story
to life. Get your data and document requests in as early as possible, and let them guide
you to the people who’ll give the story life.

Write memos. They also help reveal holes in information or logic that you might not
notice until too late to fix. If you have many reporters working on a project, encourage
them to write memos to share across the team – in “publishable” format, with quotes,
names, titles, etc., exactly as they would appear in print, which saves time at the end.
Team investigations are like compounded interest – when individual knowledge is shared
and leveraged, the overall effort is strengthened.
Encourage reporters to write as they go. The best of the best do it, and there’s a reason.
In long investigations, it makes the final writing easier. It allows you to write “in the
moment.” And if you don’t start writing until the end of a long investigation, not only are
you overwhelmed with information, but you risk forgetting or losing the spontaneity of
your material.
Encourage reporters to re-read their notes periodically throughout the reporting and
writing process. Information obtained at the start of the investigation often means
something very different from the perspective of greater knowledge and understanding.
The same goes for documents. If you’ve gotten a document dump, re-read the records for
each new line of inquiry.
The 25-word rule. With credit to Steve Lovelady, if your reporters can’t summarize their
story in 25 words or less, they’ve got more reporting and thinking to do.
Moot court it. My reporters taught me this one. During a project last year, they gathered
colleagues from other departments one day to present the premise and methodology of
their investigation. The scrutiny and feedback helped them see where to tweak and
bolstered their confidence they were on the right track.
Confront early. Information or perspectives may emerge from confrontation interviews
that you did not know/had not considered. Doing these “final” interviews before the last
minute gives you time to consider, analyze and incorporate what you learn. It can
strengthen your report and buttress you against allegations of one-sidedness or malice.
Make the methodology clear to the team and the reader. Be sure everyone on the team
knows how the analysis is being done and has input. Then explain what you did, how and
why to the reader. Consider posting the database(s) that served as the analytical
foundation. Transparency is the best defense against those who might try to discredit you.
Contain chaos but allow failure. Use all the organizational tools at your disposal to
keep the project and reporters on track, but allow people to take chances despite the risk
of failure. Let them go down those informational rabbit holes, just follow closely behind.

