“Kicking up Your Production a Notch”
IRE MIAMI 2008
KTVT- Dallas/Ft. Worth
Joshua Brown/Special Projects Editor joshb@ktvt.com
Aaron Wische/EP, Special Projects amwische@ktvt.com

*This write-up assumes the reader has a basic working knowledge of Adobe Photoshop and/or
After Effects.

UT Southwestern Spending
1.

All the documents were scanned as 200 pixel/inch jpegs. They were straightened and
cleaned up in Adobe Photoshop. From there they were imported into Adobe After
Effects and animated as 3D layers. Although After Effects (ver. 6.5) is not a true 3D
environment, it does allow control of all 3 axis: X, Y and Z. When combined with a spot
light and variable key frames (easy ease, ease in, ease out.) the illusion of true 3D
movement can be achieved.

2.

The addition of Dr. Kern Wildenthal’s picture to the “phone number” document was also
done in After Effects. The original jpeg was first loaded into Photoshop, where the
background was erased. The file was then saved as a .psd, or Photoshop document, to
preserve the transparency of the erased background. The .psd was then imported into
After Effects and added as a 2D layer (2D layers do not react to lights) to the
composition. A small drop shadow was added to give the composition more depth.

3.

The “highlighter” effect applied to several of the “credit card” documents is a result of a
yellow animated paint brush applied to the layer using the darken setting. This setting
will only apply the yellow to the “white” portion of the document, allowing the black,
blue or red ink to not be diminished by the yellow of the brush. It basically looks like a
real highlighter marker being applied to a standard sheet of paper.

4.

The map depicting Dr Wildenthal’s travel abroad was a bit more involved. The single
moving map you see is actually a collection of several different maps… all duplicated
from the original. Each duplicate map also revealed, highlighted in red, another country
visited by Wildenthal. As the audio track lists each country, After Effects was instructed
to dissolve to the next layer, visually revealing the next highlighted country. The map’s
movement was achieved by using the parent layer function, which allows many different
layers to be grouped and key framed together.

NTTA Spending
1

The “letter board” animation was fun to conceptualize and create. The first step was to
find a high resolution pic of an actual letter board. Unfortunately, the only one found
already had letters attached, so Photoshop’s clone tool was used to remove the words
while keeping the felt lines of the board consistent. Next, the Ariel font was tweaked
with a beveled edge and a drop shadow to make the text look like actual “letter board”
letters. Finally, the .psd of the finished letter board pic was loaded into After Effects and
animated as a 3D layer with a spot light.

2.

The “red highlighted” selections on the airline documents are actually part of a second
layer, which is identical to the visible layer, but with a red photo filter effect applied.
To reveal each of the “red highlights,” a series of rectangular masks are dissolve (using
opacity key frames) onto the 2nd layer. Since the animation (movement) key frames are
identical on each layer, they both appear to move as one solid layer.

Wedding Photos
1.

Adding the picture frame to the still video of Delbert Criner was a multi-step process.
Using the Avid Newscutter application (which we use for all straight video editing,) the
single frame of Mr. Criner was exported as a graphic of the same 1280 by 720
resolution. The gold picture frame was added in Photoshop, and the animation was
created in After Effects on top of a video background.

2.

How did we apply 3D movement to the “Picture Perfect” website? Basically, it’s the
same concept used to animate other documents. First, the website is loaded on to the
computer monitor. Pressing and holding Ctrl while pressing Print Screen will take a
snapshot of the entire screen (including your mouse pointer, so be sure it’s out of the
way) and place it on the Windows clipboard. The image is then pasted and saved to a
new Photoshop document. Finally, it is imported into After Effects and animated as a 3D
layer.

3.

The wedding album was first created in Cinema 4D, a mac-based animation program
used by our art department. The project was rendered to a QuickTime file and
imported into After Effects. The pictures were added by animating the mask shape
applied to each layer.

4.

The “Criner Portfolio” was created in After Effects, but with a slightly different concept.
The individual 3D layers were placed at 45 degree angles from each other in a straight
line to create somewhat of a “walking display.” Instead of trying to animate each layer to
move past the camera (which would have been tedious and frustrating) we created a
virtual camera and camera rig out of a null object. This way we could simulate the
camera “pulling out” on the initial shot of the clip. Then we could slowly push the
camera rig back in (on the same motion path or “track”) while panning the camera left
and right to focus on each particular layer.

**video samples can be viewed at:
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/UT.Southwestern.Medical.2.564306.html
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/UT.Southwestern.Medical.2.564306.html
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/UT.Southwestern.Medical.2.564306.html
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/ut.southwestern.medical.2.648698.html
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/ut.southwestern.kern.2.659842.html
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/NTTA.north.texas.2.577381.html
http://cbs11tv.com/investigators/NTTA.north.texas.2.601704.html
http://cbs11tv.com/local/Newlyweds.local.wedding.2.507310.html

