Covering Higher Education: Holding administrators accountable
IRE 2008, Miami
Todd Wallack
Boston Globe
twallack@globe.com
617-929-2069
When covering higher education, you need to be persistent and creative. Universities are
like sprawling towns with lots of different types of documents and sources. But they also
contain an endless supply of interesting stories.
Be sure to talk to people who have followed the school for years. Colleges often promise
to fix a problem in the wake of a scandal and never do. For instance, Harvard promised a
rash of reforms after a grade inflation scandal. Five years later, the average GPA is
actually higher now than it was then.
People sources include:
Board members/trustees
Alumni/donors
Faculty (Be sure to consult members of the Faculty Senate)
Labor unions
Staff members
Students (the newspaper and student government are two places to start)
Former administrators
Lawmakers, regulators, watchdogs, neighbors

Look at paperwork. Ask for documents. You'll never know what you'll find. If you cover
private universities, ask for 990s, annual audits, annual reports and other information sent
to donors and alumni...etc. If you cover public universities, there's almost unlimited
number of documents you can ask for under public records laws -- everything from
payroll records to copies of legal settlements with employees.
Potential documents include:
Meeting agendas, minutes
Correspondence with board members (including letters and meeting materials)
Employee offer letters, contracts, separation agreements
Routine annual reports
Annual financial audit
Other audits (such as those based on complaints to the university auditor)
Catalog of property the college owns (including surplus property)
Financial disclosure forms
Bios/resumes of key administrators

Expense records/housing expenses
Policies/procedures
Speeches/public statements/materials sent to alumni/donors/job postings
Discrimination complaints filed with state
OSHA workplace safety inspections
Any reports required to be filed with the state or federal Department of Education
990s tax returns (nonprofits only)
Correspondence with the local city or town
Copies of federal/state contracts

Other tips:
•

•
•

•

•
•

•
•

Find out what reports/documents are regularly sent to the school's board of
trustees/regents and ask to see those documents yourself. (If the university won't
cooperate, try to cultivate relationships with board members and others who might
have access to the documents and can help you out.) While at the San Francisco
Chronicle, a colleague and I found out the University of California was failing to
file several required reports, which gave us a story. We found other stories from
the reports they did file.
Read university/college policies very carefully. It may turn out that the university
or college is violating its own policies. Indeed, we found administrators at the
University of California weren't even aware of the rules.
Don't frame a public records request too narrowly. When a colleague and I asked
for an administrator's employment contract, we were told there was no such
document. We later found out the university called it an offer letter. Likewise,
UC signed a settlement agreement with a vice chancellor who threatened to sue -but UC insisted there was no settlement agreement. Instead, UC called it a
"separation agreement.”
Don't define a public records request too broadly either. Otherwise, the university
will either bury you in paper or complain that it can't comply. For instance, if you
are looking at expenses, don't ask for every receipt -- ask for an expense log or
summary. You can then ask for additional information on any records that seem
interesting.
Whenever possible, ask for data or documents in electronic form. That way the
information is sortable and searchable. It also makes it easy to post the
information online. In some cases, it can also cut down on copying expenses.
Ask for copies of audits and other reports. Every major school should do
audits/reviews of departments -- either routinely or based on whistleblower
complaints. But most schools – even public universities – do not routinely share
the results with the public.
Follow-up on tips. Ask your tipster for as many specific details as possible,
which should make it easier to track down the documents you need to verify the
tip.
Pay attention to administrators' promises and goals. Then see whether the college
is living up to its words.

Other ideas:
·
Check expenses for board meetings. The San Francisco Chronicle found UC spent
$90,000 a year to shuttle the board of regents around town in limos.
·
Look up housing expenses. We found UC spent nearly $1 million a year to maintain
a mansion for the college chancellor that was rarely used for university functions. The
Santa Cruz Sentinel found UC Santa Cruz spent $30,000 on a dog run for the chancellor's
home.
·
Records of sabbatical or administrative leave. Both UC and CSU in California
offered controversial one-year paid vacations for executives when they stepped down.
·
Endowments. Track how well your local universities are investing their money
over the past few years. Also see if they are hoarding or sharing their gains.
·
Fundraising. Monitor how your schools are doing against their fundraising goals –
and each other.
·
Examine property records. Does your local college own lots of off-campus
property? What is the school doing with the land? Does it have surplus property it is
sitting on or planning to sell?
·
Find out how much local schools pay towns for local services. Are they doing their
fair share?
·
Download the federal student loan default database. Find out if any schools in your
area have unusually high default rates, a sign the school might be doing a poor job of
preparing students to get jobs.
·
Check all the bond ratings for schools in your area. If any are unusually low,
investigate if the school is in financial trouble.
·
Find out how the schools is doing in various areas – academic performance,
diversity, keeping costs down….etc.

Credit: Some of the tips come from my former colleague, Tanya Schevitz at the San
Francisco Chronicle

