IRE Conference
June 7, 2008
Tip Sheet: Coaxing great writing from reporters
Keep the bar high, early on: Along with discussions
about the reporting, talk early about what the reporter’s
thoughts are on storytelling. Does she know what kind of
story she wants to write? If it’s investigative, is she
looking for the right elements that will give the story great
punch AND great impact? If it’s narrative, does she have
all the structural elements she will need? You cannot write
beautifully if you don't report beautifully, and you need to
think about what you’ll need for the storytelling while
you’re reporting your piece. You don’t want a story that is
simply “fine.” Fine is not good enough.
Share great writing: Talk about great stories you’ve read
or he’s read, and read them. Check out what works and
what doesn’t, and talk about the technique and strategy
that went into making them. Try giving a reporter a
particularly strong reprint or project right before they
begin writing. Great stories are great teachers.
Mix it up: Bring in strong writers to breaking
investigative stories to elevate the storytelling, or
investigative reporters to great feature stories to elevate
the reporting. This sends a message to reporters that both
are critical – strong reporting, and great writing.

Know your reporter: There really are different strokes
for different folks. To help a writer do his best, you must
know what makes him tick. Everyone needs lots of praise,
but some respond better to suggestion than direction, or
vice versa. Not all reporters are alike, you have got to
figure out each one.
Encourage them: Everybody can write well. Almost
everybody. Don’t fall for the old “I can’t write but I’m a
great reporter” line. Figure out if they have an ear at all,
and if not, tell them they can learn the techniques of
writing just as a software programmer learns to write
code.
A disastrous first draft? Try the Columbo approach:
Don't overwhelm the reporter with everything that's wrong
with the piece; rather, do it in pieces, while praising the
reporter for the fixes along the way. Start with story
construction, helping them see where the piece is
repetitive or confusing. Once that's fixed, move onto the
lede. Then the first few nut grafs. Remember: One step at
a time.
Talk first, and much: Before the writing even starts, talk
through the major elements, perhaps the 10 most
important concepts to be delivered. That way, the editor
helps shape the story and the reporter can decompress and
create an outline. This helps identify what's important and
what's not, and opens up more detailed discussions about
leads, nut grafs, and chronology.

Talk about story structure: How is the reporter going to
tell the story? What elements are presented in what order?
There has to be some organizing principle –
chronological, geographical, theme, etc.
Write a discovery draft: This technique can be an
effective way to break out when you’re mired in the
material. First, read your files, interviews, outline, and
chronology to get total command of your materials. Then
write a first draft from memory, as quickly as possible,
capturing the flow of the material, without slowing to
check quotes or dates. You can check for facts in a more
meditative second draft. The point of the first draft is to
get it done, to find the shape of the story.
True praise: Find something to like in the first draft, and
mention it, specifically. But it has to be something you
truly like. Praise the reporting if you can’t praise the
writing. You can always praise the effort.
What works and what need work? This question can be
asked when you get a draft that requires major work. This
query puts the writer in control and rewards him or her for
coming to the next step. Accurate self-diagnosis is a
powerful tool.
Long memory: Take notes of your conversations and
meetings about the story. Detail the anecdotes,
coincidences, ironies and outrages that the reporter has
told you as the project unfolded. Sometimes, these gems,

weeks or months during the writing, don’t make it into the
story when the focus is on investigative findings.
Lighten up: Investigative writing doesn’t have to sound
serious or be a stiff read. Conventional straight-news leads
or top sections to long stories all too often are serviceable
but forgettable. As an exercise, urge the reporter to
approach the story as a feature story. Take off the
manacles. The results can be surprisingly fresh. It’s vastly
easier, if needed, to infuse rigor and spine in this sort of
story than loosening up a straight-laced story.
Trish Wilson
AME/Investigations, The Philadelphia Inquirer
twilson@phillynews.com
James Neff
Investigations Editor
The Seattle Times
jneff@seattletimes.com
Michael Sallah
Investigations Editor
The Miami Herald
msallah@miamiherald.com

