Parachuting In:
How Investigators Can Enhance Coverage of the Big Story
Jim Strickland, WSB-TV
When news is breaking:
•

OPEN YOUR TOOLBOX: Recognize as investigators, the tools we use as a
matter of routine may be unfamiliar, unavailable and even intimidating to our
colleagues in general assignment. Many GA reporters may not even have access
to passwords and protocols afforded investigative staffers. (Nexis charges WSB
per password, so only a few of us have authorization!) In the first moments of a
chaotic news breakout, the newsroom will need point people to run Nexis
backgrounds, PACER and other court record checks, etc. We are uniquely
qualified to add that type of depth so often overlooked when a newsroom is
hyperventilating over getting first pictures and sound.

•

FEED THE BEASTS (WEB, GRAPHICS AND TICKER): Don’t dismiss facts
of marginal importance, the so-called “news nuggets.” Add them to your wall-towall coverage through a lower third ticker, a website fact page, or full screens for
the anchors.

•

BLOG THE BACKSTORY: A compelling addition to breaking news coverage
for your web. If you’re working in the newsroom rather than on the street, feed
the web an occasional play by play of what’s going on in the newsroom. The
latest craze in our shop is “process language.” That’s bringing the viewer a taste
of the story gathering including in the story telling. A blog is a great way to feed
that appetite during breaking news. It’s cool on election nights as well.

On big issue stories:
•

OPEN RECORDS TELL MUCH: How much water is the Governor using while
he orders drought conservation measures for the rest of us? Are there any names
of note living in those homes up for foreclosure this month? Documents and
simple databases are a quick way to get our investigative teeth into issues such as
mortgage crisis and drought.

•

PUT SOURCES ON NOTICE: For the scam hunters among us, get the word out
to your normal contacts that you’re are looking specifically to highlight crooked
dealings springing from the big issue of the day.

•

FIND YOUR EXPERTS EARLY: For investigative and GA, WSB had our
interns develop a list of pre-qualified professionals ready and willing to speak on
camera on their topics of expertise. We have mortgage bankers, medical
specialists, stock brokers and more on stand by on short notice. They each know
we’ll want REAL PEOPLE, and are willing to liaison. A fantastic resource.

