Using data and documents to investigate schools
IRE
Miami
June 5, 2008

Rose Ciotta
Education Editor
The Philadelphia Inquirer
rciotta@phillynews.com
215-854-5024

Mary Shanklin
Investigative Reporter
The Orlando Sentinel
MShanklin@orlandosentinel.com
407-420-5538

25+ Data and Documents to Turn
Education Into a Watchdog Beat
Charter Schools:
1)990 federal income tax filing for nonprofits
2)Annual reports/ annual audits
3)Property records
4)Related companies and nonprofits
5)State records: budgets, staff, executive salaries
6) Property records
7)Campaign contributions to state lawmakers by charter operators
8)Violence Data--What does the district count as violent? Are drugs
reported? Your first challenge is getting accurate data. No Child Left
Behind requires reporting but many states fail to verify. In Philadelphia, The
Inquirer revealed that the city schools were routinely underreporting their
incidents to the state.
Analyze by age, school, calculate a rate per school over time.
What happens outside school? Do students stay out of school because they
are afraid of being pushed and punched? Do they end up in truancy court?

9)Test Scores: Leave to love them. Six years after the implementation of
NCLB and there is an array of data that will allow you to determine whether
all of the testing is leading to any improvement. Ways to look at the results:

•Same school over time/same students over time using ID numbers
•Same class of students over several grades i.e. a cohort study
•Racial comparison to test progress in narrowing achievement gap
•Over three years, look at most improved, least improved
•Compare results by similar schools using demographic value generated by

the state or percent receiving school lunch http://go.philly.com./reportcard

10)Superintendent’s contract—what’s the buy out deal? How do contracts
compare from one district to the other?
11)School foundations—Who contributes to these non-profits and how are
they spending the money? Do any of the companies do business with the
district?
12)Field Trips—are there differences between rich and poor districts?
13)Expenses—What does the board and administrators spend—cell phone,
credit card expenses; travel; dinner meetings. Check board meeting
attendance
14)Legal Fees—Organize the billings by dates and by number of hours and
give it the reasonableness test. No lawyer can bill for nearly around the
clock work. Which firm gets the school district’s bond work?
15)Pension records--Double dippers—does your district allow highly paid
administrators to retire and be rehired as consultants?
16)Criminal records--Does the state or district require criminal background
checks of school staff? What about bus drivers and other support
personnel?
17)Megan’s Law--Where do the sexual predators live? How close to the
schools? Your state probably has a Megan’s Law database you can get.
18)Vendors/consultant contracts—a basic database to get regularly; who
has largest contracts? Are they campaign contributors to board members?
Contributions to the school’s non-profit foundation?
19)Legal claims—who sues and who collects from the district and why?

Payroll/Staff
20)Look to state for statewide database of all professional “certificated”
staff w/ salary details; what do teachers and principals earn extra? Ask for
all amounts paid, not just salary.

• Use payroll to analyze by gender, race, salary, assignments
• Use payroll to find favorite days for teachers and staff to call in sick
• See if the annual step increases by grade favor long-term teachers, who
make up bulk of union membership

21)Overtime: who gets it and why; how about $100,000 in OT for the
superintendent’s secretary?

Academic:
22)Graduation data—compare % graduating with % that passed state tests
to find those graduating with an empty diploma
23)Transfers— request test scores of students who have transferred under
NCLB and compare them to cohort groups that did not transfer. Also
compare all aspects of the school sending students to the school receiving
them, from health and fire inspections to teacher experience and discipline.
24)Substitute teachers—Request data with the education level for all
substitutes, including their name and contract employee ID.
Request data with substitutes’ assignments, preferably with the ID number
and match the two using Access.
Identify classes that were taught primarily by subs for the year and
compare their test scores with cohort group.
Request from Human Resources all of the complaints that have been filed
against subs.
25) Attendance records –Track attendance leading up to the enrollment
count before high-stakes tests. Are principals dumping low-performing
students to pump up scores?

26) State scholarship records –Request from the state the records of all
college students who receive state scholarships (names redacted). Get the
students’ high schools. Compare scholarship retention for expensive private
schools and public schools.
27)Collect Your Own

• For most recent data
• To survey many districts for specific story
• To cover a wide geography with many school districts
• To create database for Report Card comparisons

