Open Records
So you’ve been turned down! Now what?
Jim Parsons
WTAE TV
Minimize Odds of a Denial
zKeep request narrow, if possible. Find out what you’re asking for ahead of time. Try to
learn the title of the document you are requesting and include it in your letter.
zCite the section in your state open records law that says the records you are requesting
ARE public.
zFollow up written request with a phone call. Any questions?
Initial Steps Following Denial
zCall the open records official, ask if a simple re-phrasing will change minds
zAsk press secretary if you can get the document/information informally
zDoes another govt. agency have the same document?
zAppeal the denial
zIs your employer willing to sue? Find out.
Filing the Lawsuit
zIf employer waffles, are you willing to file pro se to beat deadline?
zIf you proceed without an attorney, make sure there is no doubt that the law is on your
side, that the records are considered public under your state’s open records law. Make
sure you have an attorney on the case prior to the first court appearance.
zParsons vs. Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh, filed pro se, October 2004http://dcr.alleghenycounty.us/Allegheny/CaseDetails.asp?CaseID=SA-04-001245
zAre you prepared to wait years to get your records? January 2007, URA’s final appeal
denied, records released more than two years after we first requested them
zURA story aired May 24, 2007 http://www.thepittsburghchannel.com/news/13385486/detail.html
Let the Sunshine In!
zInclude denial and lawsuit in your reporting – make your fight for public records part
of the story. It holds public officials accountable; earns you respect among
viewers/readers; results in additional tips.
zIf appropriate, question the chief elected official as to why one of his departments/
agencies/boards/commissions denied you access to public records. “Do you believe the
public has a right to know how their money is being doled out – and repaid?”
zDo a Right to Know Test story – choose a document that matters to viewers/readers;
give a ‘Gold Star” to agencies that pass the test
http://www.thepittsburghchannel.com/news/14109495/detail.html

