THREE THINGS TO

KNOW

ABOUT 2008 POLITICAL

MONEY
Peter Overby
poverby@npr.org

June 2008
BUNDLING
The technique of having individual money raisers build their own networks of donors,
bundling is increasingly important. Top bundlers, or raisers, are political rock stars; small
bundlers are essential players in Barack Obama’s spectacular money operation.
It's all legal unless it involves coercion or giving in the name of another. Candidates
disclose bundlers voluntarily, and they stay mum about details, such as which bundlers
solicited which donors.
Presidential bundler database: www.whitehouseforsale.org.
Congressional bundlers exist, but not in any database. The Federal Election Commission
is drafting rules to disclose bundling by registered lobbyists for congressional and
presidential candidates.
A low-profile variant is the finance committee, which organizes a candidate’s
overall fundraising effort. Presidential candidates have national and state finance
committees. The committees tend to be top-heavy with lobbyists, lawyers and developers.
Finance committees also form for specific events. The finance committee will be the
people whose names are on the program.
JOINT FUNDRAISING COMMITTEES
Both parties have created joint fundraising committees to sweep up combined donations
for presidential campaigns and party committees. For example: A donor writes a $72,400
check to the Obama campaign/Democratic National Committee "victory fund." It’s all
regulated “hard money,” so the dollars are doled out this way, hitting the contribution
limits in descending order of impact.
$2,300 for Obama's primary campaign
$2,300 for his general election campaign [assuming he doesn't take federal
funds]
$2,300 for his "general election legal and compliance" committee
$28,500 to the Democratic National Committee
$37,000 to be allocated to state party committees in battleground states.

INDEPENDENT GROUPS
Free-lance political entities are proliferating. You’ll need a scorecard to keep up with the
players, and a shelf-full of campaign finance regs and the tax code as well. The system is
so baroque because it’s been jury-rigged from three federal statutes, at least four Supreme
Court decisions and the two agencies – the Federal Election Commission and Internal
Revenue Service.
Conventional political action committees – the ones linked to corporations, trade
associations and unions – are old news. They’re regulated by the FEC and limited by both
contribution caps and mandatory disclosure. The new frontier is with independent groups
that typically organize as tax-exempt operations, regulated by the IRS. They enjoy
unlimited contributions; many of them face no disclosure.But they navigate a maze of
other restrictions, affecting their choice of media, wording of the messages and timing of
their messages before election day.
If you’re looking at the legality of a group or its campaign, your best bet is to take the
specific facts and ask a good campaign-finance lawyer. Many independent groups push
the limits, but only some heavily-lawyered ones are likely to go barrelling past them.
Keep in mind that independent groups can’t coordinate with a candidate committee. The
rule has predictable loopholes. But sharing a consultant or advisor with a candidate is a
red flag.
Types of Indie Groups
Political action committees, regulated by FEC, can take only capped "hard money"
contributions, and no corporate or union treasury funds. The vast majority of PACs are
connected to corporations, trade associations or unions – but not always: MoveOn.org
Political Action is, contrary to common belief, a hard-money committee.
527 political groups, regulated by IRS, have no contribution limits, but they have to
disclose donors and contributions or pay tax penalties. When they advertise in the 60
days before election day [or 30 days before primary day] they have to report the spending
and associated fundraising to the FEC.
527s often are quick-hit operations bankrolled by a few big donors. The archetypal 527:
Swift Boat Veterans for Truth.
IRS search engine for 527s:
http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/basicSearch.jsp?ck
501[c]4 advocacy groups, also IRS-regulated, have no contribution limits and no
disclosure. But the tax code says a 501[c]4 must have a primary purpose other than
campaign politics. These groups tend to be well-established – e.g., Sierra Club – but
some are new this year, such as Freedom’s Watch.
MCFL organizations are 501[c]4 non-profits that are incorporated, don’t engage in
business activities, and don't take contributions from other corporations or from unions.
["MCFL" stands for "Massachusetts Citizens for Life," from the title of the court case

creating the category.] Unlike other corporations, an MCFL group can run ads promoting
or attacking a candidate in the days just before an election. It’s a line that’s become
blurred with subsequent Supreme Court action.
Individuals can spend freely, remember, provided they don't coordinate with a
candidate’s committee.
FEC reports you can use on deadline
PACs file regularly with the FEC [more often in election years] and 527s file quarterly
with the IRS. Beyond that, here are two reporting requirements that will help you on a
deadline story.
Electioneering communications: TV, radio, cable and satellite ads, by anyone, that
identify federal candidates and run within 60 days before the general election [or 30 days
before a primary]. Disclosure covers contributions and spending; deadline is 24 hours
after an ad goes up.
FEC link: http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/electioneering.shtml
The twist: You’ll find out which candidate are identified, but not whether the ad supports
or opposes the candidate.
Independent expenditures: Activities in which a person or a hard-money committee uses
express advocacy – in lay terms, telling voters which candidate to vote for or against.
These can include media ads, Internet communications, phone banks, etc.
Prior to 20 days before election day, IEs must be reported to the FEC within 48 hours.
Within the 20-day window, the deadline is 24 hours. These reports show expenditures
only. [Fundraising info turns up later in the committee’s regularly scheduled report.]
FEC link: http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ie_reports.shtml
The twist: Thanks to Senate tradition, players in Senate campaigns file on paper to the
Secretary of the Senate. These reports don't get into the FEC electronic database linked
above, but will turn up several days later in the FEC’s full database of disclosure reports.
But you can only search by the spender’s name.
What’s NOT reported
Oh, where to begin? Internal messages by corporations to employees. TV ads that slide
between the crisscrossing regulations. Direct mail, push polls, other non-broadcast
messages, including direct mail and push polls, depending on timing and financing. Most
voter-mobilization work. You get the idea.
The Secret Money Project, a joint effort of NPR and the Center for Investigative
Reporting, is at
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=91208378.

