Web Sources
T. Christian Miller
Los Angeles Times
The absolute best source for local stories with an Iraq flair is FedBizOpps, www.fbo.gov.

FedBizOpps is supposed to be the Pentagon's one-stop shopping center for all federal
contracts. It is not. Many contracts are never listed. However, it is worth getting to know
the site. You will be surprised at how it manages to be both incredibly easy and maddenly
difficult to use.
A demonstration. I went to www.fbo.gov and typed in Iraq. Somewhat at random, I
scrolled down to item #18, a bid for law enforcement personnel to support the Joint
Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization (JIEDDO). (You know the war has
lasted a long time when the best acronym they can come up sounds like a character from
Clone Wars.)

Clicking the bid brings you to this:
https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=opportunity&mode=form&id=c7c425f073ebb37c44cc816e
730006de&tab=core&_cview=1

Hmm, you say. It's not a "Sensitive/Secure Package." Darn. But what is this for? Usually,
though not always, the "meat" of the bid is listed under "Solicitation"—where the
government spells out what it wants from a contractor. Clicking on "Solicitation" take
you to a warning. Yes, the government's security certificates are not in order. Obviously
designed to scare away Al Quaeda. We can just click through and arrive to this page:

https://acquisition.army.mil/asfi/solicitation_view.cfm?psolicitationnbr=W91CRB08R00
02

Alas. We still don't know what this award is for and the "Army Single Face to Industry"
site is not helping. Don't give up hope! You're getting close. Click on the first .pdf file
(why not?). https://acquisition.army.mil/asfi/upload/W91CRB08R0002/W91CRB-08-R0002.pdf. That will take you, at last, to real information, a 71-page solicitation
description. There, on page 2, you will find this tidbit:
Section B - Supplies or Services and Prices
ITEM NO SUPPLIES/SERVICES MAX
QUANTITY
UNIT UNIT PRICE MAX AMOUNT
0001 $487,000,000.00
Law Enforcement Professional Program - CPFF
Law Enforcement Professional Program for the Office of the Provost Marshall
General (OPMG) United Stated Army Criminal Investigation Command
(USACIDC)
Contractor shall provide experienced former law enforcement personnel with
criminal enterprise analytical and investigative skills and embed them at the
Corps, Division, Brigade, Regiment, and Battalion level in accordance with the
contract statement of work.
Ordering period under this contract is for five (5) years from the date of award.
Total estimated amount of CLIN 0001 is $487,000,000.00 and represents the
maximum limitation of this contract.

I don't know about you, but even now a $500 million dollar contract to hire cops to run
around with soldiers hunting for roadside-bomb-planting insurgents sounds fairly
interesting. Now you've got to start making calls.
And look! The contact info is already there for you, on box 10: Call Terri Quick at 410278-3697. Ask her what's up. You will again be surprised at how often a contract officer
will talk. They're used to talking to private businesses all the time. And if they don't want
to talk, they can quickly refer you to the relevant public affairs officer.
You'll want to find out when the bid closes. What is the idea behind it? What will
Aberdeen Proving Ground's role be? Etc. etc.
There are two other useful features on FedBizOpps. First is the advanced search.
https://www.fbo.gov/?s=opportunity&tab=search&mode=list. Use the "Archived
documents" button to do historical work on the winners of previous awards. You can find
out who won the contract, when and what they got.
Second, you can register with the site to receive email updates. If you have a particular
military base, or contract company, or general topic that you want to cover, you can set
yourself up to get notified by email.

Other Useful Websites
Special Inspector General for the Iraq Reconstruction
http://www.sigir.mil/
One of the best sources for raw data. SIGIR produces massive quarterly reports which
usually contain an Excel file listing all contracts issued and amounts. The report itself is
chockful of information on developing trends, recent arrests and audits.
General Service Administration Excluded Party List System
http://epls.arnet.gov
The name is obtuse, but the purpose is clear: keep out the bad guys! The EPLS lists all
contractors who have been blocked from doing business with the government because of
fraud, bribery and all kinds of other things. Most useful while backgrounding a company.
Army Fraud Fighters
https://www.jagcnet.army.mil/JAGCNETInternet/Homepages/AC/ArmyFraud.nsf/(JAGC
NetDocID)/P+F+A+UPDATES?OpenDocument
These guys have the ugliest web address in the known universe. But their newsletters are
priceless storehouses of story tips. The Army Fraud Fighters is published by so-called
debarment officers, who have the ability to block companies on suspicion of wrongdoing.
What's great about the site is that debarment officers often act much more quickly than
the FBI or Army CID since their standard of proof is much lower.
Taxpayers Against Fraud
www.taf.org

False Claims, also known as Qui Tam suits, are an esoteric branch of the law basically
designed to turn company employees into government spies. If you blow the whistle on
your company for cheating the government, you get a percentage of the pie that gets
returned. Get rich by snitching. There are many, many qui tam firms, but TAF does a
good job of highlighting the biggest cases.
Eagle Eye
http://www.eagleeyeinc.com/
A private company which crunches contract data from the federal government better than
almost anyone else. Plus, they're often willing to help on deadline, so long as you give
them some credit.

Iraq
So neither you, nor your editor is interested in going to Iraq? If it's because you're
worried about the danger, good for you. That's smart. But if you're worried about the
money, think again. It's actually pretty cheap to go, and, IMHO, worth the dough.
An embed with a military unit costs about $4,000 a month, depending on how long you
stay and where you go. Basically, the money pays for your ticket over there, hotel stays
and not much else. Once you're in the hands of the military, everything is free.
And yes, you are in the hands of the military. They will naturally steer you to good news
stories. Go along for the ride. Have an open mind. It may turn out to be good. I have
always found the U.S. military to be amazingly impressive under difficult circumstances.
If the opposite is true, however, you may be surprised at how candidly soldiers talk about
what they're facing. Get a couple of privates at a mess table and listen to them jabber.
Lieutenant colonels are great sources. They're high enough up on the food chain to know
what's going on, but not high enough to have a leadership stake that might discourage
truth telling.
Before you go over, do your research. Contact unit veterans who have been before to find
out what’s going on during the current tour. Read the base or FOB newsletter, usually
avaible online. Go over with two or three stories in mind. But be prepared to adapt to
facts on the ground.
Local military bases have welcome home ceremonies. Attend if possible, or scan for
names. Use the military email convention to reach out and make contact. It's
firstname.lastname@us.army.mil.
Returning vets and contractors also contain a wealth of good information – for about
three months. Afterwards, their knowledge gets stale, they get cranky and nothing was as
good as when they were there.

