Unsung Documents
IRE Conference, Miami, Fla., June, 2008
``The government produces so much information that they can't hide the truth all the
time.'' -- I.F. Stone
Jim Steele, Vanity Fair
Jim_Steele@comcast.net
Joe Stephens, The Washington Post
stephensj@washpost.com
Mike McGraw, The Kansas City Star
mcgraw@kcstar.com
Some of the best documents you'll ever use are little-known ones that you probably
haven't found yet. Don't assume the document you need doesn't exist. There's an endless
and continually expanding lode of documents to be mined.
Jim, Joe and Mike's five tips for finding and using documents:
1. Never view documents in a vacuum. Combining two or more documents, or documents
and interviews, is often the key to investigative stories. Such ``triangulation'' unlocks the
full potential of unsung documents and sources.
2. Always view documents over time; compare this year's annual report to ones published
five and ten years ago. Build a chronology to tease out patterns.
3. Help short circuit the troubling trend of journalists failing to use the federal Freedom
of Information Act and state open records laws. Yes it takes time, yes there are delays.
Yes there are stupid decisions. But sometimes they work and work well. Either way, we
have a constitutional obligation to keep the machine well greased.
4. If someone refers to or reads from a document during an interview, ask for a copy.
Carry a memory stick with you so there's never an excuse for someone not to copy what
you want. A digital camera can stand in as an ad hoc photocopier.
5. Make copies of your documents before you start marking them up. That way, when the
graphics folks ask for copies, you won't feel so dumb.

Here are some of our favorite documents:
Federal tax liens for information on company inventories and tax cheats.
State franchise tax reports.
Campaign contribution reports and databases.
FBI files on persons who have died. Dead men do tell tales
Docket pages at federal agency websites.
Lawsuits. It doesn’t matter who won or lost; discovery is a great tool. Check out a free
and versatile legal search engine at www.lexisone.com.
Plaintiffs Web Pages: Many law firms post complaints, affidavits, depositions etc.
relating to their court cases. Take a look at http://www.hmosettlements.com
Administrative Law judge opinions at various federal agencies.
Statistical Abstract of the U.S. (Contains thumbnail tables of every kind of statistic)
OMB Filings: A little known source of information about federal grants to states, local
governments and non-profits. Website: http://harvester.census.gov/fac/dissem/entity.html
Government cell phone, ``calling card'' and 800 number information.
Desk appointment calendars and visitor sign-in logs.
Gasoline credit card receipts.
Raw documents compiled to complete personal financial disclosure reports. (Allows you
to obtain the relevant information in real time, without waiting a year or longer for its
release.)
Flight logs and manifests for publicly owned or nonprofit aircraft.
Letters from companies and individuals commenting on proposed regulations.
Financial and performance reviews conducted by internal and external auditors.
Reports made by inspectors general, General Accounting Office, congressional oversight
committees, etc.

Raw notes and transcripts of interviews made by auditors and investigators, drafts and
early, unedited versions of audit reports or investigations. (GAO has a policy of trying to
honor at least some requests for documents used in audits.)
Company press releases, many of which are now archived by PR Newswire.
Industry magazines and newsletters.
Lists of opinions and letters issued by your state's attorney or ethics officer.
Monthly lists of documents filed with your state's archives.
Don’t forget Facebook and other social networks.
Internal newsletters at private companies and government agencies.
Corporate annual reports.
Internal telephone directories, especially old ones, which may list former employees.
Unemployment and worker’s compensation claims.
The statutes applying to your subject in the U.S. code, state law and city statute books.
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings.
Building permits.
990 tax reports for nonprofits.
State legislative research reports.
Names of potential federal whistle blowers plucked from the Merit Systems Protection
Board website: MSPB.gov.
Federal contract solicitations and sign-in sheets that include names & phone numbers of
losing bidders who might want to talk. Website: www.fedbizopps.gov
Congressional Research Service reports -- sober and relatively unbiased looks at issues

