Negotiating for Data Tipsheet No. 2
June 2008 IRE Conference in Miami
Jack Gillum
Arizona Daily Star
jgillum@azstarnet.com

Various places to find data
•

Web sites
o Links to agencies’ tab-delimited or CSV data.
o Copying and pasting HTML tables into Excel or Access. Many times, a simple, properly
formatted table on the Web can copy nicely into Excel, and then you can do simple sorts
and calculations.

•

Physical documents
o Scan documents and recognize them via OCR software, such as OmniPage Pro — but
only as a last resort. This route can be error-prone, so be mindful of that.

•

Public-records requests. Filing these frequently can get agencies into the habit of providing you
with information.

•

Your organization’s data archives. It could be that someone in the newsroom has already
collected the data you’re looking for, including police or courts reporters. And, of course, another
person who does CAR.
o To avoid overlap, suggest making a centralized inventory of your organization’s data
links. The Star uses a Wiki with a link from our intranet.

Why is data typically refused?
•

Potential embarrassment. For the same reason they’d refuse to give you paper versions of
records, they’ll deny you the electronic ones, too. Know your public-records law well and cite it
chapter and verse if necessary. Do the same for your organization’s success stories.

•

Little to no understanding of data. People get confused and agitated when you push them in
the scary world of computers. That’s because many times they’ve only been dealing with manila
folders and paper, not electronic information, for fulfilling requests.

•

Poor understanding of public-records law. Those in charge of dealing with requests may be
given morsels of instructions by their superiors on what constitutes a records request — and little
else.

•

Claim it takes too much work. Let’s be honest: Many times, a database query dump to a thumb
drive can be far quicker and cost-effective that making copies of records and redacting them with
a black pen.

•

Reliance on semantics. “Creating documents” that “don’t exist.” Don’t allow for these excuses.
“Documents” are more than 8.5 x 11” sheets of paper, and they need to know that.

Alternative tips for getting data
•

Get a lawyer involved. Yes, it costs money, but it got the Arizona Daily Star access to a big —
and poorly performing — school district’s records. A simple letter from our attorney, and we got a
CD of records within weeks.

•

Public shame. Reporting on a serious denial puts your battle into the public spotlight. Hopefully,
readers or viewers see that you’re taking on a fight for them. This will surely generate viewer
feedback, letters to the editor — and possibly to the agency in question.

•

Encrypting sensitive data.

