Tom Farrey
Senior Writer, ESPN The Magazine
Correspondent, ESPN television
Author, “Game On: The All-American Race to Make Champions of Our Children”
O: 860.766.4893
www.tomfarrey.com
2008 IRE Conference, Miami

From the grassroots up:
Investigating youth and high school sports
Three trends and ideas that lend themselves to investigative and explanatory journalism,
and may be of interest to local readers and viewers:
Jock factories/fitness laggards: Miami Northwestern High School went undefeated
and was named the mythical national champion in football in 2007, then had about a
dozen seniors sign college athletic scholarships. At the same time, most students at the
large, urban school in Florida do not pass the state physical fitness test, and the vast
majority of them do not play any sport. There just aren’t enough teams to accommodate
interest. So are schools like these, which pour a disproportionate amount of resources
into a sport such as football, serving the needs of the student body at large, or a limited
set of students who provide entertainment for the community? With childhood obesity
continuing to be an issue, particularly in poor communities, look for stories that beg the
question of whether schools are serving the interests of public health. What are schools
doing to meet interests of children who want to play sports? When resources are limited,
what are they doing to connect kids to clubs in the area that sponsor sports these kids
might succeed at? Statistics on fitness rates at individual schools are readily accessible,
and the Centers for Disease Control has recommendations in this area.
Coaches background checks: When I was reporting out the chapter on Miami
Northwestern football, I met a man at a local community field who was working with
middle-school age players as a coach. The next week, he was gone because the rec
center had done a background search and found that the man had a long criminal record
that included gun and drug trafficking charges in another state. But then I went to the
park down the street, and there he was again, coaching kids in a different program that
didn’t perform such checks. It was no surprise. Many youth sports organizations still
aren’t conducting mandatory background checks, or at least thorough checks that
include a national search of multiple databases. Contact the National Council of Youth
Sports (http://www.ncys.org/), a trade group of 180 industry organizations that has
issued recommendations, including the use of the National Center for Safety Initiatives
(http://www.ncsisafe.com/).
Recreation funding: Starting in the 1960s, tens of thousands of community fields were
built out around the country with the aid of federal legislation that offered matching funds
to towns that wanted to promote recreation. Support for that program, the Land & Water
Conservation Fund (http://www.nps.gov/ncrc/programs/lwcf/), got slashed when Ronald
Reagan entered the White House, and got hit again this decade as the costs of the Iraq

war set in. A separate initiative to promote recreation in large cities, the Urban Park &
Recreation Recovery (http://www.nps.gov/uprr/) program, was created in 1978 but hasn’t
received any funding since 2002. These cuts have had a real impact on cities such as
Baltimore, where many rec centers have been shut down and community fields have
fallen into disrepair. Check the funds that have flowed to your community via these two
federal funding sources, as well as state sources, and contrast those figures to rising
public funding of pro stadiums and arenas in the same area.

