Editors’ track: Managing the investigation
IRE national conference 2008 – Miami
Doug Haddix
Projects editor, The Columbus Dispatch
(614) 461-5082; dhaddix@dispatch.com

Tips for managing the VISUALS

Develop strong ties: Establish and maintain cordial, collaborative relationships with
photographers, photo editors, graphics artists, page designers and Web staff. Many content
editors don’t “get” visuals, leading to walls of misunderstanding between departments. Many
content editors treat visuals and Web extras as afterthoughts to the words. Show the experts on
visuals in your newsroom that you’re not like the other editors. You understand that you’re
responsible for all facets of storytelling, not just the words on paper.
Talk about visuals early: In the early stages of conceiving and developing an
investigation, talk (even informally) with key people who handle photos, graphics, page design
and the Web. Their ideas on visuals likely will affect the reporting, not just the writing. Plant
seeds early, and you’ll be surprised how they blossom later.
Incorporate visuals into the story budget on the first draft: Train yourself to list ideas
for photos, maps, graphics, online extras and other visuals when you put together the first
outline. Then, revise regularly and update. Giving the written outline to key visuals staff also will
spark more ideas and help them understand the big picture better.
Keep reporters from forgetting about visuals during the reporting: Make sure that
reporters not only understand the value of collaborating with their colleagues in other
departments, but that they’re actually doing it. Impress upon them the need to give their
colleagues adequate time to do quality work.

2

Meet periodically: Using the culture of your own newsroom as a guide, meet formally or
informally with key visuals staff to discuss progress. Be clear on expectations and
responsibilities.
Revise the story budget to include all visuals: This approach works wonders when it
comes to page design. List not only photos and graphics, but other design elements that you want
to include (e.g. day-by-day synopsis, online promos, etc.). Depending on the scope of your
online offerings, you may want to consider a separate multimedia budget. Most editors use the
story budget as a running to-do list, so having all of the visuals on it will remind you of all of the
elements that need to be prepared. Try to envision how the package or series will look in print
and online. What kind of space will you have? One open page? Two? Having a vision of the
final product will help you figure out what you need to make it visually appealing and will
directly affect story lengths.
Submit requests early for graphics, photos and other visuals: Not only does this give
the visuals staff time to do quality work, it gives you time to proof those graphics before you get
swept away editing the stories. Ask the reporters to proof graphics, maps and other visuals, too,
and that will be a subtle way to remind them that they don’t need to put all of the numbers in the
story. Early attention to photos, too, will help you identify leading contenders for the front page
as well as any gaps that need to be filled visually.
Think creatively on challenging topics: Some investigations are tougher than others
when it comes to compelling visuals. For instance, a series about teachers abusing students or
inmates molesting inmates will not naturally produce compelling action photos. Use documents,
court files and photos, journal entries, letters, compelling portrait photos, and dressed-up text
boxes with visual icons. Maybe you need a photo illustration instead of a lead photo. Pick the
brains of your visuals staff for help – they think visually, anyway, and you probably “think
words” because most editors used to be reporters.
Build in enough time for multimedia needs: Videos, searchable databases, Flash
presentations and other online extras take time to do well. As the editor, you can’t be consumed
with questions and demands about multimedia elements in the final week before a big
investigative story or series publishes. Do everything in your power to get as much of this work
done as soon as is humanly possible.
Consider a logo: A logo for a multi-day series helps readers instantly connect the stories.
In addition, it’s a useful visual cue for follow-up stories in the coming weeks or months. It also
looks cool on rack cards, house ads and other promotional materials put together by your
Marketing Department.
Be helpful during print/Web design: Being sensitive to the organization and culture of
your newsroom, find ways to be involved during production. In some newsrooms, you’ll proof
pages. In some, you might be able to help write the headlines and photo captions.

