Tips on backgrounding people
Know your database
How far back do the records go in the database? When is the database updated? Know
the geography--if it is a statewide database, are all counties included? PACER does not
include every court—see http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/psco/cgi-bin/miss-court.pl
Read the information available about the database to learn the contents and how to search
it. Some databases require a comma between last name and first name while others do
not. Is there a fee? If so, how much?
Be aware that names might not be spelled correctly in the indexes so search more than
one way if you are certain a record is in the database. If you have a “Mc” name, search
both Mc Donald and McDonald. If you have the name of a company, use only the first
part of the name.
Some of you may have access to Accurint or Autotrack or similar sources. The
compilation reports available from these services can be helpful as a pointing device to
places to check for records. However, never lift something from one of these reports and
put it into publication. Always, check with the original source such as a court or a
professional license. These reports may contain some errors.
Remember, if search results return nothing, that does not mean a record does not exist. It
may mean it is not in the database. Also, not everything on the Web is free and not
everything is on the Web. A visit to a courthouse might be necessary.
Date of Birth Sources
When backgrounding a person, especially a person with a common last name, it is
necessary to have the date of birth to be sure you are researching the person of interest.
Addresses are also beneficial to the search. Here are some sources for finding the DOB:
Driver License
Voter Registration
Marriage Record
Vehicle Registration (in some states)
Arrest report
Public employee records
These sources will also help find a middle name or initial, which is another helpful piece
of information while backgrounding an individual. In addition, these sources may
provide addresses or telephone numbers for the individual.
Telephone Numbers
There are many telephone directories on the Web for finding phone numbers from
www.infospace.com to www.switchboard.com to www.411.com and more. One of the
interesting features of www.411.com is that it allows a reverse search by phone number
or address. So if you had a phone number and wanted to find out who it belonged to, this

1

is one place where you might find that information, if the phone number is listed. If you
need to find neighbors on the same street, you can do a reverse address search at
www.411.com and not include a house number. This will give you a list of neighbors
with listed telephone numbers. Another interesting site is FoneFinder
(http://www.fonefinder.net/). On this Web site, you can search the first digits of a phone
number to find out what city or area the phone number is from and what type of service
provides that number such as cellular service. It will not identify the person registered to
that number.
If traffic citations or arrest reports/inquiries are online for the county where the person of
interest lives, check here for telephone numbers. Sometimes, telephone numbers are also
available from the voter registration database.
Criminal record checks
Check for a statewide criminal record check, if available. If the individual has lived out
of state, it may be necessary, if possible, to check criminal records in those states. In
some states, statewide criminal record checks are not available to the public or you need
the permission of the person you are backgrounding to run a criminal record check.
Usually there is a fee for a criminal record check. Sometimes the search results will be
mailed to you, rather than available online. One good source for criminal record
information is The Criminal Records Manual by Derek Hinton available from IRE.
In most states, you can run a search on the state department of corrections Web site to
find out about convictions and time served. Also, most states have a searchable sex
offender database available on the Web.
Check at the county level for criminal records, especially when the statewide search is
not available. More information might be available online about a case at the county
level. It might provide you with a lawyer’s name and phone number. Also, some
counties have inmate lookups at the county jail. This is usually on the Web site of the
county sheriff.
At the federal level, check PACER for a docket and case information. Also, check the
Federal Bureau of Prisons inmate locator although the information provided here is
limited. You may need to call to get more information such as a case number and the
court. Have the prisoner’s register number available when you call.
To find contact information for a lawyer, check www http://www.martindale.com or the
state bar association may have a searchable lawyer directory online.

2

Driving Histories
Check with the state department of motor vehicles to see if driving histories are available.
There may be a small fee for this and the history will not be complete for the lifetime of
the driver. It will have a certain number of years, depending on the state. However, in
some states criminal traffic violations will remain on the record permanently and some
will appear on the statewide criminal record check. Check with the state DMV office to
see if the driver license is current.
Check at the county level to see if traffic citations are online. Also, check the Web sites
of neighboring counties for traffic violations.
Financial Information
For financial records, run a federal courts check in bankruptcy records in PACER. Also,
at the county level check for liens and mortgages.
Check with the county tax collector to see if property taxes have been paid on time. If
the tax collector has a searchable database on the Web, it may be for only the most recent
year. Call the office to find out about previous years. They may have a two- or threeyear history.
Property records—Search the county property appraiser Web site by name to find
properties owned. Property records usually include the sales price, current assessed
value, and whether or not homestead exemption is claimed.
Education
Many universities have outsourced degree verification. Often these degree verification
services require permission of the student to release information. If a registrar’s office
will not provide you with attendance/degree information, contact the college public
relations office.
Misc
Professional licenses--Check professional licenses at the state level. These lookups are
often found on the state’s secretary of state Web site.
Corporation records—Corporation records are often found on the Web site for the
secretary of state. Sometimes, these lookups include by officer name. Check here to find
out if your person of interest is an officer and if the company is in good standing.
Concealed Weapons Permit—In some states, this information is public record. This
information may need to be obtained from a phone call if not available online.

3

Official records—Search the official records database at the county level. Some
documents might show up here such as a marriage license or military discharge or code
violations. Various records may show up here. Depending on the Web site, there might
be a fee for downloading the document images.
Check social networking Web sites such www.myspace.com or Facebook or Linkedin.
For possible friends and high school classmates check high school alumni Web sites such
as www.classmates.com or www.reunion.com (registration required).
Run a search through an Internet search engine. In Google to search for an exact phrase,
use quotation marks: “John Smith” To use a wildcard search in Google to search for
pages including a middle name or initial add an *: “John * Smith”
Newspaper Clips
Newspaper clips can be helpful in learning more about a person. Wedding
announcements, obits or clips may include information about family members or close
friends. If the person committed a crime, there might be a clip or two about that. There
might be clips about the person for any reason ranging from owning a business to being
quoted while attending an event to a photo caption.
When searching names in newspaper archives, search for the first name and last name
within a couple of words of each other. This will find occurrences when a middle name
or initial is used. Sometimes this command is w/2 and sometimes it is near2. Check the
search help for information on proximity searching. Also, keep in mind someone might
be known as a name different from the legal name such as Tom and Thomas. Finally
search addresses in newspaper clips.
One source for links to newspaper archives is on the Special Libraries Association News
Division Web site at http://www.ibiblio.org/slanews/internet/archives.html
Public Record Directories:
NICAR ‘Net Tour—Public Records: http://www.ire.org/training/nettour/papertrails.html
IRE Resource Center Tipsheet Database: http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/tipsheets.php
SearchSystems.net : http://www.searchsystems.net/
BRB Publications Public Records Directory:
http://www.brbpub.com/pubrecsites.asp?h=1
NETROnline http://www.netronline.com/public_records.htm
National Association of Secretaries of State: http://www.nass.org/busreg/busreg.html

4

Print resources (all available from IRE):
Investigative Reporter’s Handbook, 4th edition by Brant Houston, Len Bruzzese and
Steve Weinberg.
The Criminal Records Manual by Derek Hinton.
Computer-Assisted Research: Information Strategies and Tools for Journalists by Nora
Paul and Kathleen A. Hansen.
This tipsheet was prepared by Carolyn Edds, St. Petersburg Times news researcher, for
the annual IRE conference held June 5-8, 2008 in Miami.

5

