Job safety: getting and making sense of the data
Sources of workplace safety information:
OSHA:
You can search the results of OSHA inspections – including violations
found and penalties issued –by visiting www.osha.gov If you’re hoping to
analyze the inspection data and look for trends, NICAR can provide you a
relational database containing information about all OSHA inspections,
citations and fines.
More detailed information about OSHA inspections can be obtained by
requesting paper inspection records – including any injury and illness logs
collected by inspectors – through the Freedom of Information Act. (Note:
The names of injured employees are usually redacted from the documents
that OSHA provides, but the names of workers who die on the job usually
are not.)
Through a program called the OSHA Data Initiative, the agency also keeps
a database that includes workplace injury rates reported by thousands of
plants nationwide. You can request that data through FOIA.
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics:
BLS keeps a wealth of industry-specific statistics on workplace injuries and
deaths. You can find many of them by visiting their web site: www.bls.gov
If you don’t see what you need online, ask agency officials if they can do a
customized query of their data. That, for instance, is how we got the data on
reported rates of musculoskeletal disorders for every industry.
A caveat: You should view this data with skepticism:
Much of the information collected by BLS and OSHA doesn’t come close
to describing the full picture. That’s because injury reporting is an honor
system. Companies self-report their injuries, but can save money and avoid
regulatory scrutiny by keeping cases off the books. Regulators do little to
check the accuracy of company injury reports.
Also, many companies with serious safety problems rarely get inspected by
state or federal OSHA. Limited staffing means that, on average, OSHA
inspects only about one of every 100 work sites each year.
To fully understand what’s happening in a particular company or a
particular industry, there’s no substitute for shoe-leather reporting

A few tips:
*Whenever possible, show up. Most of the best interviews in our project
about working conditions in the poultry industry came only after we visited
sources face to face.
*Read every document – and read it more than once. The full significance
of information contained in documents sometimes doesn't become clear until
reporters reach the latter stages of their research.
*Often, the best stories come not solely from documents, or solely from
interview notes, but from a combination of the two. The stories we heard
from poultry workers, for instance, became more meaningful when we
compared them to what companies recorded in their official injury logs. One
large company, we found, had broken the law by failing to record workplace
injuries.

Ames Alexander
The Charlotte Observer
(704) 358-5060
Email: aalexander@charlotteobserver.com

