Miami 2008 IRE Conference: Open Records: Dealing with the
Newest Threats to Open Government/June 7, 2008, 2:30 – 3:30 pm

This legislation – hopefully -- will also improve
transparency in the Federal Government’s FOIA process
by:
>>Restoring meaningful deadlines for agency action
under FOIA;
>>Imposing real consequences on federal agencies for
missing FOIA’s 20-day statutory deadline;
>>Clarifying that FOIA applies to government records
held by outside private contractors;

Historic FOIA Reform: S 2488: Open Government Act
• first major reform to FOIA in more than a decade: the OPEN
Government Act will help to reverse the troubling trends of excessive
delays and lax FOIA compliance in our government and help to restore
the public’s trust in their government.

>>Establishing a FOIA hotline service for all federal
agencies; and
Creating a FOIA Ombudsman to provide FOIA requestors
and federal agencies with a meaningful alternative to
costly litigation.

Source for slides 1-5: http://leahy.senate.gov/press/200712/121807c.html
Presentation by David B. Smallman, Esq., dsmallman@wmd-law.com; dbslaw@gmail.com

•The OPEN Government Act will protect the public’s right to know,
by ensuring that anyone who gathers information to inform the
public, including freelance journalists and bloggers, may seek a
fee waiver when they request information under FOIA.
•The bill ensures that federal agencies will not automatically
exclude Internet blogs and other Web-based forms of media when
deciding whether to waive FOIA fees. In addition, the bill also
clarifies that the definition of news media, for purposes of FOIA
fee waivers, includes free newspapers and individuals performing
a media function who do not necessarily have a prior history of
publication.
•The bill also restores meaningful deadlines for agency action, by
ensuring that the 20-day statutory clock under FOIA starts when a
request is received by the appropriate component of the agency
and requiring that agency FOIA offices get FOIA requests to the
appropriate agency component within 10 days of the receipt of
such requests.

•Finally, this bill contains a number of key improvements championed
by Chairman Waxman. The bill includes “pay/go” language that will
ensure that attorneys’ fees that are awarded in FOIA litigation are paid
for with annually appropriated agency funds.
•The bill also eliminates a provision on citations to FOIA (b)(3)
exemptions contained in the earlier Senate bill. In addition, the bill
includes a new provision that requires federal agencies to disclose the
FOIA exemptions that they rely upon when redacting information from
documents released under FOIA.
•And the bill adds FOIA duplication fees for non-commercial
requestors, including the media, to the fee waiver penalty that will be
imposed when an agency fails to meet the 20-day statutory clock
under FOIA.

•The bill also clarifies that the Supreme Court’s decision in
Buckhannon Board and Care Home, Inc. v. West Virginia Dep’t of
Health and Human Resources, 532 U.S. 598 (2001), which
eliminated the “catalyst theory” for attorneys’ fees recovery under
certain federal civil rights laws, does not apply to FOIA cases.
•Furthermore, to address concerns about the growing costs of
FOIA litigation, the bill also creates an Office of Government
Information Services in the National Archives and creates an
ombudsman to mediate agency-level FOIA
disputes. [MAYBE….not funded by Bush Admin.]
•In addition, the bill ensures that each federal agency appoints a
Chief FOIA Officer to monitor the agency’s compliance with FOIA
requests, and a FOIA Public Liaison who will be available to
resolve FOIA related disputes. And, the bill creates a better
tracking system for FOIA requests to assist members of the public
and clarifies that FOIA applies to agency records that are held by
outside private contractors, no matter where these records are
located.

Summary: Source: http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bill.xpd?bill=s1102488&tab=summary
Bill Text: http://www.govtrack.us/congress/billtext.xpd?bill=s110-2488

Section 3 Provides definitions of "representative of the news media" and "news" for
purposes of request processing fees. Regards a freelance journalist as
working for a news-media entity if the journalist can demonstrate a solid basis
for expecting publication through that entity.
Section 4 Provides that, for purposes of awarding attorney fees and litigation costs, a
FOIA complainant has substantially prevailed in a legal proceeding to compel
disclosure if such complainant obtained relief through either: (1) a judicial
order or an enforceable written agreement or consent decree; or (2) a
voluntary or unilateral change in position by the agency if the complainant's
claim is not insubstantial.
Prohibits the Treasury's Claims and Judgment Fund from being used to pay
reasonable attorney fees in cases where the complainant has substantially
prevailed. Requires fees to be paid only from funds annually appropriated for
authorized purposes for the federal agency against which a claim or judgment
has been rendered.

1

Section 5 Directs the Attorney General to: (1) notify the Special Counsel of civil actions
taken for arbitrary and capricious rejections of requests for agency records;
and (2) submit annual reports to Congress on such civil actions. Directs the
Special Counsel to submit an annual report on investigations of agency
rejections of FOIA requests.
Section 6 Requires the 20-day period during which an agency must determine whether
to comply with a FOIA request to begin on the date the request is received by
the appropriate component of the agency, but no later than 10 days after the
request is received by any component that is designated to receive FOIA
requests in the agency's FOIA regulations. Prohibits the tolling of the 20-day
period by the agency, except: (1) that the agency may make one request to
the requester for information and toll the 20-day period while it is awaiting
such information; or (2) if necessary to clarify with the requester issues
regarding fee assessment. Ends the tolling period on the agency's receipt of
the requester's response.
Prohibits an agency from assessing search or duplication fees if it fails to
comply with time limits, provided that no unusual or exceptional
circumstances apply to the processing of the request. Requires each agency
to make available its FOIA Public Liaison, who shall assist in the resolution of
any disputes between the requester and the agency.

Section 10 Establishes within the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)
an Office of Government Information Services to: (1) review compliance with
FOIA policies; (2) recommend policy changes to Congress and the
President; and (3) offer mediation services between FOIA requesters and
administrative agencies as a non-exclusive alternative to litigation.
Authorizes the Office to issue advisory opinions if mediation has not resolved
the dispute.
Requires each agency to designate a Chief FOIA Officer, who shall: (1) have
responsibility for FOIA compliance; (2) monitor FOIA implementation; (3)
recommend to the agency head adjustments to agency practices, policies,
personnel, and funding to improve implementation of FOIA; and (4) facilitate
public understanding of the purposes of FOIA's statutory exemptions.
Requires agencies to designate at least one FOIA Public Liaison, who shall
be appointed by the Chief FOIA Officer, to: (1) serve as an official to whom a
FOIA requester can raise concerns about service from the FOIA Requester
Center; and (2) be responsible for assisting in reducing delays, increasing
transparency and understanding of the status of requests, and assisting in
the resolution of disputes.

Section 7 Requires agencies to establish: (1) a system to assign an individualized
tracking number for each FOIA request received that will take longer
than 10 days to process; and (2) a telephone line or Internet service
that provides information on the status of a request.
Section 8 Revises annual reporting requirements on agency compliance with
FOIA to require information on: (1) FOIA denials based upon particular
statutes; (2) response times; and (3) compliance by the agency and by
each principal component thereof. Requires agencies to make the raw
statistical data used in reports electronically available to the public upon
request.
Section 9 Redefines "record" under FOIA to include any information maintained
by an agency contractor.

Section 11 Requires the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to report to Congress
on personnel policies related to FOIA.
Section 12 Sets forth requirements to describe exemptions authorizing deletions of
material provided under FOIA.

Resources:
Great States database: http://www.rcfp.org
http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bill.xpd?bill=s110-2488
http://www.sunshineingovernment.org/index.php?cat=24
http://www.sej.org/foia/S2488.htm

The infamous Bush budget cut: http://www.asne.org/index.cfm?id=6807
Sec. 519. The Department of Justice shall carry out the responsibilities of the
office established in 5 U.S.C. 552(h), from amounts made available in the
Department of Justice appropriation for ``General Administration Salaries and
Expenses'. In addition, subsection (h) of section 552 of title 5, United States
Code, is hereby repealed, and subsections (i) through (l) are redesignated as
(h) through (k). (Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 2008.)

2

