FULL COURT PRESS: FIGHTING FOR INFORMATION
CORINNA ZAREK
THE REPORTERS COMMITTEE FOR FREEDOM OF THE PRESS
czarek@rcfp.org
www.rcfp.org

2008 IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE
MIAMI
COURT ACCESS: FIGHTING FOR
INFORMATION

The governmental shift toward secrecy has not bypassed our state and federal courts systems. In the last
few years, reporters have encountered increasing numbers of anonymous juries; dealt with creative judges
finding interesting ways to justify sealing court proceedings and files and uncovered disturbing trends of
secret dockets — entire court cases being filed and tried outside the public’s view.
The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, a national legal defense and advocacy organization
for journalists, tracks court access issues of interest to the media through news updates on its site,
www.rcfp.org. These issues are covered further in depth in the Reporters Committee’s quarterly
magazine, The News Media and the Law. Additionally, regular special reports give reporters a statement
of the law in each state on a particular issue and provide tips on how to address difficulties that might
arise when gathering news in that context. Our Secret Justice guides — summarized below — are
available online and are a great resource for various court access issues.
The Reporters Committee provides free legal assistance to journalists facing court access issues — or any
other legal issue — through our 24-hour legal defense hotline 1-800-336-4243.

Judicial Speech:

Electronic Access to
Court Records:

A look at the issues
judges consider before
talking to the press. This
guide offers journalists
tips to improve access to
judges they cover.

A state-by-state look at
court records available
online, providing links
where information can be
obtained.

Secret Juries:

Grand Juries:

Courts are finding ways to
shield juror identities even
when there is no threat of
harm. This guide sets
forth current court
policies and offers
suggestions to find jurors.

Though grand juries will
always be shrouded in
secrecy, this guide
discusses what reporters
can legally cover.

Gag Orders:

Juvenile Courts:

A survey of the law as
well as tips on how to
challenge a judicial gag
order.

A guide to access in every
state as well as tips to
obtain access.

