IRE National Conference
June 5-8, 2008
Miami
Tip Sheet: Testing for lead in children’s products
Sam Roe, Chicago Tribune
sroe@tribune.com
Summary
The Tribune last fall checked 800 toys for lead. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
called the Tribune's tests the largest and most comprehensive study into lead in toys ever
conducted outside the agency. The newspaper's testing replicated the often complex steps that
government regulators take when determining whether a toy contains lead and whether that lead
can leach out and harm children. We found 21 toys that exceeded federal or state legal limits for
lead. The testing prompted numerous companies to pull items from shelves nationwide and
sparked both the CPSC and the Illinois Attorney General’s Office to launch inquiries.

How we did it
Using a rented, hand-held scanner -- a Niton XRF (X-ray fluorescence) analyzer -- a Tribune
reporter spent three weeks checking toys and other children's products on the shelves of more
than 40 Chicago-area retailers, including big box stores, toy boutiques, discount outlets and
supermarkets. Another reporter went to different stores and bought toys that appeared as if they
might contain lead. In all, about 800 children's products were scanned for lead using the handheld device.
Toys that registered over the legal limit of 600 parts per million of lead on the scanner were
sent to the University of Iowa Hygienic Laboratory, an accredited institution, to determine the
total lead content. Children's jewelry and vinyl toys that tested high at the Iowa lab were then sent
to Scientific Controls Laboratory in Chicago for additional testing to determine whether the lead
could leach out if parts of the toys were swallowed. Vinyl toys received even further analyses -"wipe tests" -- to determine whether the lead could leach out by merely touching them.
To ensure fairness, toys that exceeded the 600 ppm safety limit but were under 1,000 ppm were
re-tested several times and the scores averaged.

Findings
In the end, the Tribune found a dozen toys that violated federal safety limits. An additional nine
exceeded stricter Illinois limits, including an award-winning Baby Einstein block and a widely
sold Ty Girlz doll.
The findings suggest that, despite a flurry of recalls and legislative attention, the problem of
lead in toys may be more widespread than previously documented and that testing by
manufacturers fails to protect consumers.

Reaction
Retailers and manufacturers pulled the majority of the tainted products from shelves after being
notified of the results by the Tribune. The Walgreens drugstore chain removed certain Halloween
and Christmas figurines from its 6,000 locations nationwide. Party City said it withdrew toy
drums, novelty earrings and skull rings from its 500 stores. The Field Museum stopped selling
some ceramic whistles and painted toy animals.
To date, 16 of the 21 items the Tribune identified as having high lead levels have been pulled
from shelves.
A day after publication, the Illinois Attorney General's Office opened an investigation into the
toys identified by the Tribune. State officials negotiated with retailers and manufacturers to
ensure the tainted toys will no longer be sold in the state.
The CPSC also opened an investigation into each of the 21 toys identified by the Tribune. The
agency said it was a rare inquiry into lead sparked by outsiders. Usually, the CPSC said, the
agency discounts testing by the media or special interest groups because their testing methods are
not scientific. The inquiry is pending.

Pushback
Prior to publication, three manufacturers challenged the Tribune's findings and wrote letters to
the newspaper threatening legal action. One challenge came on deadline from a prominent
industry attorney. The manufacturers said their own tests showed their toys were safe; the
Tribune's tests were faulty, and Illinois law did not apply to their products.
But because our testing methods replicated CPSC protocol, and because we were well-versed on
the nuances of federal and state law as well as the various testing methods for toys made of
different materials, our stories were able to withstand intense scrutiny before and after
publication. As a result, we were able to publish a comprehensive package, listing all the toys and
manufacturers violating the law.
All three firms that threatened to sue the newspaper stopped selling their products statewide just
days after publication.

Costs
Each lead test cost the Tribune between $20 and $50, depending on the lab and whether it was a
rush delivery. The XRF scanner cost $3,000 to rent for one month. In all, the Tribune tests cost
about $10,000.

Advice
Do your testing as scientifically as possible. Study testing methods used by government
regulators and others and replicate them. Also, hire accredited laboratories. You want your work
to withstand scrutiny by manufacturers, retailers and regulators. Other media outlets and
consumer groups have recently checked toys for lead, but they employed only a home test kit or a
hand-held scanner. As a result, those reports have sparked little action. The only way to know for
sure if a product contains illegal amounts of lead is to have a laboratory run the necessary tests.
We also suggest you share copies of your lab results with retailers and manufacturers. If
companies say their own lab results show their products are safe, ask for copies of the recent
tests. The Tribune did that, and several manufacturers could not produce such evidence.

