The Pearl Project:
Teaching Students Information Gathering
While Protecting the Enterprise of Investigative Journalism
Barbara Feinman Todd and Asra Q. Nomani
Georgetown University
http://scs.georgetown.edu/pearlproject/

Investigative Reporters & Editors Conference 2008
Barbara Feinman Todd, associate dean of journalism for the Masters of Professional
Studies at Georgetown University, is a co-professor of the Pearl Project, an investigation
into the murder of Daniel Pearl. She has worked in Washington as a freelance editor and
writer for more than two decades, assisting as ghostwriter, editor or researcher for
senators, journalists, and business leaders on several high-profile books including Bob
Woodward’s VEIL; Carl Bernstein’s Loyalties; former Congresswoman Marjorie
Margolies-Mezvinsky’s A Woman’s Place: The Freshmen Women Who Changed the
Face of Congress; former Washington Post Executive Editor Benjamin Bradlee’s A Good
Life; Palestinian spokesperson Hanan Ashrawi’s This Side of Peace; former First Lady
Hillary Clinton’s It Takes A Village; and former Nebraska senator Bob Kerrey’s When I
Was A Young Man.
Asra Q. Nomani, a former reporter for the Wall Street Journal, is a professor in the
practice of journalism at Georgetown University and a co-professor of the Pearl Project.
She is the author of Tantrika and Standing Alone. She has written for the New York
Times, the Washington Post, TIME and other publications and received a 2007 opinion
writing award from the American Academy of Religion. The American Association of
University Women named her a 2007 Woman of Distinction. She has commented on
Islam, motherhood and journalism in venues from CNN, BBC, Al Jazeera to NPR. She
delivered an NPR commentary that the same spirit of investigative journalism that
imbued Pearl’s work lives in the students of the Pearl Project.
Contact Information
Barbara Feinman Todd—202.687.4413, feinmanb@georgetown.edu
Asra Q. Nomani—304.685.2189 asra@asranomani.com
Georgetown University, 3307 M Street, NW, Suite 202, Washington, DC 20057
The Pearl Project
Overview: The Pearl Project, named for Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl, is a
collaborative investigative reporting course in which students learn to employ the same
information gathering skills used by working journalists. The project is organized like a
newsroom. Students receive a real-world assignment, choose beats, map reporting
strategies, develop primary human sources, conduct interviews, cull databases for
information, collaborate, collate complicated information, resolve ethical dilemmas,
analyze information, write stories and create multimedia packages. By doing first-hand

reporting, students gain an appreciation for the challenges of reporting and the deep sense
of accomplishment that comes from successful information gathering.
Rationale: The Pearl Project is designed with the belief that students learn best by doing.
The course is designed to introduce students to the most rigorous information gathering
challenges that working journalists face and to help them develop the skills, strategies
and methods to collect, collate and analyze information for multimedia publication and
broadcast.
With the model of the Innocence Project, headquartered at the School of Law at Yeshiva
University to investigate alleged wrongful convictions, the Pearl Project is designed to be
a collaborative investigative reporting team project conducted in journalism courses. And
in the spirit of the Arizona Project, an investigative reporting project by journalists into
the 1976 murder of Arizona Republic reporter Don Bolles, the Pearl Project centers on
investigating the death of a journalist in the line of duty and completing that journalist’s
work, or investigating the circumstances around a journalist in peril and completing that
journalist’s work.
With more than 300 journalists killed worldwide over the past five years, investigating
their deaths and continuing their work has become a critical component in protecting the
enterprise of journalism in the 21st century, and there are no purer hearts than students to
do noble work. The first Pearl Project investigated the kidnapping and murder of Wall
Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl, who was kidnapped and murdered in Karachi,
Pakistan, in 2002. The project gives students a tangible link to journalists who are
dedicated to the craft and gives students a real-world appreciation for the challenges
facing journalists in the modern day.
Methodology & Implementation: As professors of the Pearl Project, we identify the
focus of our investigation in the semester before the start of the course. We register the
class with a course description detailing the subject of the investigation, and we invite
students to submit 500-word essays to explain why they want to be in the course. This is
critical in identifying writing and critical thinking skills in students, as well as
recognizing students who will take initiative, show personal commitment and be positive
team players.
Launch: The first day, we introduce the reporting assignment and give students a
chronology of facts. We attempt to instill in the students a sense of the noble history of
investigative reporting that they are inheriting. We discuss the assignment as a
newsroom, and the class defines the reporting beats that it deems most relevant to
completing the project. Since the investigation typically involves crime or suspected
crime that has received media coverage and gone through some process in the judicial
system with possible political overtones, beats include: the journalist (through at least
their work and correspondences), the journalist’s family, friends and colleagues, law
enforcement, attorneys, media and politics.
We give the students reading assignments related to the investigation, including books,
articles and radio and TV interview transcripts. The students are assigned the task of

writing 500-word essays on the beats on which they would like to work, the reporting
strategy they would take and possible human sources they would interview.
Beats: By week two of the course, the students are assigned their beats and their beat
partners. A specific student is assigned to be the videographer, and another student is
specifically assigned to be the project photographer. The beats are organized into teams
with a team leader designated to coordinate the team members’ work.
Research: Students immediately look for open source information, such as media
articles, related to their beat, using Lexis-Nexis and other online database searches.
Gumshoe reporting: Students identify human sources with first-hand information. Early
in the course, we conduct interviews in the classroom together so students can practice
gathering information from sources using deft interviewing skills. We encourage students
to meet sources face-to-face, whenever possible, to solicit better interviews.
Pearlpedia: Using WikiMedia, the software used to create Wikipedia, we create a
private, password-protected wiki that acts as a virtual filing cabinet for the information
that students gather. We call it a “Pearlpedia.” It is easy to create using one of many
publicly available Internet service providers that support WikiMedia software. We use
Site Ground because it offers prompt technical support. On our wiki, we post classroom
essentials, including our syllabus, class schedule, assignments and reading materials.
We use it like an electronic newsroom. Students create their own pages where they post
sources, reporting strategies and story drafts. They create pages for each source and post
contact information, questions, bios, articles and interview transcripts. While students
develop one-on-one relationships with sources, they can all contribute their collective
intellect to questions for the sources. We create a page with a chronology of the facts, and
a page for all articles and documents related to the case. The Pearlpedia is an effective
teaching tool because professors can edit student work and monitor student activity by
examining the “history” of pages.
In addition to the Pearlpedia, students subscribe to a group listserv to share tips and
breaking news. We use Google Groups. The students create business cards, establish a tip
line, available by email or phone, and create a Facebook to solicit possible sources.
Students learn to share sources, tips and ideas, instilling in them a spirit of generosity.
Social network analysis: Students use technology to organize the information they
gather. We use social network analysis–a fancy term for the kind of family trees used in
genealogy studies–to visually map the investigation. We received an in-kind donation
from i2, a software company based in Reston, Va., with a collegiate philanthropy
division, for Analyst’s Notebook, mapping software typically used by students of
forensic science and criminal justice. We ground our next generation of investigative
reporters in technology tools that supplement old school gumshoe reporting.
Outcomes: Students create a multimedia package with the following elements: a written
narrative for publication in a professional media outlet; a multimedia production with a

slideshow, audio and video; a digital archive with original documents scanned into it,
much like done by SmokingGun.com; and a publicly available edited version of the
Pearlpedia to share how the Pearl Project was organized from teaching and journalistic
points of view. In completing the Pearl Project, students receive a deep reward beyond
the byline: a sense of accomplishment in protecting the franchise of investigative
reporting before even entering the profession.
###

