IRE ’08 Miami
TO “BE” OR NOT TO BE…THE ADVANCED ART OF THE
TELEVISION INTERVIEW
Roberta Baskin, WJLA-TV, Joel Grover, KNBC-TV, Armen Keteyian, CBS News
Moderator: Lea Thompson, former NBC News
And a long list of mentors who have taught us well over the years…
The very best television interviews are born of a series of “Moments” – questions and answers (or just
answers) that inform, enlighten and engage the subject in a “conversation” that offers an accurate portrayal
of their point of view.
Interviews are living, breathing organisms with a flow and rhythm. The art comes from your ability to
engage the subject in a conversation; to let the interview “tell the story,” to firmly press back when faced with
deceit or denial; and in being tough but fair.
Tough means tough - its doesn't mean or vindictive or bitchy or belligerent...it does mean fair, firm and
courteous - our audience does not want to be uncomfortable...it wants us to make good clean hits.
Remember this: Your audience will judge you more for how you conduct a tough interview than it ever
will for how great your standup is...a tough interview is the mettle you are made of – consider that before
you even walk out the door.
With that in mind here are some general tips on how to “Be” a better interviewer.
BE PREPARED – There is an old journalist adage: Don’t ever ask a question if you don’t already know the
answer. There is absolutely no substitute for homework. Read clips, surf the net, Google your interviewee
and his/her company, agency. Prepare a list of questions – in the order in which you feel the interview best
flows. Don’t wing it unless absolutely necessary even in “quickie” situations.
BE ATTENTIVE – It sounds simplistic but Listen to what your subject is saying. If you always have a followup ready (whether you use it or not), it forces you to pay attention. Be prepared to recall earlier statements
that counter current remarks/arguments (“That interesting, but last year you said…).
BE FLEXIBLE – If suddenly the interviewee answers in a way that spins the interview in a more
confrontational direction, don’t panic. You can either say something along the lines of “I was going to ask
you about that, I’ll get to that area in a moment,” or you can dive right it. The worse thing you can do is
ignore the response and move on to your next question with no follow-up. You may think the tough stuff
won’t come up until question No. 10 because that’s when YOU want it do, but that’s often the exception
NOT the rule. If someone drops a bombshell, don't hesitate to go with the flow
BE PERSISTENT – HOLD PEOPLE ACCOUNTABLE - Understand very often it’s the second or third
response to your questioning that elicits the most telling response but you have to have or know the facts
and be able to counter-punch in order to reach that moment. Know your most important questions and don’t
check them off until you get them answered.
BE DIRECT – Don’t dance around the camp fire. If you’ve got a tough question to ask – ask it. Straight up in
the most simple and direct way possible. Don’t fall into the preamble, qualifier crap trap – “Sorry but I’ve got
to ask you this,” or “I know you’ve answered this before…” The Best way to begin remains the classic
“Who? What? Where? When? Why? How?”
BE SMART – Keep an internal clock ticking in your head computing how much time you have left for the
interview. If necessary, cut to the chase. If you only have time for two or three questions, don’t waste them.

BE AWARE – Contrary to some public opinion the interview is NOT about you. It’s about getting the most
telling response/reaction from the person across from you. Don’t grandstand. Don’t play “Gotcha.” Just
frame the question in the most direct and compelling fashion possible and be prepared to follow up. Often
it’s the strong question followed by the NON-answer makes a moment.
BE CAREFUL – Realize what you say in the pre-interview “chit chat” or off-camera can come back to haunt
you – in court. Do not make any promises. Period. Proceed under the guidelines that everything you say
while in the presence of the subject or his handlers may be used against you.
SOME NITTY GRITTY TECHNIQUES WE HAVE LEARNED ALONG THE WAY:
Interviewing:
- Write your questions down with all the facts and figures (so you have them) but, then highlight just the one
short sentence question (5-10 seconds) you really plan to put on the air.
- Do not put the answer to your question in your question.
- Spend 5 minutes talking about someone’s wife, children, boat…you will gain trust and a better interview
- Tell them when you arrive you are going to ask some tough questions – tell them you have to ask what
everyone wants to know and you must represent the other side. If you do that when the tough questions
happen they will more likely take them head on
- Beware of those bearing gifts – challenge everyone – even the victims – you will find out things you didn’t
know – it will raise your interviewee’s energy level and you may discover your theory is not true
- As you ask the question think about your “B” roll or your “cover”
- Pretend you are in a two camera interview and everything will air – it pricks your diligence, gets your head
out of the paper, makes you look into the interviewees eyes, and makes you listen.
- Some people are better first time – some better the second. Sometimes saying “ I am not sure I
understand” or “what do you mean” or "how can this be?" or “I want to make sure I am understand this
correctly,” works well to get a second shot at an important question.
- Give it air…let it breath… you can always close it up later
- Corollary to above: Let them talk…salty language, braggadocio, defensive comments, contriteness, all
allow audience the measure of a person
- Keep your questions level…let your audience decide
- Sometimes the question is more important than the answer – a telling expression, a tongue-tied attempt to
answer a question, a long pause.
Neal Shapiro School of Journalism: Never use the words “think” or “feel” and Lea Thompson would add – no
“nows” or “sos” – they are overused and are almost trite
Production:
- Sometimes it is a good idea to use two cameras – if the questions are as important as the response
- If you can’t use two cameras set the interview so the camera can move in and out to see you – on a couch,
on two chairs angled out…it can make sense to “get off the sticks.”
- Put people where they belong…supermarket, murder scene, doctor in a lab, get them out of a chair and
they will be more comfortable and so will you…
- If you can…add a reaction point. .Ask the person to do what you did (make the phone call on camera, etc.,
see if they can make the product work, demonstrate something.
Confrontations:
- Write./phone/email first…no one should ever wonder who you are when you approach them
- Be careful who you confront – do not only do you burn your whole newsroom for one story
- Think about where you are going to confront someone – make sure there is light

- Don’t do a gang bang (reporter – produce – AP – cameraman – soundman)
- Your first question may be all that airs…consider it carefully…but, be prepared to do a whole interview
- Approach anyone by speaking their name – it will help make sure you have the right person
- Approach courteously – despite what you may think, the audience doesn’t really like a bully…
- In any “spontaneous interview,” always offer a real sit down interview and try to convince them to do it
- Be aware of where your camera is… help your camera person get the shot
- NBC rule: Do not run after someone – do not follow them into an elevator – do not stalk them
And always remember – this is television!
We shouldn’t use adjectives to show emotion, surprise, deep sadness or most other human emotion…
We have sound and pictures!

