It’s an increasingly tough world in the news business, but it is possible to do great public service
journalism. Have a clear mission and expectations. Break down the silos and collaborate across
the organization. Get over that the newspaper is most important. Key is delivering excellent
work in accessible ways. You can still offer training without much money.

WORK TOGETHER
 Meetings can be your friend. Sit in on enterprise-planning meetings across the room. Offer resources
and ideas.
 There's no such thing as too much coffee. Network from the ground level. Have coffee with reporters
and line editors. What are they working on? Do a lot of individual brainstorming.
 Team up veteran reporters and CAR experts with less experienced reporters, who may be short on
investigative skills but big on sources and eagerness. Have some quick successes.
 Keep track of who is doing what. Establish a log on your Intranet to keep track of public records
requests of government bodies. No one can afford duplication.
 Brainstorm on watchdog approaches. If there is a particular topic that is up for investigation, involve
lots of brains, especially the ones with some expertise in the area. More minds early are generally a
good thing.
 Train as you go. Set up informal tutorial sessions that are story-based between your CAR experts and
other reporters.
 Celebrate and spotlight successes. Has a reporter done a particularly good job on a quick-hit
investigation? Set up a brown bag! Let them tell how did they did it and how their work might
translate to other beats.

YOUR FRIENDS ONLINE
 Think of online as complementary – not competitive.
 Make the best use of resources, but put the journalism first.
 Bring online/multimedia into the discussion from the start of a story or project. Think of multi-media
elements, such as photo galleries, as another layer of information.
 If you're keeping a low profile at the outset of an investigation, make sure one of the reporters can
shoot photo and video and get sound. You can’t re-create interviews and other reporting moments.
Remember: video takes longer to edit than photos.
 Always think graphics and remember that graphics reporters are journalists.
 Multimedia journalists (such as, videographers, video editors, graphics reporters, photo editors) must
be ready for a new level of vetting, including legal review.
 If the project is rich in documents, put them online.
 Databases are popular online, especially with search applications.
 Make the online presentation easy to navigate. For a big project, consider organizing by chapter.
 Two to three multimedia elements (including database, video, graphics or photo gallery) are about
max for audience attention.

TRAINING IN A TIME WHEN THE TRAINING BUDGET
IS THE FIRST THING TO BE CUT
Look in-house!
 Assume nothing! Don’t assume your staff knows how to search the Internet effectively. Don’t assume
they know how to use your in-house Wiki or Intranet. Don’t assume everyone knows how to create
and use spreadsheets.
 Size up the room. Who is best at public records requests for documents and for data? Any math
whizzes in the room? Who is adept at Excel and Access? Mapping? Scraping the web?
 Set training priorities.
 Get buy-in. Editors have to appreciate the long-term investment in training and accept the short-term
pain of losing productive staffers in training sessions.
 Make skill enhancement mandatory and then help staff achieve it. If you require basic Excel, for
example, offer classes in it. Have other journalists in-house do the training.
They can teach it in a way that’s relevant to reporters.
 Work with your libraries or researchers to design training. They know the
commonly asked research questions, so you can teach staff members
how to do some of that work for themselves.
 Many newsroom folks teach during off hours at community college or a
four-year college. Do they teach watchdog topics? Do they have a ready
curriculum they could duplicate in-house?
 Make training fun and funny – and keep sessions short, no more
than an hour. If folks know they will enjoy themselves while
learning but will not be spending a lot of time away from their
beats, more will sign up and actually learn from what you're offering.
 Encourage your staff to invest in themselves. Journalism is a career and requires nurturing. For
example, investing in an IRE membership is worth its weight in tipsheets. Not to mention contacts who
can help you when your own newsroom can't. Attending a Better Watchdog seminar is a bargain.
 Have brown bags. Telling war stories is useful. Less experienced reporters can learn from past mistakes
and get ideas for current coverage. For example, before election season gets into full swing, bring in
your politics writers and editors and have them give a session on election-coverage basics. Before a big
schools test score data dump, get everyone who covers education together to brainstorm.
 If you do have training money, consider it carefully. How can you get the biggest bang for the limited
bucks? It might make sense to send one person to Poynter or API or NICAR or an IRE annual
conference with the idea they will come back and spread the knowledge.
 Or, bring someone in to reach a much larger group of reporters or editors. It's invigorating and
validating to hear someone from the outside reinforce what you've been preaching.
 Be liberal with your praise and support when someone learns a new skill and demonstrates it in print
or online. The first story a reporter does with a spreadsheet should be a celebration!

2008 IRE Conference, Miami
Lorie Hearn, The San Diego Union-Tribune
Cheryl Phillips, The Seattle Times
Sharon Rosenhause, South Florida Sun-Sentinel

