Jenni Bergal
National Public Radio
IRE Tipsheet – June 2008
Shifting gears: Investigative life after newspapers

Here are some practical tips to help you transition from
print to radio/TV:
1. In print, you have a byline at the top of the story and no one really
cares, except people in the know or in the industry.
The average reader doesn’t know you from Adam. In broadcast, it’s more like, “I’m Jenni
and you know me, and here’s what’s going on.” The reporter’s voice is the most
authoritative thing in his or her piece.

2. Presentation is very different than it is in newspapers.
In radio, there’s much more emphasis on the quotes you use – and the sound; in TV, it’s
the picture. That means you have to spend a lot of time trying to find just the right audio
or visuals.

3. The expectations for attribution aren’t the same.
There’s a lot more latitude about what you can say. You don’t have to use the words,
“according to,” or “John Smith said,” throughout, as you would in print. That’s very
helpful.

4. You don’t feel pressure to lay out all the facts, just a summary.
In print, you might have to use three examples of something to make your point. In radio,
you can just give two. Usually, you don’t want to use more because it’ll put the listener
on overload.

5. You must always keep listeners engaged.
In print, you might write a long, complex story, and parts of it may be rough sledding for
the reader. In radio or TV, they’ll just switch to another station, period. That’s why

storytelling is so important. As my friend, Sandy Bergo, a Washington TV producer,
says: “In a newspaper article, people can stop and go back a couple of grafs to re-read
something. In TV and radio, you can’t go backwards.”

6. Keeping the listeners engaged means you must write in an easy,
conversational style, even if it’s a major investigative project.
You have to use simple, declarative sentences to tell the story. Write the way you talk –
the way you’d tell a pal a story over a beer.

7. You have more room to be creative with features and enterprise
stories in radio.
You’ll have a lot of freedom to bring color and interesting voices into your pieces and put
together scenes that come to life. However, keep in mind that it’s a much more difficult
task if you’re covering policy or a government agency.
8. Make people you interview explain complex concepts to you

verbally.
NPR’s Dina Temple-Raston, a former print reporter who now covers the FBI, gave me
this tip: “When you’re interviewing someone for this kind of story, say to them, ‘pretend
you’re a blind person and tell me what you see.’ You’ll get great tape that way.”
Excellent idea.

9. Think victims, just as you would in a newspaper investigative
story.
If you’re doing a radio or TV piece about something dry, such as budgets or contracting,
you’ll want to find victims or people who’ve been affected, not just policymakers. That’s
the only way to keep listeners or viewers interested.

10. Think of yourself as a director, à la Hollywood.
When you put together a piece for radio, you’ve got to think of a lot more than just
interviewing people and writing a story. You’ve need to find people to put on tape who
sound articulate and interesting. A political science professor who’s great to quote in a
newspaper story might come off as dry, pedantic and inarticulate on radio. You’ve also
got to think about the sound – do you want to hear birds in the background if you’re
interviewing someone at the park, or waves crashing if you’re doing an environmental
story about beach erosion? And you’ve got to write your script (yes, that’s what they call
it) in a way that will keep listeners wanting more.

-30-

