Editing the CAR story – Part 1: Laying the right foundation
By Joe Tanfani, Philadelphia Inquirer
When it’s done right, data analysis is a marvelous reporting tool, a terrific complement (NEVER a substitute) for smart
and aggressive street reporting. When it’s not, it can be a huge waste of reporting time and energy, or worse.
Which way it goes is usually determined right at the beginning. It’s easy, with all the competing demands on our
attention, to stumble into some easily avoidable hazards.
Here’s a few proven ways to go wrong using CAR:

1. Budget lines first, data afterwards.
We’ve probably all seen it happen: the story’s already been planned, put on a projects budget and half reported, and
now someone gets the idea: Hey, we need some graphics, so let’s do some data runs. You know the painful ending:
maybe the data doesn’t support the premise the reporters have been chasing, and weeks of reporting go down the drain.
Or, the analysis uncovers a far better story, but now there’s no time to fit it in.
The cure: Make sure that CAR is part of the story’s foundation, not simply the decoration on top. Work to spread the
gospel in the newsroom, so other editors are thinking about that too. In the first stages of framing up a project, make
sure you ask: what data sets are out there that can help us tell this story? Do we have some of it in house? Will we have
to build our own data? Are there databases that are easily accessible? Can we maybe partner with someone else, like a
college or a nonprofit, either to build our data or to tap their expertise in figuring it out?
By thinking this way early, you’re forced to become more rigorous and analytical, and move beyond purely anecdotal
stories. And that is good. Many a weak trend story might have died early if someone had been thinking early on about
statistics and data.

2. Thanks for those lovely numbers. Now go back to your box.
This is the opposite problem: Someone churns out data, presents results to reporters and editors and is never heard from
again. That can lead to a lot of pain at the story’s close, if the reporters don’t really understand the data. Even at best,
that approach generally leads to static and shallow stories. Reporters can hustle out and devote themselves to framing
up that premise, and as a result, when they stumble on some other, amazing thread, they don’t follow up.
The cure: Make the data person a full partner on the project. Let them out of the office once in a while, if you can, and
let them participate in interviews. If not, make sure there’s a dialogue going, a loop where the data guides the reporting
and the street reporting produces sharper and more interesting analysis. Reporters should keep coming back and
saying: We just learned something, and we just thought of some really cool questions to ask the data.

3. Hey, I’m more of a words person. You figure it out.
As the editor, you know you have to vet the CAR numbers once they’re completed. But perhaps the most important
vetting that you do is at the front end, making sure you understand how the database is put together and whether it will
support the points you want to make. Even if you don’t have the skills to work with the levers and perform the analysis
yourself, you need to fully understand the logic behind it.
The cure: Ask tough questions: How complete is this database? How recent, or how old? Who enters it, and how
reliable is it? Are there holes in it, and are there ways to vet it, using other data? If it’s not clear to you, it won’t be to
anyone else. Better yet: before going too far down the reporting road, show your conclusions to experts in the field, and
ask them whether they hold up. Near the end, make sure you show your data conclusions to the people you’re writing
about. If you missed something, you’d rather hear about it before publication.

4. Those are great statistics. The readers will love each and every one of them.
If the story is born in CAR, keep in mind that the numbers only serve as a signpost to what you always want: strong,
compelling, surprising human stories, not a collection of numbers. The best stories, whether driven by data or not, are
the ones where the sweat and the effort and all the machinery is invisible, or nearly so.

5. Hey, maybe we could use some pictures with this thing!
It’s particularly important when dealing with stories grounded in data – be thinking visuals very early. Bring in a
photographer right away. And consult with a graphics person very early. If you’re lucky, they will have great ideas
about how to mine the data for maximum visible impact.

6. Can you have it by noon?
Finally, a word from a former head of our CAR department: “The thing I’d suggest you mention is the problem of editors having no

clue about what goes into the analysis. I mean none at all. They think you get the data, and bam it’s ready to go. There
are no magic wands in CAR. Good analysis takes time.”

