FOLLOW THE MONEY
Corruption in Alabama's Community Colleges
by Brett J. Blackledge IRE/June 2008
The Birmingham News
205-325-2282, bblackledge@bhamnews.com

The only way to look into how community colleges spend their money is to get inside their actual
expenditures and payrolls Like any decent bureaucracy, there's a trail. But sometimes it's tough
to find. In Alabama, for example, the 26 community colleges and trade schools don't have a
centralized financial system that would allow "one-stop" shopping for records. Never mind
whether that's intentional, to make it hard for anyone to look over a college's shoulder at what
they're doing. Just know it's a problem to get inside more than $500 million of state and federal
spending if you're forced to travel to every corner of the state to review financial and payroll
records.
I spent 2006 and 2007 getting inside the finances of community colleges, which led me ultimately
to some of Alabama's biggest political leaders. And the records I kept going back to as a constant
reference were the ones I compiled early in the reporting on contract spending and payroll. Who
was paid? How much? Who was hired? What was their background? Who's paid by more than
one college? Without a centralized, macro view of the system, those questions may have been
impossible to answer. The short answer is come up with a plan to get all the records, get those
records, and sit back and review them for the stories inside.
What I found when trying to figure these issues out was that vendors not typically associated with
college business were making millions, some of the largest grossing vendors among the state's
two-year colleges. Several, it turns out, had special arrangements with college officials that
included kickbacks and other felonious things. Some vendors were the relatives of college
officials, which raised questions about how they got the work. Some vendors were legislators,
which raised similar questions. They were all hiding in financial records spread across the state
that likely would never be found without a way to compile the information in a data form, to do
what system officials thus far had refused to do -- create a centralized, statewide view of all twoyear college spending.
And here are some ideas to make that happen:

* If you believe that every government payment has a trail, focus on finding the trail. (If you don't
believe that, you should. Governments write checks, or warrants, or some other form of payment,
and they compile documents justifying all of it, even if it's not very impressive documentation.)
How does the government entity make payments? What documentation do they require to write
the check? How is payment information maintained by the government, and that includes paper
and data information. They'll both be helpful eventually. But for now, figure out how the money
flows.

* Governments, like the rest of us, are depending more on computers. Every payment made likely
is logged in some computer file by one of the government's finance people. Those records are
incredibly important, because you can collect them and make your own dataset that allows you to
analyze the payments many different ways through a spreadheet or database application of your
choosing. At a minimum, think of one of your own personal checks when thinking about a
payment record in a computer format and the information it can provide. Who is the check written
out to? What's the date? The amount? Who signed it? What's in the memo field, or "for" line?
Finding out how these records are maintained and requesting them with even this basic

information will give you a huge amount of incredible information about every check written by the
college. And that will lead you to stories.

* Every college has someone responsible for making sure the paperwork is in place for payments
and the check is cut, and for making sure the data system is properly logging all of this
information. Chances are they are different people (someone in finance and another in
information services, for example.) But they're both worth finding and sitting down with to learn
what they know. Find the staff person who will sit down and walk you through it, even if they
retired or were fired from their department. They can tell you what questions to ask, how the
information is compiled, what the records actually show or should show, and they can tell you
when you're being conned. They can tell you how to request the data files, for example, or the
particularly query that's already in the college's computer system that will slice the data you want
without special programming needed. And chances are most of the colleges use compatible
accounting software, which means if you know one you could know them all and use the same
request at each college.

* Payroll records can be just as difficult to obtain as vendor payments, and they're just as
valuable. But who wants to sift through dusty files in a windowless room? Even if a college
system doesn't collect actual payroll data, every college reports whose working on their campus,
how much they're paid, what they do and how long they've done it. The information is collected
from all colleges by the systems that manage them, if for any other reason to show the feds and
even accreditors that they are complying with diversity, hiring and staffing standards. Some of the
data is used to justify funding requests. The records are absolutely essential in a data form,
showing names, sex, race, position, hire date, salary and date of birth. And in some cases, you
can get even more information, which can be really useful -- highest degree earned, type of
degree (to see if they're teaching in their field), full or part-time status, prior assignments.
(Definitely gather part-time records too, by the way, because some of the more sinister payments
can be made to people put on payrolls for do-nothing jobs. But they're hired as part-time, in part,
to keep them off the radar.) Get whatever you can and sort through the information you'll use
later. And chances are you won't even realize how useful some of the information is until you're
staring at the computer screen working with it.

* Everybody knows that few stories are written from a spreadsheet. So remember, when you sort
the payroll records for all the colleges in your state (once you've compiled them) and you see the
House Majority Leader in your Legislature is paid by two colleges at once (this actually happened
to me), you can't just write the story then. Be prepared to go where the data leads you, to those
dusty files and windowless basement rooms to pull the personnel records. The real story is there,
you just took the shortcut to finding it by using the data first. In those files are who knows what,
and likely good stories. Perhaps they'll show you that the only work product the Majority Leader
produced were periodic letters to college presidents commenting on politics of the day, or saying
a few nice words about party leaders, and not so nice words about those in the opposing party
(yes, that happened to me.) This is where the real fun starts, and in many cases where the work
pays off.

* Keep adding to the data sets you created. If payroll, or personnel, records are updated every
semester by a college, then get the new one and add it to your set. Do the same thing for vendor
payment records for college contracts. Chances are there's a story in there about a one-time
payment made to the wife or daughter of a college president that you wouldn't see unless you
gathered several years worth of records. Collecting multiple years of data, by the way, is an
absolute must when you start the process. First of all, why do all the work gathering it for one
year. Go five years if you can, and keep adding to it. This will allow you to see trends in hiring,
promoting, transfers and other interesting issues over time that a one-year snapshot can't

provide. And this can serve as a great beat resource to do countless stories, and to keep a little
personnel and payment file of your own for all colleges.

* If your colleges or college system has come under federal court oversight because of
discrimination practices, that's a plus for you. Court monitoring requirements typically force
colleges to provide great information about who, how and why they hired. Go through those
records and collect everything you can from the files. They can tell you whether someone was
hired without others applying, if they were hired on a temporary basis and whether the hiring went
through a screening process. This can be a great starting point to begin compiling who's on the
payroll and why.

