Exploring the paths of power and influence

CONNECTING THE DOTS
Using public documents, official web sites, news coverage and other reliable sources,
Muckety is building an extensive database showing connections between people and
organizations. Users are able to query the online database and view these connections in
interactive maps such as the one below.

Muckety was founded by journalists with years of experience at the Detroit Free Press,
The New York Times and the Dallas Morning News. The site, which is free, is designed to
be useful to reporters, as well as the general public.
Much of the site is intuitive and easily navigated. You'll have no problem querying for
specific people or organizations and expanding or contracting the maps. The guidelines
below are intended for more advanced searches.
Visit Muckety at http://www.muckety.com to begin experimenting!

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 1

Exploring the paths of power and influence

SEARCHING MUCKETY
Performing a simple search
Most pages of the Muckety Web site contain two areas where you can search the
Muckety database and create Muckety maps – the top right corner of the page and the
bottom right corner of the maps.

In our first example we are going to make a relationship map for Google Inc. To do this
type the word “Google” in one of the search boxes and press the Search or Go button to
see a list of results.
On the search results
page you'll see a list of
terms that contain the
word Google, grouped
by type of organization.
Let's say you're
interested in creating a
map for Google Inc.
Click the checkbox next
Google Inc. and then
click on the
MucketyMap button.

to

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 2

Exploring the paths of power and influence

The resulting page
contains a relationship
map for Google Inc. with
a list detailing the
relationships in the map.
The list of relationships is
broken into sections
depending on the type of
relationship.
In the Google Inc. map
example there are people
currently related to
Google, other current
Google relationships and
Google past relationships.
Following each name is a
description of the
relationship.
For example, Robert
Boorstin is currently
communications director
for Google Inc. and
Sergey Brin is a cofounder and director for
Google Inc. Each of the
relations is also linked to
that person's Muckety
map. Click on their name
to see their map
At the bottom of the list
of relations is additional
information such as
Google’s location,
business sector and links
to financial information
such Google’s filings
with the Security and
Exchange Commission
and its current stock
quote and chart.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 3

Exploring the paths of power and influence

Exploring the maps
For a complex map, it is often useful to explore connections using a large version of the
map.
To view a larger map, click one of the links below the map.

For this example we are going to click on the link that says “View Large version of map.”

Muckety maps are interactive. To start exploring a map you need to click inside of the
map area to activate it.
Lines between items in the map show relationships - solid lines indicate current
relations and dotted lines indicate former relations. If you move your mouse over a line a
small box appears showing the nature of the relationship. In the map above we see that
Sergey Brin is a co-founder & director of Google Inc.
Clicking on an item in the map will expand that item to show its relations. In the map
above we clicked on Sergey Brin’s name to show his relations.
IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 4

Exploring the paths of power and influence

The maps are color coded; people are orange and non-people are green.
You can re-center the map on another item by holding down the control key and
clicking on an item. If you control-clicked on Sergey Brin you would see a map with only
his relations and the other items in the map would go away.
After clicking around in a map several times the maps can become quite crowded and
complex. You can reset the map to its original state by clicking the Reset Map button
in the top right corner of the map.
You can also perform a new search from within a map. Enter a search term in the box
that says “Search Muckety” and press the Go button to start a new search.

Advanced search techniques
The advanced search page allows you to narrow
search results based on the type of item you are
looking for in the Muckety database. This can
help you get to the information you are looking
for more quickly
On the left side of the advanced search page is
an area that allows you to limit the scope of your
search by choosing the topic areas you wish to
search in. You do not have to limit your search
to one topic area. Pick as many as you feel
would be appropriate.
Major topic areas include:
People, Business & finance, Education, Politics
& government, Entertainment & sports, Media,
Other organizations, Animals, Awards & lists,
Vehicles, Places, Health, Objects, Events and
Crime.
Each major topic area has sub-topic areas that
can be selected as well. Choosing a major topic
area will include all sub-topic areas by default.
Click the
symbol to see the sub-topics
within each topic area.
Once you have selected the topic areas to search, put your search terms in the search box
and click the search button.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 5

Exploring the paths of power and influence

Performing an advanced search
Suppose you are looking for information related to the toolmaker Stanley. If you were to
just search for Stanley you would end up with a long list of results, many of which are
related to people named Stanley.
To narrow the search, you can click on the box next to the topic area that says Business
on the left side of the search page and click the search button.
While there are still quite a few businesses that contain the word Stanley, the list is much
smaller and focused only on the topic area you are interested in. Select the box next to the
entry for Stanley, Inc. and you get the relationship map and other information about the
company.

Creating a map from more than one search result
It is possible to create Muckety maps that show the relations of more than one of the
items that appear in search results. As an example, let’s see if there are common
connections between two technology companies – Cisco Systems and Network
Appliance.
First we perform search for the two companies. The names of the companies need to be
joined using the word “and,” so we search for “Cisco Systems and Network Appliance”
When we get to our search results we check the boxes next to both names and click on
the Muckety map button. The resulting maps looks like the one pictured below. (When
the database does not include overlapping relationships, the map that is displayed is the
one that has the most relationships.)

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 6

Exploring the paths of power and influence

Let’s look at one of Chicago’s political dynasties – the Daley Family. Richard J. Daley
was a mayor of Chicago, his son Richard M. Daley is currently the mayor and another
son, William M. Daley, was U.S. secretary of commerce.
First we search the database looking for Daley. On the results page we check the boxes
next to Richard J. Daley, Richard M. Daley and William Daley and click on the Muckety
map button. The resulting map looks like this:

ADVANCED MAPPING
Selecting items on the maps and using the map tool menu
Most of the advanced mapping features involve selecting items on a map and using the
menus to manipulate those selected items. Map tools enable you to delete items from a
map, group items on a map, save a map for future reference or embed a map on your blog
or website.
Here is a look at the menu bar that appears at the top of the map, showing the contents of
the Edit menu:

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 7

Exploring the paths of power and influence

There are five different menu items, File, Edit, View, Tools, and Help.
Edit Menu
The edit menu has seven options.
Edit > Find…
When you first load a map and look at the edit
menu you will see that only the Edit > Find…
option is available – all of the other options are
grayed out and unavailable. We’ll explain why in a
minute, but first let’s look at what Edit > Find…
does. If you select this, you'll see a dialog box like
the one to the right. This tool is useful for maps that have many relations since it is
sometimes difficult to see the item you are looking for in complicated maps.
Enter the name of the item you
are searching for in the box and
click OK. If the item is found
in the map it will present a
dialog box that tells you your
item was found and selected.
If the item is not found in the
map a box will pop up to tell
you that no matching items were
found.
If there are multiple items that
match your search terms you
will get an alert like the one to
the right which tells you that
two items were found and selected. Notice how the two items we were trying to find in

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 8

Exploring the paths of power and influence

the map have been highlighted. The highlighting, or selecting of items on a map are one
of the basic building blocks for more advanced mapping features. You will notice that
menus have more options available to you once items have been selected on a map. Some
of the menu options are available when one item has been selected, and some menu items
are available when multiple items have been selected.
Selecting items in a map
Selecting items in a map is the key to unlocking the advanced features of the Muckety
map menus. As we saw from the previous example, one way of selecting items on a map
is to use the Edit > Find… menu to find and select items in a map. Another, perhaps
more powerful way to select items in a map is to click on the map and drag your mouse
around a single item or multiple items on the map. If you want to select multiple items in
a map you can just loop you mouse around them to select them. If you want to select
multiple items in a map that are not adjacent to one another you can select one item and
then while holding down the shift key use your mouse to select other items in different
areas of the map.
Deleting selected items from a map
Sometimes it is useful to delete items from a map to highlight the ones that are if interest
for a particular story or research project. To delete an item or items from a map simply
select the items you want to remove and choose the menu option Edit > Delete. The
items you selected will be removed from the map and the map will redraw itself with the
remaining items. Sometimes it is useful to repeat this process until you get to the core
items that you wish to display or explore in your map.
Grouping selected items in a map
If you have a complicated map with many items in it you may want to group the items
that are important for your purposes and then delete the remaining items from the map.
Once you have
deleted the unwanted
items you can
ungroup the items
you want to further
explore your map.
To group items, you
must select at least
two items for the
option to appear in
the Edit menu. Once
you have selected the items you wish to group, choose Edit > Group from the menu and
you will be presented with a dialog box asking you to create a name for your group. The
dialog box should look like the one above. Once you click OK, the items you had
selected will appear as one item with the name you chose for the group. Notice that
grouped items appear in a different color than either people or non-people items.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 9

Exploring the paths of power and influence

Ungrouping grouped items
In the previous section we created a group and named it. There are two ways to view the
contents of the group. The first is to simply double-click on the grouped items and the
group will become ungrouped. An alternative method is to select the grouped item and
choose the menu option Edit > Ungroup.
It is important to note that all maps have an auto-grouping feature that will automatically
group like items when a certain number of them appear in a map. Currently our maps are
set to automatically group items when more than 10 items with the same relationship
appear in a map.
Organizing a map
The Edit > Organize menu option is an advanced grouping tool. It allows you to group
all items in a map that have the same relation to the selected item. Here is a quick
example using the Google Inc. relationship map.
When we first load the Google Inc. map it looks like
the one to the right with no grouped relations. There
are over 50 relations in the map, so at first it appears
a little bit crowded.
To organize the Google Inc. relations in the map we
first have to select the item called Google Inc.
Choose Edit > Organize and the resulting map will
look like the one below.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 10

Exploring the paths of power and influence

Using the Expand command to explore relations
The Edit >Expand command can be a useful tool for expanding many connections at
one time. Clicking on a single item expands the relations of that item. If you want to
expand the relations of a large number items at one time you can select those items and
choose Edit > Expand from the menu to have them all expand at once.
A couple of things to note
• There is a limit of thirty items for the Expand command. Currently the maps
allow you to expand up to thirty items at one time. You will get a warning from
the map applet if you try to expand more than the limit.
• It is useful to use the larger versions of maps when performing large expansions.
Large expansions usually add many more items to a map, so having more room
for the items is going to be helpful.
One of the best reasons to expand a large number of connections in a map is to allow you
to explore the interconnections of items in a map that may not be obvious at first. Let’s
look at an example using the large map of the American Clean Skies Foundation.

First we want to select all of the items in the map, so we drag our mouse around
everything in the map to select them all. Next we choose the menu option Edit > Expand
to expand all of the relations to these items.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 11

Exploring the paths of power and influence

The resulting map looks like this:

Using the Center command to explore relations
Like many of the edit commands, Edit > Center requires you to select an item or items
on a map before performing the command. If you select just one item it does the same
thing as control+clicking on an item. If you select multiple items in a map and choose
Edit > Center you can create some very interesting maps quite quickly.
For this example we will keep working with the American Clean Skies Foundation map.
Let’s select three of the items in the map that were interrelated: Aubrey K. McClendon,
Denise Bode and Chesapeake Energy Corporation. Once they are selected we choose the
menu option Edit > Center and end up with the map below. Notice how there are fewer
extraneous items in the map allowing us to focus on the relationships we are interested in
exploring further.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 12

Exploring the paths of power and influence

We can continue to explore relations in this map to see if there are any other interesting
connections we might want to know about. With a little bit of clicking around we
discover that Aubrey McClendon and former Chesapeake director Tom L. Ward have
teamed up as co-owners of the Professional Basketball Club LLC. Professional
Basketball Club LLC happens to be the owner of the Seattle Supersonics, and is trying to
move the Sonics from Seattle to Oklahoma City, the home of Chesapeake Energy.
Muckety that!
A quick review of the Edit menu
We made it through all of the commands in the edit menu. Let’s review them quickly.
• Edit > Find… allows you to locate and select items in a map.
• Edit > Delete allows you to delete selected items from a map.
• Edit > Group allows you to group two or more selected items in a map and
create a name for them.
• Edit >Ungroup allows you to ungroup items that have been grouped.
• Edit > Organize automatically creates groups from names related to the selected
name. Groups are created of two or more names having the same relation to the
selected name. The groups are named using the name of the relation.
• Edit > Expand allows you to expand relations of the selected names, bringing
new names into the display that are related to the ones you have selected.
• Edit > Center centers the map display on the selected names. This is the same
display you would get if you started a new search from the names you have
selected.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 13

Exploring the paths of power and influence

The File menu
The File menu has only one option at this time: File > Save.
The File > Save command allows you to save a map in the current state that it is in. It is
sometimes useful to save maps you are working on so that you can return to a previously
saved map if your explorations take you in a direction you really didn’t want to go and
your map gets crowded and confused with items you are not interested in. At Muckety we
save maps frequently so that we have previous versions that we can explore freely
without loosing the time we took to get a map to a certain state.
Once you have a map in a state which you would like to save choose File > Save. You
will be presented with a popup box asking you for a title for your map. Choose a
descriptive name and click OK.
You will then be presented with a dialog box (see image below) that has the address of
your saved map. Copy the address and paste it into your browser’s address bar. You may
want to also email the address to yourself, or bookmark it for future reference.

On the Muckety web site we feature user created maps in our Make a Muckety section.
http://news.muckety.com/make-a-muckety

The View menu
The view menu has four options that are available. None of these require items to be
selected in the map for them to function.
View > Repel
Using this command forces the map to move the names in the map so you can see them
all. It may not be possible if there are too many names. Choosing View > Repel a second
time will cause additional adjustments to be made. If you select items on a map, these
items are not affected by this command; select the ones you want to remain stationary
before choosing View > Repel.
View > Toolbar
Using this command enables or disables the Toolbar, which appears above the map. The
Toolbar contains some of the tools available under the Edit and View menus. Note that
leaving the Toolbar enabled will use up some of the area normally used for items in the

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 14

Exploring the paths of power and influence

map. For busy maps it might be best to disable the Toolbar. The Toolbar is turned off by
default.
View > Status bar
Using this command enables or disables the status bar, which appears at the bottom of the
map. The Status bar reports the number of items selected in a map. This information is
useful because some commands are limited by the number of selected names. For
instance, the Center and Expand commands are limited to 30 selected items. The Status
bar is turned off by default. You can turn it on by clicking on Status bar in the View
menu.

The Tools menu
There is just one choice under the Tools
menu and that is Tools > Options…
The tools palette opens in a separate
window and looks like the image to the
right.
It is quite powerful in its ability to
control what types on relationships you
would like to see displayed in a map.
Sometimes when working with maps you
are not interested in seeing former
relations (the ones with dotted lines).
This tool allows you to control whether
current, former, or both types of relations
are displayed.
Suppose we are only interested in seeing the current relations in a map.

The default setting is to display both current and former relations. To change the default
setting we choose one of the choices that appear after Displayed Relations at the top of
the palette - in our case we are interested in current relations, so we click the button to
the left of the word Current and then click the OK button at the bottom of the palette.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 15

Exploring the paths of power and influence

The map will redraw and all of the former relations will be removed from the map. If we
don’t like the results of what we have done we can go back and change this option to
Both, or see what it looks like with just former relations.
Below the displayed
relations options is an area
where you can choose what
types of items (or Actors)
you would like to hide. You
can choose as many or as
few of these as you like, but
if you choose to hide them
all, your map will display
nothing.
To choose more than one
type to hide control+click
on the types you wish to
hide (command+click on
the Mac).
Click the OK button to see
the results.
At the top of the Options
palette are two buttons. One
says Filters (which is what
we have been looking at)
and the other says Group.
We have a choice to autogroup or not auto-group. Auto-group is selected by default.
As we discussed earlier in our look at grouping, the auto-group feature will put items into
a group if there are a certain number of them that appear in a map. Un-checking the Autogroup box in the Options palette will prevent the maps from grouping items.

Mouse actions
Here's a quick rundown of some of the features that can be done to manipulate maps by
just using your mouse.
Click on a name
Clicking on a name other than a group expands that name, adding new names to the map
that are related to the one you clicked.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 16

Exploring the paths of power and influence

Control-Click on a name
Control+clicking on a name other than a group centers the display on that name. This is
The same display you would get if you started a new search from the name you clicked.
Shift-Click on a name
This automatically creates groups from names related to the name you clicked (similar to
the Edit > Organize menu option).
Click on a name and drag
This will move the name to a new location in the map. If multiple names are selected, all
selected names will move by the same amount.
Click on empty space and drag
Selects names in the map. Any name that touches the drag box will be selected. Selected
names are indicated by a magenta border.
Shift-Click on empty space and drag
Selects more names in the map. Any names that were previously selected remain so.
Control-Click on empty space and drag
Unselects all names that touch the drag box.
Click on empty space
This unselects all names in the map.

ADDING DATA
The current setup of Muckety does not allow users to upload their own data. There are
several obstacles to adding this feature, not the least of which are concern for accuracy.
It's crucial that we avoid combing entries for separate people. We also want to avoid
duplication entries for the same person.
That said, we're interested in working with journalists who want to upload data for
specific stories or projects. If you'd like more information on how to do this, please
contact us at journalistsdata@muckety.com.

HELP
You'll find online help guides at http://news.muckety.com/help
Feel free to email us at info@muckety.com or call us, at 212-924-0702.

IRE conference, Miami, June 2008 - Page 17

