Finding/Negotiating for Data Tipsheet -- June 2008 IRE Conference in Miami
Matthew Doig
Sarasota Herald-Tribune
matthew.doig@heraldtribune.com
Why bother?
If you want to publish comprehensive, unimpeachable and informative stories on subjects such as
test scores, salaries or demographics, then data will likely be the backbone of your work. Take a
look at some of the stories featured on IRE’s Extra Extra page (www.ire.org/extraextra/). Many
of them could not have been published at all, or would have been much less interesting, if the
reporter had not obtained data.
Find out what information is being collected
Agencies often use their data to generate reports, which are then sent to department heads,
lawmakers, etc. If you ask for a copy of these reports, they can give you an indication of what
kind of data the agency has.
Get all the data you can
Don’t stop at those aforementioned reports. Agencies usually compile data for limited reasons,
and their lack of imagination will surprise you. Get everything the law allows you to have,
because you never know what kind of interesting information lurks in some ignored column in a
spreadsheet.
Get it in a format you can use
This usually means as an Excel or Access file. But if the agency has a complicated system, ask
them to get it to you as a comma or tab delimited text file (which you can then import into Excel
or Access). Do not settle for a PDF and, unless you’re time-traveling back to the 1970s to finish
your project, do not pick up your data if it has been printed out on a stack paper.
Become an expert in your state’s public records law
It’s good to know going in whether you need to be a beggar and/or charmer (because the records
may not be public), or whether you can act like a belligerent jerk (because the records are
definitely public).
Find and befriend the agency’s data guru
Flacks will prove more useless than usual when it comes to data requests, so try to navigate your
way into a conversation with the person who actually compiles and works with the information
you want. I’ve found that these people are usually squirreled away in a dark corner and they are
thrilled when a reporter shows interest in their thankless task.
Do other agencies have the same data?
It’s a longshot, but it worked for us once: If a law exempts an agency’s data from public
disclosure, find out if they’ve transferred their data to another government agency. The
exemption might not apply to the other agency.
If the law says you can have it, don’t give up
It sets a bad precedent. Train your flacks to be good stewards of your state’s public records laws.

