Here are some of the stories that reporters and researchers at the Center for Responsive Politics
produced in the last year by mashing up data on OpenSecrets.org with other sources.

STRATEGIC ASSETS: Congress's Personal Investments in War

IRE 2008 National Conference / Miami

http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2008/04/strategic-assets.html
April 3, 2008

To write this story, we used FedSpending.org to generate a list of all of the companies receiving a
defense contract in 2006 and then matched that list with the 2006 data we collected from the
Senate Office of Public Records and the Office of the Clerk of the House about the personal
wealth of members of Congress and the executive branch. Doing so allowed us to look at how
much lawmakers had invested in these companies (which can be analyzed by party), how much
lawmakers on defense-related committees had invested in these companies, which lawmakers
have made the biggest profit from these investments and which companies are the most popular
for lawmakers to invest in. The story touched on just how widespread the war effort has
become—lots of popular companies that don’t seem defense-related have some sort of defense
contract—and how hard it is to avoid investing in them for anyone who wants a diverse blue-chip
portfolio.
Because the most recent data available is from 2006, we made sure to call the office of any
lawmaker that we were going to mention specifically in the story to check that they hadn'
t
divested since (and if they had, to find out why) and to confirm that they controlled the asset. In
stories like this, we look for anecdotes about lawmakers who are outspoken for or against the
issue related to the industry, or who have legislated for or against it. Personal financial data is
challenging because lawmakers need only check a box indicating a range of the value of the
asset. We usually speak in “at least” terms, saying that a lawmaker had "at least $X invested" in a
certain company.

SEEKING SUPERDELEGATES: Correlating endorsements and $

http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2008/02/superdelegate-update.html
February 28, 2008

The focus in this story was on our finding that elected Democratic superdelegates were more
likely to throw their support behind the candidate, either Clinton or Obama, who donated the most
money from their leadership PAC or campaign to the superdelegate'
s campaign. We were able to
determine this by matching a list of superdelegates to a list of lawmakers who had received
money from either Clinton or Obama during the 2008 or 2006 election cycles (the time period
when both front-runners served in the Senate together). Critics of the report said we shouldn’t
have included the 2006 election cycle in our calculations because the candidates may not have
been anticipating a presidential bid. But our aim with the story wasn’t to say that the candidates
were buying votes, merely that they have a long-standing financial connection to the
superdelegates that they don’t have with voters or with delegates who don'
t hold elected office.
Through our research we also found that Obama had given more money to superdelegates
during our report'
s time period than Clinton had.
One tricky part of the story was figuring out how much local and state superdelegates had
received from the candidates. For this we needed to look at Obama and Clinton'
s expenditure
data, rather than contribution data.

MEDIA CONTACT:
Massie Ritsch, Communications Director
(202) 354-0111 or massie@crp.org

THE DEMOCRATS’ LOBBYIST LOBS: Fact-checking candidates

IRE 2008 National Conference / Miami

http://www.opensecrets.org/capital_eye/inside.php?ID=315
December 6, 2007

Last summer, when Hillary Clinton defended her decision to accept campaign contributions from
lobbyists, she claimed that lobbyists work in the interest of the ordinary person. While some
lobbyists do, we wanted to take a look at which industries were represented by the lobbyists
giving money to her. By matching lobbyists who have donated to the presidential candidates this
cycle with their clients using our lobbying and contributions databases, we found that the
lobbyists contributing the most to Clinton represented big industries such as pharmaceutical,
automotive and computer companies. The numbers in the story reflect the amount of money that
the lobbyist-contributors billed their clients—so, for example, we determined that Clinton’s
contributors who lobby for pharmaceutical companies and interests billed more than any other
industry, $30.7 million, or 14 percent of the total.

THE OTHER IRAQ SURGE: Military $ favors anti-war candidates

http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2007/09/the-other-iraq-surge.html
September 13, 2007

By looking at data on campaign contribution that we had classified as coming from members of
the armed services, we were surprised to find that the most popular candidates were anti-war
candidates Barack Obama and Ron Paul. To come to this conclusion, we took data that we had
coded in the defense sector and looked specifically at contributions from the Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marines and other segments of the military. We determined that members of the armed
services, as well as civil servants at the Department of Defense, were giving a greater percentage
of their total money to Democrats in this election, reflecting perhaps dissatisfaction with the
Republican administration’s handling of the war. We found support for this hypothesis in follow-up
conversations with donors.

PHONE COMPANIES WANT TO BE OFF THE HOOK: Immunity/$
http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2008/03/phone-companies-want-to-be-off.html
March 6, 2008

This is a pretty straightforward story that uses our lobbying data to analyze the amount of money
that telecom companies spend each year on lobbying. One of the frustrations in a story like this is
that it’s impossible to say how much an industry or client is currently spending on lobbying, in the
moment—because the data is filed quarterly (used to be semi-annually), we’re always a few
months behind. But as some of the major telecom companies fought for immunity over their
participation in the Bush administration'
s warrantless wiretapping program, we were able to point
out how much money those companies and the industry as a whole have spent on lobbying.
According to our data, the industry was among the top 20 spenders in 2005 and 2006, which
means Congress won’t likely turn a deaf ear to it.
We were also able to match the amount of money the industry had contributed to senators who
voted on the immunity bill. Not surprisingly, the senators who supported granting immunity to the
telecoms received, on average, $8,200 more from the industry than those who voted against it.
Our data allowed us to break that down by company, so we could analyze how much the
senators who supported the bill received in the past from AT&T and Verizon. Similarly, we were
able to look at industry and company contributions to sponsors of the bill and the presidential
candidates.
MEDIA CONTACT:
Massie Ritsch, Communications Director
(202) 354-0111 or massie@crp.org

