Belief is in the document: Tips on investigating religion
By Eric Gorski, religion writer, The Associated Press (egorski@ap.org)
Investigative Reporters and Editors conference, Miami 2008
Churches are more than what they seem: Churches are no longer just four walls that
accommodate congregations on Sundays. Especially in the evangelical world, many churches do things
most people don't associate with church. Churches are starting charities, launching businesses ranging
to coffee shops to book publishers and real-estate development firms, building subdivisions and taking
millions of dollars in taxpayer money to provide social services that used to be the government's
responsibility. Every time a church intersects with a government agency, it produces public records.
These tips refer to churches, but apply to any place of worship:
− Run the church through state Secretary of State records. Search for articles of incorporation and
bylaws, which can include important information like the structure and makeup of the church board
and what kind of role the founding pastor has in governance. Search for for-profit companies
started by either the church or its pastor/executives.
− Churches are not required to file IRS Form 990s, which provide detailed financial information on
nonprofits. Does the church have an affiliated nonprofit group that does? Check
www.Guidestar.org and ask Guidestar for older form 990s that are not available for free.
− Seek out the IRS Form 1023, or application for tax-exempt status, of the church or related nonprofit
groups. These forms may include salaries, bylaws, budgets and more. Ask for all correspondence
between the IRS and the applicant. Churches are not required to file Form 1023s but some do
anyway. If they do, they're public record. Getting them from the IRS can take weeks. News media
can request copies of Forms 1023 from the IRS by faxing a request to 513-263-5900. (An IRS
information sheet on media requests for these and other public records is attached).
− Check on whether with the church or related nonprofit gets any county, state or federal money to
provide social services. Find out the dollars involved and check whether an audit was conducted.
The Federal Award Assistance Data System (www.census.gov/govs/www/faads/htm) includes
information on grants. The Federal Audit Clearinghouse (http://harvester.census.gov/sac/) is a
source for audits. Not everything is there, however, so try to identify the appropriate agency and
contact it directly.

The document trail: Churches are wrapped in a layer of privacy that secular nonprofits don't
get. But there are still plenty of records and documents out there that shed light on what they do:
− Check whether the state or county requires an application for property-tax exemptions. This can
apply to land or property like jets, as well. Churches may make public anything from pastors'
salaries to money paid to board members and family members on the church payroll.
− Run the church's name and the name of pastors, senior staff and board members through property
records. What does the church own and how much is it worth? Has the church sold property to any
insiders, or vice versa? The pastor may live in a church-owned home, or be paid a housing
allowance by the church.
− Check vehicle records (what's public varies from state to state).
− Check whether the church, pastors or any related institution owns any aircraft. Ownership
information is searchable online through the Federal Aviation Administration:
http://registry.faa.gov/aircraftinquiry/. You can also request more detailed records on individual
aircraft, including its ownership history and - sometimes - purchase price information. The FAA
delivers that on CD-ROM, and it can take several weeks. The directions for ordering those records
is available on this link, under "records and reports:"
http://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/aircraft_certification/aircraft_registry/.

−

−

Run court local, state and federal records for any lawsuits involving the church, its principals and
all associated companies and nonprofits. Even the smallest lawsuits can lead to documents and
sources. Check bankruptcy filings and divorces. The Nexis prompt that allows searches by state is
helpful for running searches across different databases.
Give board members the same scrutiny in searching records; these are supposed to be the people
watching out for the church's best interest. Also check out relatives. How many relatives are
employed at the church? Do any sit on the board? Does the church have any business relationships
with anyone related to church executives?

Cultivating sources: People can provide the color and quotes that bring stories to life, but they
also may possess documents that are impossible to get elsewhere
− Look for former members, employees or board members. Check for former assistant pastors who
have left to join other congregations. Find old rosters of board members to see who's left. One
source opens the doors to others. Always ask "What kind of documents do you have?"
− Some churches do make their budgets public - or allow them to be inspected by members. So find a
member who is willing to share that information, if it's handed out.
− Attend services, tape record the sermons, buy CDs and DVDs of the preaching, buy books by the
pastor, attend "introduction to the church"-type classes if you can blend in well enough
Checking it out: Once you've gathered your material, you'll want to check it against applicable
laws, IRS rules and nonprofit best practices. Keep in mind that churches aren't like the Red Cross and
can cite theological reasons for how they operate. But there are IRS rules they must follow:
− The IRS requires that pastors' compensation be "reasonable," typically set by collecting comparable
salaries, weighing factors such as church size and a pastor's value to the congregation.
−
The IRS prohibits insiders – staff, board members and their relatives - from benefiting from their
relationship with the nonprofit above and beyond reasonable payment for services rendered. If
violations are found, nonprofits can lose their tax-exempt status and board members can face
penalty taxes.
Some resources:
− The IRS produces a tax guide for churches and religious organizations: www.irs.gov/pub/irspdf/p1828.pdf
−
The Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability sets standards about transparency and board
makeup for its 1,280 member organizations:
www.ecfa.org/Content.aspx?PageName=ECFABestPractices.
−
The Better Business Bureau (www.us.bbb.org) and American Institute of Philanthropy
www.charitywatch.org/) National Charities Information Bureau also have best practices for
nonprofit groups, but be cautious about holding churches to the same standards.

