Tipsheet #3183
On The Beat: Covering Local Government
June 7 2008 IRE Miami

Telling the big story and making a difference
Focus: government pensions
1. TIME IS RIGHT
• Many local and state governments are struggling with surging pension benefit
liabilities thanks in part to generous deals cut years ago – or improperly granted
benefits.
• When examining public pension plans and individual pension payouts, keep an
eye out for pension “buyback” or “service purchase” deals that allow employees
to buy additional pension service, often to their great advantage. Also watch for
newfangled arrangements that allow lump-sum pension payments up front at
retirement.
• Another frequent trouble spot is loose systems for granting disability pensions.
The treatment of military leave for pension purposes – and how the Iraq war vets
are being treated compared to previous veterans -- is another possible story.
2. KEEP IT SIMPLE (at least at first)
• Ask how the baseline pension benefits for your public-sector employees compare
to those given in surrounding localities or states.
• Can general employees’ retiree with full pension at age 50 with only 25 years of
service? That’s one example of who can retire in Milwaukee County under a very
generous “Rule of 75” (age + years of service) eligibility standard that was in
place for years.
• Are benefit formulas richer for elected officials than general employees? By how
much, and why? Do those officials vote on their own benefits? Do benefits differ
greatly according to membership in certain unions? Same follow-up questions.
What about police and fire workers? (the protective services typically get better
benefits, but not always).
• Are workers maxing out on overtime as they near retirement in order to jack up
their final salary for pension-calculation purposes?
3. DIVING IN
• You may find that individual pensions are NOT a matter of public record in your
area. This varies by pension system. Don’t lose hope if they are private;
reasonable estimates can be made based on publicly approved benefit formulas.
• With some help from a pension official, learn the basic formula for calculating a
pension, and the caveats that go along with this.
• Learn which public agency and/or elected officials control benefit levels, and who
administers the payment system. Pension changes are often buried in the details of
labor contracts.

Tipsheet #3183
•

Ask for the database of current pensioners. This will be interesting reading if
nothing else. Basic fields of information will vary, but might include: A unique
ID number for each retiree (sometimes called annuity # or retirement #), Name,
Job title, Department, DOB, years of service, Date of Retirement, Payment option
selected, Monthly pension amount, Final Average Salary. Separately, ask to see
individual pension files to find details that can affect calculations.

4. WHERE TO GET EXPERT HELP
• Insiders: Pension system officials (director, pension board members, actuaries,
and pension system auditors), human resources directors, labor leaders,
government comptroller or finance officer. Outside experts: They are vital for
doing comparisons and examining whether local benefits are generous.
• A good starting place is the National Association of State Retirement
Administrators, www.nasra.org.
• For help finding an actuary to consult, see the American Society of Pension
Actuaries (ASPA), www.aspa.org
• The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) has best practices on
pension and benefit issues, www.gfoa.org
• The International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans can answer general
questions and direct you to sources, www.ifebp.org.
5.

BE CAUTIOUS AND PATIENT!
• The basics of pension reporting can be pretty straightforward, but important
nuances creep in when examining different groups of employees. Allow a long
learning curve and you will feel more comfortable over time.
• Double-check every calculation and assumption with inside and outside
experts. Then check again.
• Just a few of the caveats: Pension benefit formulas often differ across
employee groups based on labor agreements and arbitration decisions. Make
sure you know which formula applies to the group you are looking at. Final
average salary, a key component of pension calculations, can be based on a
varying number of years. IRS gets involved too, limiting pension payouts
when they exceed certain limits, especially for younger workers and highly
paid workers.

6. FINDING FAULT AND GETTING RESULTS
• It’s a general principle of investigative reporting but can’t be overemphasized:
study up on the local rules and laws early on so you can spot possible
improprieties.
• A little bit of homework will establish your credibility with pension officials, and
come in handy when deciding whether specific rules or laws were broken. When
you reach certain conclusions, run them by the municipal or state lawyers and
pension officials, so you can get their reaction and respond to any challenges.
Dave Umhoefer/Milwaukee Journal Sentinel dave.umhoefer@gmail.com (414) 224-2372

2

