We’re there. Every day.

Zack Kucharski
Data Team Leader, Cedar Rapids Gazette
(319) 398-8219
Zack.kucharski@gazcomm.com
www.gazetteonline.com and www.iowafloodstories.com

Databases in a disaster
The Cedar River changed the face of Cedar Rapids, a city of about 130,000 residents, on June 12, 2008. While
flooding was forecasted, the scope of the flooding surprised everyone. The rain kept coming, upstream river
gauges quit working just when they were needed most, and the predicted flooding was woefully wrong. The
flooding forced the evacuation of more than 18,000 residents, left more than 6,000 homes and businesses –
including the city’s entire downtown – under water.
Databases played an important role in our coverage as the community went from a state of shock to
rebuilding. We used databases in three main ways: simple searchable databases providing basic community
information, as a tool to assist our ongoing reporting and as a stand‐alone storytelling tool.
Searchable databases: These were very helpful immediately after the flood. We used them for missing pets,
items needed by flood victims/offered by the community (a free classifieds), relocated or reopened
businesses, homes cleared by inspectors, which contractors had passed the city’s requirements to work in
flooded areas, which property owners were asking the city for property buyouts.
We worked with the Chamber of Commerce to get information on relocated businesses. They had staff going
door to door to get temporary contact info and assess needs. While we got the information for a searchable
database, we also got cell numbers for a lot of local businesses. While the database has changed, we’re
continuing to update a list of businesses as they return to their pre‐flood location.
An idea to create logins so the public could update or delete information they posted to the database proved
to be more trouble than it was worth. People forgot passwords or didn’t have easy access to the Internet, so
it ended up taking more time and frustrating some people.
Database to assist reporting: Our first scrape of the city assessor’s property database two weeks before the
flood proved invaluable, as it has served as the backbone for a lot of our database work since the flood.
Having a copy meant we had access to the database while the city staff was working to rebuild its computer
system which was underwater in the flood.
We were able to quickly identify ages or values of property damaged in the flood and get ownership
information. While we still spent plenty of resources hitting the street, this helped give us some depth to our
reporting and allowed us to target some of our resources.
The property database also served as one of the main tools the city used. Each time the city produced a list of
homes that could be reoccupied, or identified property owners asking for buyouts, or identified homes being
sold for pennies on the dollar, the city was drew from its property database. We were able to do simple joins
to the database to answer more questions.

This was where luck entered the picture. We had no idea what data the city would draw on in a disaster. We
will next time, and you should work to identify what databases your city or region would use before a
disaster struck.
Now that recovery is continuing, we are continuing to link building permit data (done by a separate office) to
the property database so we can keep tabs on where rebuilding is occurring fastest.
The property database became a storytelling tool: Our property database became the key component to a
storytelling Web site www.iowafloodstories.com which we launched several months after the flood. The site
provides information about every parcel damaged by the flood. In addition to linking all of the content by
address, we’re also collecting stories, photos and videos from the public about their experiences.
Built in part using a repurposed PHP business directory, the property database is the guts to this effort. We’re
continuing to link additional information to this property database. We geocoded each of the damaged
properties and linked it to a Google map, and are linking our content based on these addresses.
This database gives the public thousands of different entry points to our content, and allows them to see
content in whatever slice they choose. We’re using this as a public archive of the incident, and adding the
user submitted stories and other content we’ve received. We’ve also partnered with some of the local
colleges to collect video interviews as we’ve received.
Some things to think about before disaster strikes: Our newsroom emergency plans didn’t factor in National
Guard evacuation orders nearly all government offices being unavailable. Here are some data‐related
questions you’ll want to think of before the disaster strikes:
¾ Can we rely on data on the web or should we scrape some data so that we have a copy available?
The majority of government offices sustained heavy damage during the flood and it took a few
weeks before the Web sites were again operational. Government offices were being bombarded by
requests for information. We couldn’t wait that long to get at some of the basic info. When the
scope of the flooding became apparent, we were on a generator which could power 13 newsroom
computers, all needed to produce the paper. Periodic Internet outages made it difficult to update
our Web site, let alone pull info from other sites. It was too late to look for data.
¾ Can the database be queried in the ways you need on immediate deadlines?
¾ What data sets are local governments going to draw on when a major disaster strikes? It’s a good
idea to collect the data on a regular basis so it’s there when you need it.
¾ Are the computers or servers with the CAR data in the emergency newsroom power plan? You won’t
have the time to waste dealing with these types of issues.
¾ Are there agencies you can partner with to collect data in an emergency?
¾ What information will the public need to know at an individual level in the event of a major disaster?
¾ Does your database contain the fields necessary to map it quickly? If not, this is something you can
do before a disaster strikes.

