NICAR - From Database to Story – A Step-by-step Guide
Phil Harbord, Bosloe, CBC
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
1-416- 694-7597 (office)
pharbord@rogers.com

David McKie
CBC Investigative Unit
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
181 Queen Street
1-613-288-6523 (office)
1-613-290-7380 (cell)
David_mckie@cbc.ca

Premise – In workplace safety inspections, not enough attention is paid to the non-traditional industries
like healthcare, schools, (e.g., violence) and business (Carpal tunnel syndrome, strains, etc.)
Source Data
NICAR - OSHA data Using
Washington State OSHA
Inspections as example. All
States are available.
Ensure data is clean.
Base or Denominator data
Need to “standardize” output
into “Rates” rather than absolute
numbers. i.e., Inspections per
1000 workers better than
Number of Inspections
Government stats for workforce North American Industry
Classification System
NAICS 1997 replaced SIC codes
used since 30’s, NAICS
Summary codes – first 2 digits
Querying the data
Count visits by NAICS summary
By Year - Use Crosstab
Crosstabs are like Pivot tables in
Excel – very useful for seeing
trends (i.e., changes over time)
Now apply workforce to get rates
- Inspections per 1000 people
It is possible to compare the Inspections to workforce in Access. However, we will do the calculations in
Excel

Paste into Excel -

http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/workplace-safety/outofsync.html
Other stories using the
same data - Weekend
Inspection Analysis
We know that overtime,
weekend and shift work
outside the regular 40 hour
week tends to be less safe.
What proportion of inspections
is carried out at weekends?

Going Further
 Analyze Inspections by each NAICS summary, rather than just Traditional vs. Non-Traditional
 Compare to Workers Compensation claims by NAICS codes
 We have focused on the table in the OSHA database that tracks inspections, but we can also get
stories from other tables that track factors such as the nature of the violations and whether the
companies in question are repeat offenders.

