Stan Ketterer
Associate professor
School of Journalism and Broadcasting
Oklahoma State University
stan.ketterer@okstate.edu
(405) 744-8270

Interpreting Results with the Elaboration Model
Test
Partials
Control
Variable
ChiSquare
Use
Layers in
SPSS for
the
control
variable.

Replication
(Same effect as before)
All significant
Control V.
Control V.
Prior to IV
After IV
Supports an
Supports a
direct
indirect
effect. To
effect
confirm, run a
between IV
second test.
and DV.
Relationship
CV has no
should
effect on
it.
disappear
when IV is
controlled.
IV>DV
CV>IV>DV

Explanation
Interpretation
(Spurious)
(Mediating)
None significant
Control V.
Control V.
Prior to IV
After IV
Supports an
Supports a
spurious
indirect effect
(intervening).
effect. Both
To confirm, run
variables
related to the a second test
between the IV
CV but not
and CV. It must
to each
be significant.
another.
If not, it is a
spurious effect.
CV>IV
CV>DV
IV>CV>DV

Specification
(Moderating)
Mixed
Doesn’t
matter
Supports an
interaction
between the
CV and IV.
Specifies the
conditions
under which
the original
relationship
holds.
CV
↕ >DV
IV

Steps in the Analysis
1. Run the initial analysis (between Ethnicity and Loan Decision) with chi-square or
column percentages. Ethnicity is the independent variable (IV), or presumed cause,
and Loan Decision is the dependent variable (DV), or what is measured.
2. If the relationship is statistically significant (.05 or below) or about a 10% or more
difference in column percentages, we want to determine how other variables affect
the relationship. We add a control variable (Income) to the analysis and determine
how it affects the original relationship. For chi-square, use the Layers function in
SPSS to split the data by the levels of the control variable.
3. We will generate partial chi-square or cross tabulation tables, one for each level of
the control variable (Income: 20, 35, 50, 120). Use the Elaboration Model to
interpret the results. First, look at the partial tables and determine if all significant,
none significant, or the results are mixed. If the results are mixed, the results
support specification and an interaction. (Income <> Ethnicity > Loan Decision).
Whether ethnicity affects the loan decision depends on the level of income. In our
example, no difference exists for $20,000 or less because all loans were denied,
regardless of ethnicity. For the rest of the income levels, blacks were denied loans
significantly more than whites.
4. For all significant or none significant, determine if the control variable came before
the independent variable (prior) or after it (intervening) using logic and theory.

1

If all significant and the variable came after the IV, the results support replication
and a direct effect between the IV and DV (Ethnicty > Loan Decision). The control
variable (Income) had no effect on the relationship between ethnicity and loan
decision. In other words, blacks were denied loans more than whites regardless of
their incomes, so income had no effect. If the control variable came before the IV, it
supports an indirect relationship (Income>Ethnicity>Loan Rate). In our example,
this scenario would be impossible because ethnicity logically comes before
income. Thus, our first interpretation would be correct. (In fact, Sarah Cohen had
this result in her exercise when income was divided into quartiles (fourths). Blacks
were denied loans more than whites at all levels of income. Thus, level of income
did not matter, which further supported a direct effect between ethnicity and loan
decision.) If you are uncertain about the variable order or to confirm your
interpretation, run another test between the control variable (Income) and the DV
(Loan Decision), controlling for the IV (Ethnicity). If the relationship disappears, it
supports a prior control variable because the causal chain is broken if the control
variable is controlled (Income>Ethnicity>Loan Decision). If the relationship
persists, the control variable had no effect (Ethnicty>Loan Decision).
If none are significant and the control variable came before the IV, it supports
explanation and a spurious (false) relationship (Income>Ethnicity; Income>Loan
Decision). Both ethnicity and loan decision are related to income, but they are not
related to each other. Thus, ethnicity and loan decision are unrelated and one does
not affect the other. If the control variable came after the IV, it supports
interpretation and an intervening relationship (Ethnicty>Income>Loan Decision).
Ethnicity affects income, which in turn affects loan decision. Consequently,
ethnicity indirectly affects loan decision through its effect on income. To confirm
this relationship or if you are uncertain about the order of the variables, run a test
with the IV (Ethnicity) and the CV (Income) as the DV, the first part of the indirect
effect (Ethnicity>Income). If it is significant, it supports an intervening relationship.
If not, it supports a spurious relationship.

2

