There are two kinds of databases: those that already exist and those that don’t. In a perfect world,
easily‐accessible, well‐maintained electronic data exists for every story we’re researching. Our world
isn’t perfect – and that often means we need to request, plea, pester, wait, wait some more, gather,
download, input and clean before we can sort, query and analyze. Don’t assume the data you’re looking
for doesn’t already exist! Search for it. If you find it’s not available electronically, that’s when it may be
time to start…

Creating Your Own Dynamic Databases
NICAR Indianapolis 2009
Mark Nichols
Indianapolis Star
Mark.Nichols@indystar.com

Bob Segall
WTHR‐TV Indianapolis
bsegall@wthr.com

WHEN TO MAKE A DATABASE
1. When data is critical to the story
‐‐When you need the numbers and the perspective that only a database can provide
‐‐If you cannot and will not benefit from the database, don’t waste your time
2. When it’s important to your journalistic process
‐‐When you need the data in an electronic format to help you organize and analyze
3. Never been done before
‐‐The data exists but the database does not – and you believe it should. (See points 1 and 2!)
‐‐You want to provide a groundbreaking public service
4. When time allows
‐‐On a tight deadline? This may not be the time to create an elaborate database.

HOW TO CREATE A DATABASE
1. Choose your software
‐‐Use multiple software tools for database creation, analysis and presentation.
2. Be well armed!
‐‐Arm yourself with laptops, thumb drives, a photocopier. Work in pairs or teams if needed.
3. Identify what information you need – and what you don’t
‐‐Do this early. Think ahead. Be thorough but efficient.
4. Create a “notes” column in your database
‐‐Allows you think out loud as you input data with your questions, comments, observations.
5. Don’t just build and construct… “Rebuild and reconstruct”
‐‐Look for portions of data that might already exist, and blend them into what you’re creating
from scratch.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

PUTTING YOUR DATA ON THE WEB
1. Should it be on the web?
‐‐Always ask yourself if making the database publically accessible will serve a public interest.
Possible benefits of putting your data on the web include:
*Provides information the public wants and/or needs
*Provides the information in a clearer, more thorough or more convenient manner than
currently available anywhere else
*Provides transparency. Takes readers/viewers behind the scenes of your journalistic
process
*Provides more depth and perspective to your reporting
*Draws your readers/viewers deeper into the issue by providing them an interactive
way to participate in what you’ve done
‐‐Always ask yourself if the data could cause any public harm and weigh that against the
benefits. If there would be harm, is there a way to minimize it while still serving the public
interest?
2. Think big and think creative!
3. Less @ first, more @ last
4. Think user‐friendly!
‐‐Can your mom use it?
‐‐Cut the jargon. Show how to use database and benefits of using it.
5. Does your database simply support your story – or will it be the story?
6. Promote and cross‐promote in print, online, broadcast.
‐‐Create awareness and buzz over the data
7. The more (relative databases) the merrier.
‐‐Think about mixing data sources (like crime and census data) to help viewers better
understand what they’re seeing and what to search for.
8. Disclaimers

“MOTIVATING” GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO CREATE ELECTRONIC DATA
1. Micro approach
‐‐Develop a “data relationship” with the agency
‐‐“Don’t make me do it” approach
2. Macro approach
‐‐Work to change public records laws, attitudes and policies

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

