Finding the right spigot
on American FactFinder
Revised for NICAR National Conference, Indianapolis, March 19-22, 2009
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427
Opening factfinder.census.gov can be intimidating. It’s a wonderful tool, but sometimes it’s hard to know where
to start or which way to go. It’s like one of those Leatherman tools that offer 37 blades, screwdrivers, punches,
files, augers, openers and all kinds of gadgets you can’t figure out.
So let’s simplify. Think of American FactFinder as a big tank that dispenses data through all different kinds of
pipes and spigots. Sometimes you want just a drop or two, sometimes a steady drip, sometimes an open faucet and
sometimes a firehose. Mist? Wide spray? Tight stream? This is a tour of AFF’s valves.
Where to go when you want:
-- Just 1 number – the population of some place or other.
Click on the “Population finder” link in the upper-right corner of the home page.
The page that loads is preset for the United States, but look again in the upper right -it’s ready to look up any city, county or ZIP, or to feed you any state off a dropdown.

It even offers, with one more click, to let you search by
address.
This returns the population for the smallest named place
that address sits in, but that’s not all.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

At top left, you can see links for no fewer
than five other geographical levels, from the
nation down to census tract. (A census tract is
like a neighborhood, but its boundary is set by
the Census Bureau. It’s typically about 1,500
households and 4,000 people.)
Lower, you see links to related data for all
N.J. towns and even two population density
maps for the place you looked up. Here’s one of
them:

--

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Just a quick capsule – a snapshot or profile.
This is a rundown on lots of basic demographics
about a place. This is what you want in hand when you
go parachuting into a place you’ve never been. It’s right
there in the most prime spot on the home page – top left
corner of the content section. Type the name of the city,
county or ZIP into the “Fact Sheet” search box or use
the state dropdown.
Here’s just a piece of what results for Bridgewater
Township, N.J:

Notice the “show more” links.
-- Just one breakdown (table) for all the (pick one) counties/cities/census tracts in your (pick one)
state/county/city.
Here’s where you need to navigate into the heart of AFF. On the home page, click in the left column of links on
the one that says “Data sets” and choose one. Let’s use “Decennial census” since not all products for the American
Community Survey have been published
yet. By default, “Census 2000 Summary
File 1” is selected on the page that loads.
On the following page, we can fan out in
different directions – let’s look around a
minute. Note:
-- Tabs at page top to let us switch quickly
to the 1990 Census.
-- Five links to background and
documentation on Census 2000.
-- Other Census 2000 data sets.
-- Nine different links into SF-1 data.
Now let’s push on into the data. Click
on “List all tables” toward the bottom of
the right column. On the page that loads,
scroll to and pick “P1. Total population”
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

and click “Next.” On the page that loads,
ignore the geographical choices and look
instead at the tabs across the top of the
page.
Over at the right, click on the
mysterious one that says “geo in geo.”
This lets you choose all of the
geographic areas contained by some larger
geographic area – “geo in geo.” The limit
is 7,000, so it would let you pull data for
all 3,141 U.S. counties, but I don’t
recommend it. It takes a while. (See below for a different spigot to do that.) Instead, it’s great for pulling in one
quick step all of the:
-- Census tracts in a county.
-- Counties in a state.
-- Cities in a state.
-- American Indian reservations in the United States.
Here’s what the option screen looks like:

The top
dropdown lets
you choose
many “all of”
geographical
levels, right
down to census
blocks, the
atoms of the
census universe.
Choosing an
item from this
list reloads the
page to reset the
available
“within” options
in the second
dropdown. From
there, you can
click “Add” to
push your
choices into the
“Current
geography
selections” box
at the bottom.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

-- Just give it to me straight.
All the spigots above produce results you can digest with your eyes, or a simple downloaded spreadsheet.
There’s lots of formatting on the screen or the spreadsheet to give the data context and make it easier to read and
understand.
But if you want lots of data, AFF has big pipes, too. Right on the main page, look for the link in the left column
called “Download center.” This opens a page where you can choose a dataset and then a geographic level and scope
– all 50 states, or all the census tracts in a county, etc. Then you can pick up to 50 tables from some data sets and all
the tables from data sets with summary files. (A summary file is data jerky – nothing but protein and fiber. It’s a
rectangle of nothing but data, precisely formatted and useable only with elaborate external documentation.)
If we pick the 2000 Census Summary File 1 (SF-1), here’s what we see. The first choice is all that’s available
for American
Community
Survey, but a test
version of an
ACS summary
file was released
in January.
Eventually, ACS
should have
several versions
of its own all-data
file like these.
In our
example, picking
“All the places in
a state) and “All
detailed tables”
shifts the page to
prompt us to pick
a state from a
dropdown list. If
we pick “N.J.,” a
new page tells us,
“You have selected all tables for All Places in New Jersey (505 geographies)” and prompts us to download them.
Doing so captures a zipped set of ASCII files that are ready for processing.
-- Just gimme it all. (Please.)
Finally, you can use a couple links scattered around
AFF to get to the really big data pipes. They are
analogous to “Pull around back to the loading dock.”
It’s not pretty back there and you need to know what
you’re doing once two tons of raw data lands on your
hard drive. One link is fairly prominent – one click off
the AFF home page. Click on “Data sets” and on the
page that loads, look over at the far right under “other
resources.” If you need this much Census data, ditch the browser and get a Windows FTP program such as
WS_FTP or BulletProof FTP. They can simplify and automate such operations.
Once you’ve gotten some basic routes through AFF down pat, you’ll feel more comfortable exploring new trails.
Try a new trail every couple weeks so that when you’re on deadline, you’ll know how to get exactly where you
need. The links down the left side of the home page are good jumping-off points.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

