Finding and downloading data online
Prepared for NICAR National Conference
Indianapolis, March 19-22, 2009
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427
With more data online each year, it’s not surprising that new downloading tools appear all the time. But it does
mean that you should frequently try to learn new ways to find and download data. That way, you’ll know the right
tool and how to use it for each opportunity – or deadline emergency.
This lesson is mostly about downloading, not finding. How to find data is a part of how to search, a subject
about which entire books have been written. Just a couple quick favorites:
-- Google search using the “filetype:” operator, somewhat like this:
filetype:xls site:nj.gov/transportation
You can use any common data file type – csv, dat, txt. This is a good way to poke around in the closets of your
favorite government agency for data that has just been left lying around. Yes, it’s legal!
-- Look at where data enters a government agency – the forms people fill out, either on paper or online. Every
blank or conbination of blanks is fodder for analysis if you can get the data. Pet license example: Spayed dogs by
neighborhood by breed?
-- The same applies at the other end -- look at data that comes out of the agency. Often, it’s summary statistics
in an annual report, especially if they make the agency look good, like a rising caseload. But what about caseload
per staffer?
How you actually download data depends on how much data you need and its form.
Opening a web page in Excel
If it’s a single table that takes up most of a simple
web page, you can just open the file in Excel. This
web page from the Bureau of Justice Statistics is a
good example. Its structure betrays regular HTML
coding that Excel can digest easily. Just copy the
web page address from your browser to the
clipboard. Then, in Excel, choose File|Open, paste
the address into the box called “File Name” and hit
“Enter.” (Do it often enough and you’ll learn the
keyboard sequence: Control-C, Control-O, ControlV, Enter)
Excel, recognizing a web address, passes it to the
browser and says, “Hey, go get this file for me.”
When the file arrives, Excel looks for the table
coding and slices it up.
Here’s the result
in Excel:

From this point, it’s simple to copy the data to another worksheet. Sometimes you will need to work a little harder
by stripping the rest of the page elements away from the data.
This also works for plain old text files stored as web pages. Their addresses often end in “*.csv” or “*txt.” Like
this: http://www.census.gov/popest/metro/files/2007/CBSA-EST2007-alldata.csv. Here is what Excel does with it:
You can always download files like this and use
Excel to find and open them. When you do, a *csv
usually opens immediately but a *.txt.file triggers
Excel’s Text Import wizard, which gives you more
control – such as column skipping and formatting
(see below). If you want or need all the data,
however, simply spooning the web address into
Excel’s File|Open mouth is usually faster and neater.

Excel web query
Often, a web page is much more complicated. It’s a mix of text, graphics, and lots of little tables – and you only
need one of them. In cases like this, it’s a good idea to learn how to use Excel’s built-in web query tool.

With an Excel file open, go to Data|Import External Data|New Web Query. That opens a browser window within
Excel. Paste into that browser’s address bar the address of the page that holds the data you want. In the example
below, I’ve loaded a page from the U.S. Senate’s Office of Public Records.
You can see that the
browser window is
marking the upper left
corner of the tables
coded into this web
page with little yellow
arrows. Clicking on one
of the arrows turns it
green and tells Excel
the range of the data
you’d like to grab.
Then just click on the
“Import” button.

Excel loads the table, often perfectly. In this
case, it parsed some of the table coding as
interlaced “gray line” rows between the actual
rows of data. This is easy to dump by sorting and
deleting.
This isn’t just any old Excel worksheet. Excel
has stored the basic instructions for where to go
and what to grab. Right-click anywhere on the
data and you’ll get a pop-up menu that lets you
set several options, including naming and storing
what you just did for reuse.
This is handy if you have to import something
every week. It’s priceless if you can hook it up
on Election Night to a web page where your
county is posting live results.

Big downloads in a hurry
Sometimes you need data
immediately and it’s on the
other side of town or the
state, sitting in the computer
of someone who’s willing to
send it but just doesn’t know
how. It’s too big for her email system or yours, or your
source doesn’t know how to
compress it or split it. You
know your IT folks use an
FTP site but they are all busy
or off-site. This is a good
time to use Web-based file
transfer services. One
example is YouSendIt.com,
which offers a free service
for files up to to 100
megabytes and subscription
plans for larger ones. Just tell your source to go to the site, register and upload the file. For a few bucks, she can
even password-protect it and get a return receipt.
.
Downloading in bulk
The state education department is releasing its annual standardized test score data. On release day, you click to
the web page and find you will have to download 177 files, one for each grade of each school that you cover. Do
you enlist everyone in the newsroom to start clicking and saving? Firefox has several add-ons that can automate
this. One is DownThemAll! (https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/201) It simply finds every link in the
webpage you’re on and grabs the underlying web page or file.
In this example, a page on the New Jersey state government
website lists the home page of just about all of the state’s 565
towns, townships, boroughs and other local governments.
With DownThemAll! installed, a right-click on the page brings
up its menu (below).

It offers a variety of filters and ways to steer and rename the
incoming files. In this case, 630 web pages took less than 3 minutes.

FTP
Deep under the glittery city of the World Wide Web run the big pipes and tanks of the Old Internet – File
Transfer Protocol sites. When you need a few thousand files or the same file downloaded every five minutes or
once a week, an FTP client is a good solution. Most browsers can connect to an FTP site for simple stuff, and you
can choose from half a dozen FTP add-ons to Firefox (check out FireFTP). However, if you do a lot of file-hauling,
consider an FTP client like WS_FTP or Bulletproof FTP (Windows) or Fetch (Macintosh). They offer free trials
and prices of $30 to $40.
Network administrators may balk at letting you use an FTP client because it’s another hole in the firewall that
has to be watched and protected. You may need to make special arrangements to install and operate an FTP client.
Depending on how your network is set up, there are several ways to strike the necessary balance between security
and utility.

