1

2009 CAR National Conference

(National Institute for Computer­Assisted Reporting)
Indianapolis, Ind.
March 19­22, 2009

“CAR in the Classroom”
Dan Close, Wichita State University
Brant Houston, University of Illinois
Gerry Lanosga, Indiana University
Suzanne McBride, Columbia College (Chicago)

Panel Description
A discussion of philosophies and practical approaches to teaching CAR.
We will talk about course conceptualization, teaching techniques, textbook selection,
creating individual and group projects, searching for and using spreadsheets and
databases, motivating students, the use of social networks, doing CAR on both a small and
large scale, and using CAR as a means instead of an end.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

2

CAR in My Classroom: A Professor Gets Schooled
Dan Close is an associate professor in the Elliott School of Communication at Wichita State
University. He has been a college teacher for 23 years. He was a reporter and editor at The
Wichita Eagle and other newspapers for 14 years. Close was a consultant for “Bind,
Torture, Kill: The Inside Story of the Serial Killer Next Door” (HarperCollins, 2007). This
spring he is doing his best to work on CAR stories with his Advanced Reporting course.

When I started doing journalism as a college student in the Midwest in the mid‐1970s, I
had a choice of working on a manual typewriter — or a manual typewriter. The only
computer we had was a cranky phototypesetting machine that transformed yellow ticker
tape into stories at the speed of Methuselah. No problem. That was the technology, and we
were glad to have it. Technology was not then a means to a story, it was merely a delivery
system for the finished product.
All good and decent reporters — then and now — pound shoe leather, cultivate sources,
and interview anyone willing to talk. You use your brain to make connections, and it
usually works pretty well. But back then, without the availability of local online databases,
or the technology to access them, it was in retrospect sometimes a tedious task to get The
Big Picture.
As a professional I went to IRE and SPJ conferences in the 1980s and 1990s, but I never
worked in a newsroom that had the technology or desire to advance beyond that 19th‐
century model of reporting. So over the years I kept on walking and reading and talking,
getting stories the old‐fashioned way. Sorting through hundreds of yellow “flimsies” to
connect a pattern of robberies that the cops wouldn’t talk about. Chatting up courthouse
clerks to get “public” autopsy reports that the sheriff didn’t want released; turns out they’d
botched a murder investigation. Spending six months with another reporter researching

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

3
the state’s water crisis, including wading through geologist’s reports, ancient meeting
minutes and long‐forgotten studies.
So I came to CAR late. Last summer, I took a one‐week CAR Boot Camp. The idea was to
train me to train my students in a full‐blown CAR course. The course was well‐taught, and I
should have been an excellent student. But what seemed effortless to others rushed by me
in a blur. I wasn’t used to the formulas and the software. I was frustrated at my inability to
keep up and wondered whether I’d ever be able to teach this stuff.
I had done some legwork before arriving in Columbia. I had downloaded and read two
dozen syllabi from experienced CAR teachers. I had downloaded NICAR tip sheets. I had
read a couple of books. But now I felt more lost than wise.
It almost came as a blessing when my director said that I was needed elsewhere this
spring, and that the CAR course was off the books. From the Boot Camp, I found out that I
couldn’t write SQL that well. I could barely keep up with the basic exercises on cleaning
dirty data. I had never heard of ArcView and still can’t tell you more than it’s a “relational
database” often used to interpret campaign spending reports. We never touched SPSS,
which was just as well, because my academic pursuits have always angled toward the
qualitative instead of the quantitative. And did I mention that I flunked algebra the first
time I took it in college? I knew I was failing, but didn’t know that I could drop the class.
What an idiot.
But back to now. I wasn’t entirely ready to abort the mission. What I had visualized as a
16‐week course dedicated to CAR became a six‐week segment inside an Advanced
Reporting class that I had inherited. This seemed a bit more manageable. We started this
semester working on a major piece for the course that I call Death and Dying. Briefly, the

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

4
D&D story is an in‐depth profile of someone who has a terminal illness and is not long for
this world. Students have long‐form interviews with the subject and their friends, relatives
and caregivers. The idea is to paint a picture of a person struggling through their triumphs
and tragedies. The stories are rich in narrative, anecdotes, history, personality and color.
Students conduct research on the illness and its impact on the individual and society. The
story requires time, tact, and the ability to write a sophisticated, nuanced profile.
There are other assignments, exercises and reports. But the other major piece my 14
students are working on is simply called the CAR Story. It is to be an investigative‐style
story based primarily on database library and online searches, supplemented by interviews
and other traditional reportage. The goal is to ferret out a “hidden” story and write a piece
that helps people better understand their world.
On the plus side, some things have worked well. The local paper, The Wichita Eagle,
recently has gotten more involved in CAR and that’s helped the class and me. Some of its
searchable databases are cute and simple, such as ones that allow readers to find out how
popular their names are and the most common breeds of local dogs. Others are more
practical: Tracking crime trends, searching for hazardous intersections, finding out how
school districts rate, learning how much public employees make, keeping score on nearby
casinos, and finding out where the worst potholes are (potholes are a huge problem in
Wichita, secondary in importance only to how the aircraft industry is doing). Most
important, the paper has a catchall category listing hundreds of other public databases and
reports, everything from restaurant inspections to racial profiling reports.
(http://www.kansas.com/news/databases/)
By looking at these examples, students were getting an appreciation for what CAR can

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

5
do. I was able to acquire some original source data used by the paper and have students
practice on them, creating their own “stories.” I have also been able to use some of the data
from the CAR workshop last August to walk my students through the same exercises I did.
And I have sought out sites on my own, and had students download data and manipulate it.
I also talked to them about some CAR resources that I have found helpful:
• “Computer‐Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide,” Brant Houston, 3rd Ed., 2004
• “The Investigative Reporter’s Handbook: A Guide to Documents, Databases and
Techniques,” Brant Houston and Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc., 5th Edition, 2009
• “Precision Journalism: A Reporter’s Introduction to Social Science Methods,” Philip
Meyer, 4th Ed., 2002
• nicar.org
• ire.org
• powerreporting.com
• reporter.org/desktop/
• journalism.org
• poynter.org
• regrettheerror.org
• aim.org
But there were limitations to their CAR mini‐projects. First, we’re all about the high‐end
Macs at our school. We are a school of communication, not journalism, and most of our
grads will go into the creative side of advertising and public relations. I know — journalists
aren’t the only ones who need to do database research. The point is, due to budget issues,
we are limited to Excel on Macs instead of Access on PCs. I’m afraid I don’t yet have the

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

6
know‐how to tap into other options.
Notice also that I categorized their CAR story as “investigative‐style.” That’s a hedge
phrase that I have used in case time constraints keep them from completing something
more detailed than I would like. It’s a good thing it’s there, because some students are
struggling to find a story within the simple framework I have given them. Several weeks
ago I asked them to began looking for a CAR story on one of these three broad topics:
• Alcohol use by college students
• Crime and violence on college campuses
• The job outlook for graduating college students
Students were asked to write a memo selecting one of the topics, discussing some
major directions/angles the story could take, listing specific online sites where good
databases were available for their topic, listing a dozen people who might need to be
interviewed, and discussing why they selected the topic and what benefits their story
would have for readers or viewers (there are also broadcast students in the class).
The emphasis was on specificity, but what I have received in return are some of the
most confused, generic story budgets I’ve ever seen. What went wrong? The first answer
seemed obvious. I had been broad, so their responses were, too. Yet, in other courses most
of these students had done far better planning. We had already spent weeks talking about
CAR, so they had a base of knowledge. In talking to the class, I learned that fear of the
unknown — using the modest science of CAR to elevate their stories — was the main
reason for their lack of motivation.
They also don’t care much for my decision to create the class schedule as we go, a few
weeks in advance, which I thought was one of the more clever ideas I took from several of

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

7
the syllabi. But mostly it was fear of being “forced” to tackle the unknown, resentment at
being taken out of their comfort zone, and like me, frustration at not being able to do it well
immediately.
That was not a good day in class. Like me and my typewriter (yes, I was the guy they
literally had to pry off my Selectric to install a primitive VDT) they are clinging to old‐
school ways. I have been kicking myself and my colleagues for not bridging the gap earlier.
Many of the students in class are seniors, but they have not been exposed to this kind of
reporting. Our students get lots of cross‐training in communication — broadcast folks
know how to write press releases, print people can pen TV commercials, and everyone can,
unfortunately, Facebook — so I thought that most would be comfortable dealing with data.
But there’s a big difference between going on the Internet for Finding Fun Facts and
navigating it using relatively unfamiliar CAR approaches. To professional journalists, CAR is
a necessity and there is a paycheck and a job hanging over your head, not to mention
professional pride. In a classroom, a grade and pride sometimes are not enough.
Some regrets: Not assigning them a basic CAR textbook. Not preparing myself
adequately to explain every question that comes my way. Not providing exposure to as
many resources as I could have. Taking too long to realize that I can’t do it all myself and
that I need to bring in experienced CAR reporters and editors to further educate and
entertain them, not necessarily in that order.
But it’s only March 22, and their stories aren’t due until May 11. So there’s time for
them to learn a bit more about CAR, and time for me to learn a whole lot more about how to
teach it.
###

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

