THE YEAR IN CAR

The Seattle Times
Data: Zillow sales data,
King County assessor’s data
Findings: Zillow.com found that 29 percent of homes in the Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue
area sold at a loss during the final three months of 2008. And a Seattle Times analysis
shows that early summer of 2005 was the tipping point. Sellers hardest hit were those
who bought in the first three months of 2007. If they sold their homes in the fourth
quarter of 2008, they typically lost more than $100,000. The opposite was true for
those who bought homes early in 2000. They walked away with a median appreciation
of about $200,000 if they sold at the end of last year.

(Sarasota) Herald-Tribune
Data: A shipping database
obtained from the Port Import
Export Reporting Service, or
PIERS, the primary source of
U.S. waterborne import-export
trade data. The company
maintains individual records
taken directly from ships'
manifests.
Findings: At least 550 million
pounds of Chinese drywall have
come into the United States
since 2006. With that quantity,
you could construct 60,000
average-size homes. The
material has been linked to
health problems and corrosion
caused by gas emitted from the
drywall.

National Public Radio
Data: Proposition 8 contribution
data, California secretary of state
Findings: Teachers, aides and
counselors in California public
school systems gave about $2 to
support the marriage ban for every
$1 they gave to oppose it. The
educators gave some $450,000 in
individual contributions to
advocates supporting the ban and
about $210,000 to those opposing
it, according to the NPR analysis.
Proposition 8 passed on Nov. 4,
overturning a California Supreme
Court decision that allowed samesex marriages in the nation's most
populous state.

Houston Chronicle
Data: Texas Ethics Commission records;
produced searchable database
Findings: Lobbyists have spent at least $12.8
million in the last four years wining and
dining Texas lawmakers and other state
workers — including thousands of dollars for
trips to a Ritz-Carlton lodge in Georgia, a
resort in British Columbia and the Hyatt
Regency in Lake Tahoe. Since 2005, they
have doled out more than $3.5 million
directly on state senators and
representatives — and another $3.8 million
on lawmakers’ staffs.

The Washington Post
Data: D.C. school data, national test scores
for economically distressed students
Findings: Disadvantaged students in
charter schools are outscoring their
counterparts in public schools.

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Data: Standard-deviation analysis of
Georgia standardized test scores by
school; produced searchable
database
Findings: Atherton Elementary’s
unlikely performance was one of a
handful the AJC uncovered by
analyzing student scores on the CRCT
and retest. The surges were so far
outside the norm they raise
questions about whether those
schools’ retest scores are valid. As a
result, the findings also suggest
some schools that relied on the
retest to reach academic goals might
not have met federal standards.

The News-Journal (Wilmington, Del.)
Data: Internal Revenue Service, Delaware
State Fire School, National Fire Incident
Reporting System, Emergency Operations
Centers
Findings: The state's 60 volunteer fire
companies failed to meet National Fire
Protection Association response-time
standards in at least 900 structure fires over
four years, according to an analysis by The
News Journal. That's one out of every six fires
statewide and one of every five fires in urban
areas like northern New Castle County.

The Columbus Dispatch
Data: State Fire Marshal
data
Findings: The National
Fire Protection
Association wants
departments to get to a
fire within six minutes, 90
percent of the time. Only
two of 84 departments in
the region -- Grandview
Heights and Lancaster -met that standard,
according to a Dispatch
analysis of more than
14,000 runs to building
fires between 2003 and
2007.

CBS-4 in Miami
Data: More than 7,000 paper inspection reports.
Findings: Many day-care centers in metropolitan South Florida have operated for years
without complying with state safety standards. IRE/NICAR’s Database Library staff
assisted the Channel 4 I-Team with analysis of the reports, which were entered into a
computer database, and the creation of an interactive map and search tool.

The Tulsa World
Data: USDA Farm Subsidy database, Federal Elections Commission database
Findings: An investigation by Gavin Off of the Tulsa World revealed serious issues in the
allocation of farm subsidy dollars. By cross-referencing two databases, he found “more
than 100 lawyers and dozens of doctors, teachers, car salesmen and insurance agents
have received U.S. Department of Agriculture farm subsidy payments in recent years.
Some have received more than $500,000 or about $42,000 a year since the mid-1990s.”

St. Petersburg Times
Data: Property sales records
Findings: An automated site scrapes property
sales data throughout the region and
produces maps, charts and short “stories” on
the fly.

The Journal Gazette (Fort Wayne, Ind.)
Data: Allen County voter registrations, Florida Secretary of State records
Findings: The analysis found that 2,172 voters in Indiana’s Allen County had names
and birthdates identical to those in Florida. Duplicates were examined by hand. Middle
names or initials that did not match were automatically thrown out. “Of the 2,172
matching names and birth dates, seven voted in both the Florida primary in January
and the May primary in Indiana.”

CTV British Columbia and ESRI Canada
Data: Parking tickets issued in Vancouver
Findings: Residential areas and zones without meters seem to be places you can leave
your car without risking a ticket, according to an analysis of parking tickets in
Vancouver. But if you park in some commercial zones or downtown -- including top
ticketing spot Robson and Burrard -- watch out.

The Seattle Times
Data: Defense Dept. bill, campaign
contributions; includes searchable
database
Findings: An in-depth examination of
the 2008 defense bill found $8.5 billion
in earmarks. Of those, 40 percent —
$3.5 billion — were hidden. And
Congress broke its pledge to cut
earmarks in half. People who benefit
from earmarks generally give money to
those who deliver them: Of the nearly
500 companies identified as getting
2007 defense earmarks, 78 percent
had employees or political action
committees who made campaign
contributions to Congress in the past six
years.

ABC 15 in Phoenix
Data: Arizona Department of
Public Safety inspection records
Findings: More than 16,000
inspection records showed that
more than 220 school buses
were pulled off the road in the
last two years alone for major
violations involving damaged
tires. The station found tires
with chunks of missing rubber,
huge gashes, even signs of
separation - where the tread is
literally starting to come off.
The state of Arizona requires
annual inspections, but the
Department of Public Safety
only has five inspectors to cover
the entire state and its more
than 8,000 school buses.

The New York Times
Data: Campaign filings with the Federal
Election Commission
Findings: Nearly 3,000 donations to
Barack Obama, the Democratic
nominee, came from more than a
dozen people with apparently fictitious
donor information. The contributions
represent a tiny fraction of the record
$450 million Mr. Obama has raised.
But the questionable donations —
some donors were listed simply with
gibberish for their names — raise
concerns about whether the Obama
campaign is adequately vetting its
unprecedented flood of donors. For
example, someone using the name
“Test Person,” from “Some Place, UT,”
made a series of contributions to
Obama totaling $2,410.07.

The Houston Chronicle
Data: Texas state payroll data
Findings: State senators may be
violating a Texas Constitution ban
on using taxpayer money for
bonuses to government workers by
approving temporary end-of-year
raises to give staffers thousands of
dollars in extra pay. In the last two
years, state senators have given
senior staffers scores of temporary
pay increases, effectively issuing
bonuses totaling more than
$650,000. The records, obtained
under the Texas Public Information
Act, show a clear pattern in many
Senate offices in which salaries are
inflated as the end of the state's
fiscal year approaches, only to be
reduced a month or two later.

Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Data: Monthly “standards of
efficiency” disciplinary records
from the county 911 center
Findings: The staff of Fulton
County’s 911 center has
caused scores of mistakes in
recent years that at times
endangered those seeking
help and the emergency crews
sent to provide aid. A review of
nearly five years of call-center
disciplinary records reveals
instances of insubordination,
fighting, sleeping on the job,
tardiness and absenteeism.
Dispatchers who are required
to meet monthly standards of
efficiency often failed to meet
them.

Louisville Courier-Journal
Data: Metropolitan Sewer
District data and records
Findings: In addition to raw
sewage being dumped into
Beargrass Creek and its
branches, the waterway is
in peril because of physical
changes and urban runoff.
Bacteria from sewage and
natural sources have long
made the creek's water
unsafe for recreational
activities such as fishing
and swimming, especially
during and shortly after a
rain. Those who dare play in
it risk skin infections and
bacterial gastrointestinal
diseases.

EveryBlock
Data: Hyperlocal data sets
Findings: Users can hone in on their
neighborhood for a wealth of local data

Scripps Howard News Service
Data: Center for Disease Control's Multiple Cause of Death Index
Findings: The records of 40,000 infant deaths cast deep doubt on claims of medical
authorities that cases of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome have fallen by more than half
since the 1990s. The investigation of infant deaths going back to 1992 revealed that
the quality of infant death investigations, the level of training for coroners, and the
amount of oversight and review vary enormously across the country. In many cases,
professional bias -- both for and against a diagnosis of SIDS -- trumps medical evidence.
The sloppy investigations and muddled records come with a very high price: the deaths
of more babies who might have been saved through medical research.

The Kansas City Star
Data: National Fatality Analysis
Reporting System (the National
Highway Traffic Safety
Administration)
Findings: At least 1,400 drivers
and front-seat passengers died
from 2001 through 2006 in
front-impact crashes involving
vehicles whose airbags — smart
or otherwise — never deployed.
Analyzing a database of all
traffic fatalities over a six-year
period, the newspaper
discovered that far more people
had died from wrecks where
airbags didn’t deploy than all of
those who died from injuries
caused by airbags that fired too
easily or too forcefully.

CBS Atlanta
Data: U.S. Food and Drug
Administration inspection records
Findings: A CBS Atlanta News
investigation has found dozens of
Georgia mammogram facilities
are operating after being cited for
serious Level One violations that
the Food and Drug Administration
said may have a detrimental
effect on patient's quality of care.
It took months to get FDA
inspection records that many of
the facilities do not want you to
see. The violations range from
everything from failing to prove
doctors are board certified, state
licensed, or even qualified to
read mammograms, to
equipment failing crucial quality
control tests.

The Philadelphia Inquirer
Data: Arrest records, court records
Findings: In area towns, nuisance
laws result in a disproportionate
number of arrests of African
Americans, often by nearly allwhite police forces. Many police
chiefs across the suburbs say
nuisance laws are an
indispensable tool in their quest to
rid the streets of serious criminals;
they say many of those arrested
have long records for drug dealing
or violence. They insist that they do
not target offenders by race. But
these aggressive tactics, employed
in largely minority neighborhoods,
mean that African Americans are
arrested for nuisance offenses far
more frequently than whites.

The New York Times
Data: U.S. Railroad Retirement Board data
Findings: Virtually every career employee at the Long Island
Rail Road — as many as 97 percent in one recent year —
applies for and gets disability payments soon after
retirement. Since 2000, about a quarter of a billion dollars
in federal disability money has gone to former L.I.R.R.
employees, including about 2,000 who retired during that
time. The disability rate suggests it is one of the nation’s
most dangerous places to work. Yet in four of the last five
years, the railroad has won national awards for improving
worker safety.

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Data: City street repair data
Findings: The paper analyzed more than 11,000 pothole fixes in the city of Milwaukee
and found that the city repaired potholes at a slower rate in minority neighborhoods.
Using SPSS, the analysis found that minority areas on the north side were waiting
significantly longer for repairs. Even major arterials in minority neighborhoods took
longer to repair than problems in largely white residential neighborhoods.

Dallas Morning News
Data: State and federal
dam data, Census data
Findings: Suburban
sprawl has encroached
on hundreds of dams in
Texas that were once in
remote locations –
including dozens in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area.
At least 554 of Texas's
roughly 5,800 lowhazard dams are now in
areas where the
population has more
than doubled since
1990. In addition, many
of the dams in Texas
classified as high
hazard do not have
specific emergency
action plans.

Center for Public Integrity
Data: 10 years’ worth of adverse-reaction reports filed with the Environmental
Protection Agency by pesticide manufacturers
Findings: Pyrethrins and pyrethroids — used in thousands of supposedly “safer”
pesticides — accounted for more than 26 percent of all fatal, “major,” and “moderate”
human incidents reported to the EPA in 2007. Based on information from the previously
unreleased EPA pesticide incident-reporting system, this investigation spurred the
director of the EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs to announce the agency would begin
a broad study of the human health effects.

USA Today
Data: EPA Toxic Release Inventory data, U.S. Department of Education’s Common Core
of Data
Findings: Using the government's most up-to-date model for tracking toxic chemicals,
USA TODAY spent eight months examining the impact of industrial pollution on the air
outside schools across the nation. The result: a ranking of 127,800 public, private and
parochial schools based on the concentrations and health hazards of chemicals likely to
be in the air outside.

WSMV-TV in Nashville
Data: Court records, gun registrations
Findings: The I-Team found, again and again,
people convicted of abuse and men banned
from being near women in Davidson County
allowed by the state to keep their handgun
carry permits. They received their gun
permits before the incidents and kept them
despite what happened in court.

The (Toronto) Star
Data: Royal Canadian
Mounted Police arrest
records, federal prison data,
provincial jail records
Findings: The newspaper
explored the state of crime
and punishment in Canada,
including the social costs of
mandatory minimum
sentences. The research
includes never-beforereleased criminal data
obtained through three
freedom of information
requests, including one that
took 2 1/2 years and
required the intervention of
the information
commissioner.

Las Vegas Sun
Data: Drug Enforcement Administration reports on the state-by-state distribution of
controlled substances to pharmacies and health care practitioners.
Findings: Nevadans consume about twice the national average of several prescription
painkillers, making us among the most narcotic-addled populations in the United States,
a Sun analysis has found. The consequences are deadly. More people in Clark County die
of prescription narcotics overdoses than of overdoses of illicit drugs or from vehicle
accidents.

The Salt Lake Tribune
Data: Utah Department of Health inspections
Findings: The public has no easy way to
identify who owns Utah’s nursing homes,
particularly when names are changed to hide
a troubled past. The paper’s analyzed
inspection records from 2000 to 2007. Such
name changes are nearly impossible to track
since the Utah Department of Health keeps
incomplete ownership data, none of which is
publicly accessible. Only those who visit a
nursing home can review its most recent
inspection report. The Tribune spent hundreds
of hours mining data obtained through open
records requests to compile an eight-year
history of compliance for every nursing home
in the state.

The Arizona Daily Star (Tucson)
Data: The Star compiled a database of more
than 3 million records of student grade data
from eight Tucson-area school districts.
Findings: Thousands of Tucson-area middle
and high school students who fail key
subjects continue to progress through Pima
County's largest school districts every year
toward graduation, a 10-month investigation
has found. In the 2006-07 school year alone,
nine in 10 students were moved to the next
grade level, but data show that nearly a third
of them failed basic courses in English, math,
science or social studies. At least 94,000
students failed essential classes during the
past six years.

The Washington Post
Data: Small Business Administration loan data
Findings: U.S. government agencies made at least $5 billion in mistakes in their recent
reports of contracts awarded to small businesses, with many claiming credit for awards to
companies that long ago outgrew the designation or never qualified in the first place. The
Post examined a sampling of the $89 billion in contracts the agencies classified as smallbusiness awards.

Gannett News Service
Data: Enforcement and compliance records compiled by the EPA and state regulators
from January 2003 to February 2008.
Findings: America's aging sewer systems continue to dump human waste into rivers
and streams, despite years of fines and penalties targeting publicly owned agencies
responsible for sewage overflows. An analysis of Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) data found that since 2003, hundreds of municipal sewer authorities have been
fined for violations, including spills that make people sick, threaten local drinking
water and kill aquatic animals and plants.

KIRO-TV (Seattle)
Data: More than 5,000 RV accident, safety
and mechanical deficiency reports in two
databases: Fatality Analysis Reporting
System and National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration data
Findings: Braking problems, collapsing
walls and poorly secured cabinets: These
are the RV industry's deadliest secrets. The
station spent months analyzing hundreds of
fatal luxury motor home crashes both
nationwide and in the Pacific Northwest.

South Florida Sun Sentinel
Data: Florida Department of
Environmental Protection
records
Findings: Forty-three percent of
underground fuel storage
tanks in South Florida are out
of compliance with a state law
requiring gas stations and
other owners to upgrade their
facilities. The law approved by
the Legislature 18 years ago
requires a double-walled
system for underground
storage tanks by 2009.
Thousands of outmoded
storage tanks could pose risks
to water quality across the
region and state, putting more
strain on South Florida's
already stressed water
resources.

Pittsburgh Tribune Review
Data: United Network for
Organ Sharing data (national clearinghouse for organ transplants)
Findings: Hundreds of patients each year undergo liver transplants when they don't
need them, and possibly never will, a four-month investigation found. In the business of
transplants, aggressive centers have much to gain from doing surgeries on the least-ill
patients, and by pushing the limits on what kind of liver will work. Demand for livers
outstrips supply. Centers that find ways to use more organs for a deeper pool of
recipients can do more transplants. Those that do fewer transplants -- even if that's the
best medical decision -- leave money on the table.

The New York Times
Data: Previously undisclosed
data from the National
Collegiate Athletic
Association
Findings: Excluding the
glamour sports of football
and basketball, the average
N.C.A.A. athletic scholarship
is nowhere near a full ride,
amounting to $8,707. In
sports like baseball or track
and field, the number is
routinely as low as $2,000.
Even when football and
basketball are included, the
average is $10,409. Tuition
and room and board for
N.C.A.A. institutions often
cost between $20,000 and
$50,000 a year.

Pro Publica and partner newspapers
Data: State regulatory agencies,
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services
Findings: Psychiatric Solutions Inc. has
used acquisitions to become the
nation’s leading provider of private
mental-health care. Today, the Franklin,
Tenn.-based company runs almost one
in five freestanding psychiatric facilities
in the U.S. The growth comes against the
backdrop of continuing concern by state
and federal officials about PSI – patient
care, finances and general operations.

WHAT WILL YOU DO IN THE COMING YEAR?

 Get inspired
 Get story ideas
 Get hands-on training
 Get involved with the IRE community

