Visualization as a Reporting Tool

Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / cohensh@washpost.com

Some reporters think of graphics as a separate step in the reporting process – something to
be considered after the story is largely written and the rest of the art is complete. But
reporting with graphics can help throughout the story. The bonus is that it will make the
ending art much easier to compile and fact check.

Early Visual Exploration
Timelines, maps and “small multiples” of many similar graphics can help put your story in
perspective early on and highlight subjects, programs or regions to use as examples for
further reporting. The process will also point out holes or errors in your early reporting
much more efficiently than staring at numbers buried in text.
Some things to keep in mind during this early exploration:
•

Don’t obsess over precision in the figures in these early graphics. They should be
generally correct, but don’t worry if you have various levels of rounding for every
number, if they don’t add up to exactly 100% or if you are missing one year out of
20. This is part of the exploration process – you’ll still see the big trends and you’ll
know where you need to get more data for any final graphic you want to publish.

•

Look at the pictures in many different ways, including those that some people call
cheating. For example, you don’t care that your news organization bans charts that
don’t start at zero. If it helps you see patterns, use it. Some other techniques
include: Omitting scales and the labels on graphics, leaving only the general
impression. Or look at figures in their raw form, as a percent of total or per capita
arate, as a change or percent change or in logarithms or square roots. Each provides
a different view and each can be just as illuminating as the other. You might look at
geographic data by county, town, zip code or using polygons or points. You get a
different impression each time.

•

Use small multiples. Repeating the same image over and over on the same page or
screen becomes easy to read very quickly – once you learn to read one, you’ve
learned to read them all. This is advocated by Edward Tufte, who also came up with
a variation on it that he calls sparklines:
Without much text, small mutliples can be very small – say, an inch tall by maybe
three inches wide. (William Cleveland’s experiments showed that the eye perceives
change best when a graph’s line segments – or the implied ones between bars -average a slope of 45 degrees. It means that many charts will be most effective
when they are shorter and wider than we usually make them.)

•

Go through the entire history of your subject and begin making a document that has
all of the key events. At some point, you will find a dataset that you can use as a
background to this chronology. Figure out how far back you want to go. You will
collect many more items than you can possibly use in a chronology, but it will help
you figure out what you don’t know. You will also be able to put any significant

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

events into context.
•

Create chronologies of any significant case studies. I often do these on paper rather
than by computer. I use different colors for different types of events, like convictions
vs. crimes or contributions vs. lobbying. They make the writing process much easier.

•

Meet with your graphics department to brainstorm about graphics you will likely want
to use in the newspaper or online. It is much easier to report them out at the same
as you report the story than it is to start over once you’ve written a draft. It also
gives your artists more time to work on making them an interesting addition to the
package rather than a last-minute add-on.

Interactive explorations
The difficulty of building interactive explorations stops many reporters from trying them. But
interactive maps, timelines and their combinations can be among the most effective ways to
visualize the story and find the best examples.
Some tools for developing interactive are:
http://manyeyes.alphaworks.ibm.com provides templates for many common visualizations,
including simple maps, networks and treemaps. They are good for categorizations. The data
can be copied and pasted from a spreadsheet. Like other simple tools, there is no way to
drill back into very many details. But if you have many categories of information, it is a
quick way to summarize the data. It also has some rudimentary text visualizations,
including word clouds and text maps.
http://www.simile-widgets.org/exhibit/ is a project of MIT that lets you put together maps,
timelines and details. It’s a little difficult to understand and there isn’t much documentation
on it, but you can create some interesting visualizations. I’ve not used the maps, but the
timelines are pretty interesting – it’s something that is really difficult to do in other
software.
http://code.google.com/apis/chart/types.html Google Maps, Google Charts and Google
Analytics have programmable graphics that you can put on web pages. Unlike Google Maps,
the charts can be used completely internally. (Google maps requires a public-facing
website.) One type is a sparkline.
Lastly, if you have some programming skill, consider learning Actionscript for Flash – it’s
very similar to Javascript, and it does allow for some of the most sophisticated interactives
that your graphics department can then take and turn into a publishable interactive online.
It’s not really any more difficult than any other language. Your newsroom probably already
has several licenses for the very expensive development suite for your online and graphics
department.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

