Data negotiation
All you’ve gotta do is ask…

Daniel X. O’Neil, Everyblock
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE and NICAR
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Attitude
 Have a document state of

mind.
 Assume it’s public.
 Assume it’s free.
 Documents = databases.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Know the law when making requests
 Federal Freedom of Information Act – requests

made to federal agencies

 Indiana Access to Public Records Code –

requests made to government bodies/agencies
in state of Indiana.
 http://www.in.gov/legislative/ic/code/title5/ar14/c

h3.html

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

FOIA is your friend
Know the Law
http://www.rcfp.org/ogg/index.php

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Open or
closed?

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

What do they have?
 Ask for the document and/or data retention

schedule. http://www.in.gov/icpr/2766.htm
 Get a tour.
 Grab every blank form – both internal and
external – in all agencies you cover.
 Meet the document and data clerks and the IT
folks.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

What do they have?
 FOIA – Open records logs
 State and federal statutes
 State archives
 Appendix and footnotes to audits and reports
 Audits and reports created for legislative branch

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Ask for it
 Often requesting information is simple and fast
 You won’t know information exists if you don’t

ask
 Think creatively – beyond paper documents
(calendars, phone call logs, expenses, budgets,
etc.)
 Don’t assume information is closed – the
burden is on the government to prove this
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Talk to government officials
 Keep an open dialogue
 Do your best to work with them instead of

against them
 If they require an open records request get their
advice about the best way to write and submit
the request
 Respect their work and their time
 Continue working with them throughout the
process
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Requesting electronic records
 Know the law -

http://www.rcfp.org/elecaccess/
 Always request records in electronic format
whenever possible
 Formats: .xml, spreadsheet (.xls, .xlsx); text files
(delimited or fixed-width: .txt, .csv, .lst, etc.);
Access database (.mdb, .accdb); dBASE IV
(.dbf); etc
 We can handle it via email, CD, ftp, etc.
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

How to be successful
 Ask for the records
 Ask often – make open records requests a part

of your routine
 Use a template or a FOI letter generator

 http://www.rcfp.org/foi_letter/generate.php

 Be nice to government officials – even if they

aren’t nice to you

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.



Follow up requests with phone calls or emails



Keep a detailed log of your requests



Be persistent, but be patient whenever possible





If they won’t give you something make them tell you why the
information is not public (the specific exemption)
Did I mention ask for records?

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Common Excuses
 Too complicated
 The system can’t export data
 The key person is out on vacation
 The information isn’t public
 The records contain confidential information
 We don’t keep that information electronically
 If we give it to you, we’ll have to give it to

everyone

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

 We don’t like what you plan to do with it
 The system uses proprietary software
 We’ll give you some records, but not all of them
 Exorbitant costs

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

More Tactics in Searching
 Know the Web sites of the agencies you cover

better than anyone else
 Google Advanced Search-- limit to domain or
folder
 Search for .xls for sure
 Search for the word “data”, “database”, etc.
 Search on unique terms of art for the agency
(“zone check”, “Easy permit process”, etc.)
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Be an Omnivore
 Subscribe to every RSS feed you can find
 Sign up for any email alert-- you can always

unsubscribe if they end up being duds
 Do Google News Alerts on your topics and
keywords
 Make sure you do the “Comprehesive” search
and use the email option-- the RSS option has
less information
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Always Move Up The Chain
 Don't get stuck with PIO people
 Be respectful and try not to go over their heads

in a way that ruins relationships, but it's good to
make requests to the Commissioner/
Department Head/ responsible Deputy, etc.
 If you are rejected, ask to whom you should
appeal the decision
 Then do it, formally
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Try a Smaller Request
 If you are rejected for a “too much time to

respond” reason or something similar, try
making a smaller request for a limited time
period
 This can often reveal technologies, methods, or
data types that you can use to fashion the next
request

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Use Their Language/ Reports
 If you are rejected for a “we can't export that”

reason, ask how the Commissioner or Mayor or
other executive receives their information
 Get proper nouns-- “Weekly Mayoral
Construction Report” or “Green Light
Summary List” – whatever
 That way you just ask for that instead of
reverse-engineering a request
©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Some Examples
 Chicago Building Permits (“standing FOIA”)
 San Francisco Police Department data (waiting

for technology to catch up and being at the right
place at the right time)
 Miami-Dade Public Access (obscure agency who
are there to help)
 CMPD (huge data sets w/o a FOIA)

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

