1

Using Access 2007
Jaimi Dowdell
IRE and NICAR
jaimi@ire.org

If you’re trying to transition from Access 2003 to 2007, you’ve probably noticed that the most daunting
task is dealing with the new look and feel of the software. Although some new features have been
added, for the most part, the tools are the same in the new version. Access still runs queries the same
way; even file limitations were left unchanged. What has changed, though, is the interface.
Like all Office 2007 products, Access has introduced the Ribbon, but with Access they didn’t stop there.
The new Access is something that takes time to get used to. This handout will serve as a guide to
introduce you to Access 2007. Topics covered will include creating databases, importing data, running
queries, modifying tables, etc. Here’s a quick rundown of what’s new, what’s not and what’s gotten
better:
Note: Some of the differences listed below will be discussed in more detail later in this handout:
•

The interface has changed quite a bit. The menu items Microsoft has trained us so well
to use have been replaced by the sleeker, more modern “Ribbon” consisting of buttons
and tabs.

•

By default, Access 2007 saves files with the .accdb extension. If you or others want to
open a file in an earlier version, you need to use “Save As…” and select “Access 20022003 Database” or “Access 2000 Database.” Or, users can download a converter here:
http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?FamilyID=941b3470-3ae9-4aee8f43-c6bb74cd1466&DisplayLang=en

•

Even though most of the tools themselves haven’t changed, the way you get to them
may have. For example, you must now use the Ribbon to create a query, (select the
Create tab then “Query Design.”)

•

Multiple open objects appear as a series of tabs rather than windows overlapping one
another. This helps with organization. If you can’t bear the thought of the new tabbed
view, you can change settings back to the old way, (Select the Office Button, “Access
Options,” “Current Database,” “Overlapping Windows.”)

2
•

Users now have the ability to search within data and use Excel-style filtering on
columns. See Figure 1 below:

Click on the dropdown
arrow next to a field to
get the filtering
capabilities of Excel.

Type directly into the
“Search” box to find
the next occurrence of
specific text; this is
very similar to the Find
function.
Figure 1

•

Another feature Access borrowed from Excel is the ability to summarize values in a
datasheet. Without running a query, you can sum and count all the records in a field.
Just select the last row of a table with your mouse, and then under the Home tab select
“Totals.” Click in the field you want to total and use the dropdown menu that appears to
select what type of math you’ll do on the column. See Figure 2 below:

3

Figure 2

•

Dates have gotten fancier with the date picker. This calendar pops open whenever you
click on a date field or enter dates into a form or table:

•

Alternate row colors in datasheets help you keep your place.

•

Use the “Data collection” tool to create html forms you can send out via e-mail;
responses automatically populate a table. (Note: This requires Outlook 2007.)

•

Limitations on table size remain the same as Access 2003 at 2 gigabytes.

Figure 3

4
Getting started
If you open up an older version of Access, chances are you’ll get a screen like the one below. Most of us
have grown accustomed to this empty screen. Without any text or icons in the main body of the screen,
users had to begin by using the menu items across the top:

Figure 4

In Access 2007, this minimalist approach is gone. The “Getting Started” screen offers images, text and
links to additional information. See Figure 5 to get a better understanding of how to “get started” in the
new Access:
Click on the Office
Button to open an
existing database.

Click on this icon to
create a new, blank
database.

Access 2007
offers a long
list of
available
templates.

Figure 5

Find links to
online Access
help and
information

Look here to find
recently-used files or
browse to open other
ones.

5

Creating a new, blank database
Just like older versions of Access, the 2007 version requires that you either open an existing database or
create a new one in which to store all of your tables, queries, forms and more. To create a new
database, click on the icon in the Getting Started screen that says “Blank Database,” (see Figure 2), then
follow the instructions in Figure 6 below:

Click on the file folder to
navigate to the location where
you are going to save the new
database.
The file default file extension
for Access 2007 is .accdb. If
you want to be able to open
your database in an earlier
version save it as Microsoft
2000 or 2002-2003 .mdb
format. You can also
download a converter here:
http://www.microsoft.com/do
wnloads/details.aspx?FamilyI
D=941b3470-3ae9-4aee-8f43c6bb74cd1466&DisplayLang=
en
Click Create to finish.
Figure 6

Navigating the Ribbon interface
Once you’ve created a new database, your screen should look something like Figure 7. The most notable
difference found in all Office 2007 products is the change in user interface. Long gone are the days of
menus and dropdowns; the 2007 version of Access has an updated, sleeker model that combines tabs
and buttons. Microsoft calls this interface the Ribbon. The theory is that all the tools you need will be
visible and therefore the software will be easier to use.

6

Consisting of a series
of tabs and buttons,
the Ribbon interface
is the signature
element of Office
2007 products.

The Navigation
Pane acts as the
table of contents to
your database.

Figure 7

Here’s a rundown of items found in the Ribbon:

Figure 8

Ribbon button – The focal point of the Ribbon is the Office Button located in the upper lefthand corner of the screen. This button contains much of what can be found under the File menu
in older versions of Access. It’s where you’ll go to save, open, close, print and e-mail files. It’s
also the place to find application settings.
Home – Much of what you’ll need in Access can be found on this tab. It’s where you’ll go to cut,
paste, change fonts, filter, find, replace, delete, check spelling and more. The new “Totals”
feature is also found here.
Create – Any time you want to make a new table, report or form, you’ll come to this tab. It’s
also where you need to go to start a new query.

External data –This tab contains everything you’ll need to get data into or out of Access. It
contains tools for importing and exporting, as well as getting data via e-mailed html forms.

7
Database tools – Use this tab to write macros, move your database to SQL Server and make it
secure.
Another change from previous editions is the Navigation Pane. In Access 2003, a window floats in the
screen and acts as a table of contents for your database, (Figure 9). To see all of the objects contained in
the database, you would have to click through each individual tab for tables, queries, reports, etc.
All that has changed in the latest edition: The Navigation Pane is butted against the left-hand side of the
screen and has been designed so you can see all objects contained in the database at one glance, (Figure
10). The figures below show a side-by-side comparison of the new and old versions. Notice that in the
2007 version you can quickly see all tables and queries contained in the database. The items located
along the side of the view in 2003 have been incorporated into the Ribbon for 2007.
Access 2003

Access 2007

Figure 9

Figure 10

Objects in the Navigation Pane can be opened by double clicking and closed by right clicking on the
object’s tab and selecting “Close.” Delete and rename objects directly in the Navigation Pane by right
clicking on the object and selecting “Delete” or “Rename.”

Querying data in the ribbon
The steps for starting a query in Access 2007 are a bit different than those in earlier versions. To do it,
click on the Create tab and then “Query Design.” See Figure 11:

8
Figure 11

For the most part, once you’ve started a query, the process is pretty much the same except for the
location of some commands and the types of queries visibly available, (see Figure 11 for more
information). Similar to previous versions of Access, the “Show table” dialog window pops open after
you start a query in design view. Select the table(s) you want to add, and then click “Close.” From here,
write queries in the design or SQL view just as you’ve done before.

Use this icon to toggle
between different
query views: design,
SQL, datasheet, etc.

In previous versions, you had to
search for different types of queries to
make under the Query menu. Here,
they are all visible.

Figure 12

The red exclamation
point is bigger and
more prominent, but
still runs queries with
just one click.

Use the tools in Query
Setup to change the design
of your query.

Getting data in and out of Access
You can create tables in Access by going to the Create tab and clicking on the table icon:

In design view,
click on this
icon to insert
the group by
line in your
query.

9

Figure 13

Add fields to your table by simply typing them into your table in datasheet view, as shown in Figure 11:

Double click here and
type in the field name.

Figure 14

Or, switch to design view by clicking on the icon with the pencil and ruler. Define fields and field types in
this view just as you would have in earlier versions of Access.
Most likely you’ll need to import data into Access from another source. The 2007 version of Access is
able to import the following data types:
Access
Excel
Text
Xml
Html
ODBC (SQL Server)
dBase
Outlook folder
Paradox
Lotus 1-2-3

10
To import a file, click on the “External Data” tab and then select the proper file type under the “Import”
section:
Select the file type you need. If it isn’t
visible in this view, click on the “More”
dropdown.

Figure 15

In the next window, navigate to the file’s location and click OK:

Figure 16

An import wizard should open that will walk you through familiar importing steps. At the end of the
wizard, Access will ask you if you would like to save the import steps. This can be useful if you’re
planning on importing multiple tables with the same format or if you have a regularly scheduled data
update. In the latter situation, Access 2007 allows users to set up recurring task using Outlook.
Exporting data works similarly to importing. Simply select the type of file you’d like to export your data
to and then follow the steps in the export dialog.

11
Access 2007 has introduced a new way to gather information for your data tables with “Data
Collection.” The software will easily create an html form that you can distribute with an e-mail.
Responses to the e-mailed form automatically populate the table.
To do this, Outlook 2007 must be installed and correctly configured on your machine. If it is, then create
a new table using the steps shown above. (This table will act as a shell to hold information you want to
collect from others.) Click once on this table in the Navigation Pane so that it is highlighted and active.
Next, go to the External Data tab and select “Create E-mail” as shown in Figure 17 below:

Figure 17

If prompted, enter the user id and password you use to regularly get into your e-mail. In the “Collect
data through e-mail messages” wizard click “Next” on the first screen and then make sure “HTML form”
is selected. Click “Next.”
Access then asks you to select which fields you want to be part of your html form. Use the arrows to
move fields into and out of the “Fields to include in e-mail message” box. Under field properties you
specify text recipients will read in the form in place of the field names, (see Figure 18). Click “Next” once
you’ve finished adding fields.

Figure 18

12
In the following window, you can control how Access and Outlook will process your replies. If you want
the results to be added to your table upon arrival, check the box next to “Automatically process replies
and add data to…” The next screen lets you choose how you want to select recipients: You can either
enter e-mail addresses on your own or use e-mail addresses already stored in the table. (If you’ve
created an empty table, you’ll need to enter the addresses yourself.)
Write what your e-mail will say to recipients in the next screen:

Figure 19

Once you’ve completed the e-mail, click “Next” and then “Create.” An e-mail should appear with the
text you created, as well as a form built of your specified fields. Treat this just like any other e-mail and
enter the addresses of the people you’d like to respond. Once you’re ready, click “Send.” Individual
replies should appear as records in your table.

Dealing with disabled content
In Access 2007, if you attempt to update or alter tables, you may see the following warning:

Figure 20

13
If you want to continue, you have to enable the content by telling Access that the file location is safe. To
do this, click on the Office Button and then find Access Options. In the next window click on Trust
Center, then Trust Center Settings.

Figure 21

In the next window, you’ll set up a trusted location. First click on “Trusted Locations” and then “Add
new location.” Navigate to the folder(s) you want to enable. If there are subfolders make sure you have
the “subfolders of this location are also trusted” box checked. Then click OK. Now the content should be
enabled, and the warnings should go away.

One last thing
If you’re still wondering how you’ll survive the transition from 2003 to 2007, Microsoft has put together
this handy interactive guide to help you find any commands you think you’ve lost:
http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/access/HA102388991033.aspx

