Kaas & Mulvad | 8.9.088 | Kapow | Make_robot | Basic steps
MEMO

What
Get OpenKapow

Install the program
Choose a website
for extraction
(scraping)

Why

How

OpenKapow is a simple program to build robots to scrape data
from the web. The program is free to download and use. It is
in a linux- and windows-version.
If the link at right is not functioning just search after
Openkapow and click on download.
From the webpage you’ll also have access to download
examples of robots and particpate discussions and get tips.
All necessary help programs is contained in OpenKapow. Just
follow the guidelines.

http://openkapow.com/blo
gs/getting_started/archive/
2007/10/26/downloadRobomaker-6-3.aspx

The first step in building a robot is to examine the website you Look around.
want to scrape. Choose data to extract, make notes on formats
(text, number, date). You can always change, but it’s a good
idea to use five-ten minutes to get an overview over the
website before making the robot.

Open Robomaker
Choose type of
robot

Save robot
Insert step

Click on the exe-file.

Click on the programmeicon on the menu-line.
Start with RSS/Atom feed - click through. No to input-values.
Now you get a robot with first and last step made – load page
and return item.
In RSS-robots it’s demanded to extract something in at least
title and URL. So we need to have something to put in here.
The window in the software program has six areas. One in the
top with the step in the robot, one showing the website in a
normal format, one with tags, one with the source code of the
website, one with the actions of the step, which is highlighted
with green color and one input- and output-values.
Give the robot a proper name and save it. Robomaker normally
saves robots in …/programs/…openkapow/project/library.
Important steps are loop, test tag (conditions), click and
extract. First decission in a step is to choose, which area of the
website to work with for the robot.
You can choose an area by clicking. Expand this by holding altkey down and click in the area in the source-code or tags.
When you’re satisfied, then right-click, and you can now
choose what should be done in this step.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Click on the place on the
website in the window in
Robomaker, where you
want the step to work.

Kaas & Mulvad | 8.9.088 | Kapow | Make_robot | Basic steps
MEMO
Loop

Often you have to loop through a table to extract from each
row.
Then you decide where in the top and end of the table shouil
begin and stop (how many rows from first and last).
The choosen row in the table is now in the next step marked
with a blue rectangle. By clicking inside here, you can insert
steps in this row, and it will also be used for the next row.It
can be conditions, click or extract.

Test tag

Define if the robot need for testing the presence of a specific
text in html-code or text. Set .* before and after test-words.
And you can define if the robot shall continue or stop, if the
content is contained in the choosen area.

Click

Rightclick on the link the robot shall use to open a new
website and choose click. You can configure loading options
by unclicking ”Use default options” in action and click on
configure. Now you can set the robot to wait more than the
default 60.0 sec(Timeout for Each Attempt), try more than one
time (Max number of Attempts), you can unclick load frames
(click in Page Loading) and execute javascript (Javascript
Execution) to make the robot faster.
If the website is protected by passwords, you can insert
passwords under Username and Password.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Find it on the Action-sheet.

Kaas & Mulvad | 8.9.088 | Kapow | Make_robot | Basic steps
MEMO
Extract

Rightclick on the content to be extracted. Define if it’s text or
number. Choose the field to use for saving this. It can look like
this:

Edit initial values

If an extracted value should be the same for all rows, the
easiest way is to click on Edit Initial Values, write the value
and the click on Apply. Remember then to click on Show
Values at Step.

Save the robot
The robot can look like this.
Test robot

Click on debugger. You can run the whole robot or run it from
the active place in Robomaker. In the last case it’s the ikon
with arrow.
The debugger stops at errors, and you can solve them, until it
runs without errors. Save the robot before every test in the
debugger.

Copy

You can mark several steps by pressing the control-key down
and click on each step. You can mark everything by control-A.
You can then copy and paste the steps into another place or
another robot (if you have two Robomaker running).
Insert ekstra step or
new branch.

You can insert an extra step by clicking on the empty steps
with an arrow.You can insert an extra branch in the robot by
clicking on the empty step below another step. In the picture
it’s for testing and do different things depending of it’s
positive or negative.

Next page 1:
Repeat and Next

Often you need to click through many pages to extract the
results. This is done in different steps.
First you insert a blank step. Under Action use Click,and then
under Loops click firs ton repeat, then insert a branch then
insert Next.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Kaas & Mulvad | 8.9.088 | Kapow | Make_robot | Basic steps
MEMO
Next page 2:
Do Nothing

Here we use a step called ”Do Nothing”. This is for testing
that next page is working properly.

Next page 3:
Click Next

Before Next insert a step with a click-action. Under Tag finders
work to define it totally right. Here it’s done by writing
.*Next.* in Tag Pattern:

In the same way you can use Error Handling to make the next
page iterator to stop, when it makes an error. It means when it
don’t find alink with the text “Next”, it stops.

Combine extraction
in one field

Some times you need to extract more than one information in
a single field. You do that by breaking it down in several steps.
First time you extract the first information. Next time you
extract the second information, add a converter (click +),
choose advanced extraction and write it like this:

Here in the first step the number 154 is extracted. The new
extraction is 99%.
In pattern you writes (.*) – it define the whole input. And in
Output Expression you writes RSSItem.title+";"+$1 – it
extract the first extraction, a ; and the new input. It means
154;99%.You can continue this several times.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Select a converter:
Extraction:
Advanced Extract

Kaas & Mulvad | 8.9.088 | Kapow | Make_robot | Basic steps
MEMO

Here you see an example on a robot, where we after load page has put a next page iterator (repeat, click og next),
thereafter a loop over the result. Then some extraction for in the end to click on a link for opening a web-site and
from extract one more information before all the extraction is returned in a row and the next row begins.
This model of Robomaker is typically useful when there in every single row is a link you have to open to get specific
information.
The main principle is to extract things as early as possible in the robot.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

