Following the Money: From Grade School Through College
Presentation at NICAR Conference, March 21, 2009
Jeff Kelly Lowenstein
The Chicago Reporter
(312) 673-3878 (Work)
(773) 656-8985 (Cell)
jeffkl@chicagoreporter.com
Data Sources:
Illinois State Board of Education
Property Tax Revenue from the Illinois Department of Revenue
Tips:
I.

Think about how the topic is usually discussed, and take a different
perspective.
School funding gaps are usually talked about on student-to-student and one-year
bases. Thinking about funding during the course of a student’s entire education from
kindergarten through twelfth grade and on a class, building or district wide can
provide more stark and more accurate pictures of the disparities.
II.
Don’t forget to look at property tax rates.
This is a second level of funding inequity that comes from relying on local property
tax as the primary vehicle for funding schools. What tends to happen is wealthier
districts receive far more money from taxing themselves at far lower rates than poorer
communities. The Rondout School District in Lake Forest, which received more than
$21,000 per pupil from a 1.33 percent property tax rate, and a district in East St.
Louis, which taxed itself at 7.588 percent and received about $1,300 per pupil, is an
extreme example of that second level of inequity.
III.
Look at commercial and industrial property tax revenue.
This was a third level of funding inequity that we discovered through our
investigation. We learned that reliance on property tax as the major vehicle for
funding school has consequences for business development. For wealthier
communities, the low property tax rates were an incentive for businesses to set up
shop in the community, while it was just the opposite for poor communities. We
were able to show this by receiving from the state’s department of revenue the
amount of money received by property type. On a scale basis, the gaps were even
larger for industrial and commercial property than they were for residential property.
This can be a way to illustrate the cyclical nature of relying on property tax for school
funding.

IV.
Look at percentage of money from local sources.
There are certain poor districts that receive relatively large amounts of aid from the
state and federal governments so that their average per pupil expenditure is actually
quite high. At the same time, this money often comes with conditions and is not a
permanent source of revenue. Communities that receive 90 percent of the money
from local property tax tend to tax themselves at lower rates, to be smaller districts
and to have higher levels of local control.
V.
Look beyond the test scores.
School funding reform opponents in Illinois sometimes point to downstate rural
districts where the students tend to score very well on standardized tests. This is a
noteworthy accomplishment, and the low levels of funding in many of these districts
mean that they cannot provide much beyond a basic education that prepares students
for the tests.
VI.
Think about unusual bedfellows.
This is a related tip to the previous point. In Illinois, we found a number of rural,
predominantly white, high property tax rate districts that received a relatively high
percentage of money from farm property. These districts were disadvantaged by the
system in a similar way to students in poor, largely black urban cities like East St.
Louis.
VII. Look at the extras.
We did not do this analysis, but in many cases the per pupil spending is supplemented
in wealthy communities by the creation of local foundations, alumni associations or
silent auctions, all of which add to the amount of money spent on the children.

