Hi, my name is Clem Henriksen. I been involved with GIS for over 25 years,
most of that time with ESRI,, the GIS industryy leader.
I have been a programmer, held technical roles in product
Development, and for the last few years worked in marketing.
Presently, I do market research.
In my opinion, the current Internet era is the most fun
g statewide databases for the State of Arizona.
since I was making

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

1

We are awash in data. Some is free, some is not. In the US, government
agencies have petabytes of spatial data available on the web as free
Downloads.
David Herzog has done a great job of identifying
sources of ready-to-go geodata.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

2

I’d like to talk about three sources of geodata that are now, or will be, important
to journalists
journalists.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

3

‘Story’ data can be can come from anywhere. It might be in a spreadsheet.
A contact may give you data for a story, or give you a link to a
obscure online database. These tabular data sources can be mapped.

Rows and columns—aka ’Tables’.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

4

US Government studies have estimated that 80% of tabular data
(i.e., spreadsheets, DBMSs, formatted text files) can be geocoded.
This includes your ‘story’ data. Geocoding is often the necessary first step
for mapping. Geocoders are also called locators.
Any data with an address or a placename can be geocoded. In this example,
Geocoding is done on five-digit ZIP Code. When you type an address into
Google, Google geocodes it and puts a marker on the map.
GIS software does built-in geocoding . Geocoding is very data dependent, and
Results will vary dramatically with data quality.
Check out:
http://www.batchgeocode.com/ - free batch geocoding using Yahoo!
http://www.gpsvisualizer.com/ - free geocoding and geodata conversion tools

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

5

Geotagging and geocoding both refer to the same process: taking data that
Has a spatial element and making it mappable—more precisely, to add a
‘coordinate pair’ to the data.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

6

The EXIF header in .jpg Holds the GeoTag
It turns out the digital camera industry agreed to add something called the
‘EXIF header’ to digital photos. All kinds of info can be put there including
latitude and longitude. Precisely put, when you geotag a photo, you add a
lat/long coordinate pair to the EXIF header. Then, other mapping software
can read the geotag and place the photo on a map.
Here, Photoshop is displaying a geotagged photo and part of its EXIF header.
If your cell phone does not have GPS and a camera, your next one probably will.
3% of the photos in Flickr, or 100 million photos, are geotagged.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

7

A new computing paradigm is providing data (geo or otherwise) to your
computer. It’s called the Internet, Software as a Service, or just plain services.
When you balance your checkbook online, you are using a service to talk to
a computer operated by your bank. Geoservices work the same way.
More and more, Geodata is available as a service. That is, instead of
downloading data as a file, your web browser runs software that displays
just the area of interest. The most familiar map services are street data and
Satellite images from companies like Google, Yahoo!, Mapquest, and Microsoft.
ESRI’s
ESRI
s ArcGIS Server is used by organizations to publish services based on
Their own data.
Services will become the preferred method for sharing data on the web. More
and more data and more and more kinds of services are made available every
day Services are used for mashups written with Application Programming Interfaces
day.
(APIs).

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

8

The free ArcGIS Explorer software from ESRI supports four types of
Servers . Each server can have multiple services.
http://resources.esri.com/arcgisexplorer/index.cfm?fa=download

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

9

GIS derives new data by combining geodata layers .
GIS analysis derives new data, which tells the story.

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

10

http://resources.esri.com/arcgisserver/apis/javascript/ve/index.cfm?fa=codeGallery

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

11

Thank you for the opportunity to present here today.
If you would like to know more about demographic data services
From ESRI, I’ll be at a brown bag following this presentation.
Questions?

©2009 - No duplication without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

12

