STUPID WEB TRICKS
Ben Welsh
IRE Watchdog Workshop — Los Angeles — April 17-18, 2009

Hey young world, this blog is yours.
April 16, 2009 by benwelsh

Heres a rule from the non cool..your life, don’t drool
Don’t be a fool like those that dont go to school
Get ahead… and accomplish things
You’ll see the wonder and the joy life brings
I’m no Rick the Ruler, but I am your MC today for this portion of the IRE watchdog workshop.
That means you’re probably stuck listening to me spiel for the next hour, but, on the upside,
before we’re done you should be well schooled in a few stupid web tricks. They include:
1. How to publish a locater map from Google.
2. How to publish a word cloud from Wordle.
3. How to publish interactive charts from ManyEyes.
The examples I’ll be working through are all already documented below. So, if you’re bored
with me already, feel free to cruise them at your leisure. I’ll leave them up here, so you can feel
free to bookmark the page and go grab a smoke. The substance is all here, you’ll only be missing
out on my charming presentation.
– Ben Welsh

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Publish a Google map in no-time flat.
April 16, 2009 by benwelsh

Part I: Make the map
1. Visit maps.google.com.
2. Log in with a Gmail or other Google account. If you don’t have one, you’ll need to sign
up. At the L.A. Times we have a joint account that is used by different people across the
newsroom.
3. Click the “My Maps” link in the upper-left-hand part of the page. It’s just below the
Google logo and to the right of “Get Directions.”
4. Click “Create new map” — a link also found there in the upper left.
5. Now you should have a palette of tools for drawing your own map. Points. Lines.
Bubbles. The whole deal. I won’t go through it all here, but if you need more help you
should consult Google’s documentation, which includes a helpful screencast.
6. Go ahead and draw your map. If you look above, you can see what map I made. It shows
the new stop sign in my hometown, Swisher, Iowa.
7. Once you’re done, click the “Save” link in the left-hand toolbar.
Part II: Jack the map
1. Click the “Link” button in the upper-right-hand corner of the page.
2. A window should drop down with two boxes in it. The top box contains a direct link to
this page, here on Google’s site. The lower box contains a snippet of HTML code you
can use to “embed” your map someplace else — like your blog, for instance.
3. Copy the contents of that lower box to your clipboard. It’s all the code you need to need
to plant this map on your site.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Part III: Blog the map
1. Login to WordPress or whatever CMS you’re using.
2. Paste the HTML code clipped from Google into a new post or story. If you’re using
WordPress there’s a nice guide here. Some blogs or CMS systems might restrict what
kind of HTML you can just dump in, so there’s a chance you’ll bump your shin here if
your system is locked down. Unfortunately, if that’s the case, you’ll have to sort out the
issue with whoever manages your CMS. If you’re using a blog application besides
WordPress, you’d probably do well just to search Google for help. Since these maps are
commonly embedded, there’s likely to be something out there.
3. Publish the post.

Publish a word cloud and make mom proud.
April 16, 2009 by benwelsh

Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa's 2009 State of the City address.
Part I: Make the cloud
1. Collect your data, in this example, the text of Mayor Villaraigosa’s most recent State of
the City address.
2. Copy the text you want to visualize to you clipboard.
3. Visit Wordle.net and click the “Create” link at the top.
4. Paste in the text and click “Go.”
5. You should now have a beautiful word cloud you can fiddle around with.
6. If something went wrong, consult Wordle’s troubleshooting guide.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Part II: Jack the cloud
1. Center your browser window so that the entire cloud is on the screen.
2. Take a snapshot of your current window. If you’re using Windows, it’s usually as easy as
tapping the “Print Screen” button. If you’re on a different system, or your keyboard
doesn’t have the button, check out the guide here.
3. Open up Microsoft Paint or Photoshop or whatever you use to edit images. Since “Print
Screen” saves the image to your clipboard, like anything else you might cut or copy, all
you have to do is paste the image into a new file.
4. Use the cropping tools to cut down the image so it only contains the cloud
5. Save out the result in either PNG or GIF file format.
Part III: Blog the cloud
1. Login to your WordPress or whatever CMS you use.
2. Upload your image to your site. If you’re using WordPress, they have a step-by-step
guide here.
3. Insert the hosted image’s URL into an img tag in the HTML. If you’re using WordPress,
it will do all that for you.

Publish an interactive chart and look real smart.
April 16, 2009 by benwelsh

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Part I: Snatch the data
1. Collect your data, in this case a spreadsheet of newspaper advertising expenditures
stretching back to 1950.
2. Click the “Download a Spreadsheet” reference in the upper-right-hand corner to get the
file.
3. Open the spreadsheet in Excel or Open Office, remove the empty row, trim down the
headers, kill out the percentages and fill the empty spaces with zeros.
4. If you’d rather skip this boring step of data preparation, I posted a cleaned up version of
the data here as a table. Or, if you’re really lazy, you can skip ahead to Part III and use
the data I’ve already uploaded to Many Eyes here.
Part II: Post the data
1. Visit ManyEyes and log in. If you don’t have an account with IBM you’ll have to create
one.
2. Click the “upload data set” link in the left-hand sidebar.
3. Follow the instructions on the page, paste the data and review the results.
4. After you save you should be sent to a page like this one, where your data is now live on
the site and ready to be visualized.
Part III: Make the chart
1. If the data looks alright, click the “visualize” button just below the data sheet.
2. Next you’re asked to select a data visualization method. For the example above, I
selected “line graph.”
3. Fiddle with the chart until you get it how you like it. Name it. Click “publish.”
Part IV: Blog the chart
1. After you publish the chart a “share this” button appears beneath the chart with two
options. The first gives you the code necessary to publish a thumbnail with a link, the
second allows you to republish an actual working version of the chart.
2. Since WordPress doesn’t allow the type of “live” embed offered by ManyEyes, I’ve just
dumped in the thumbnail here. But if your CMS allows it, you could do me one better.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

