Ways to Trace Every Business
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Even the smallest, youngest business creates a trail that reporters can follow.
The key is understanding what businesses must do to get off the ground and to
survive.
1. A rose by any other name
• Fictitious business name. Legally required in California and many other states
for anyone who does business under a name other than his own. Businesses
can’t file lawsuits (for example, small claims actions for unpaid bills) unless
they have a valid FBN. Filed with county clerk. Lists business’s official name,
form (sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership or corporation),
address and responsible person – often the owner. FBN’s expire after five
years; older FBNs may be inaccurate.
• Business license. Filed with city or, in unincorporated areas, the county. Basis
for city business taxes. You can’t find out how much a particular business
paid in business taxes, but you can see the license, which lists name and
address.
• Trademark. Useful for protecting product names. Filed with U.S. Patent &
Trademark Offfice (http://uspto.gov). A search on the trademark “The Orange
County Register” shows the registrant as Freedom Communications Inc., a
California corporation. It also lists the address, the attorney who filed the
trademark and the type of business (“Newspapers for general circulation”).
• Website address. Every large or midsized business and a growing number of
small businesses have websites. These websites are registered through
domain registrars. Several services provide lookup services; just type “whois”
(one word) in Google and take your pick. A check of www.ocregister.com at
the Network Solutions whois site
(http://www.networksolutions.com/whois/index.jsp) provides the phone
numbers for the administrative and technical contacts as well as a list of the
Internet addresses for three domain servers associated with The Register’s
website.
• Incorporation and other shields against liability. Businesses of all sizes
incorporate or form limited liability corporations or limited partnerships. The
reason is simple: to shield the owner from liability. If a corporation owes debts
or gets sued, the creditor has to take what he or she can get from the
corporation. The owner is safe behind the “corporate veil.” Incorporation
papers are filed with the state; in California and most other states, the
secretary of state maintains corporate records. Go to
http://kepler.sos.ca.gov/list.html to search for California corporations, limited

-1©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

liability corporations or limited partnerships. The corporation record for
Freedom Communications lists the date filed (April 16, 2004, following the
reorganization of a predecessor company)), the address and the agent
authorized to accept service of lawsuits. In addition to all the online info,
corporations must report their board of directors and officers annually; a quick
call to the secretary of state’s press office (916/653-6575) will usually get you
this.
2. Money makes the world go round
• Uniform Commercial Code filings. Typically filed when someone buys goods
on credit. Absolutely vital for businesses that don’t have a lot of cash. UCC’s
are a goldmine; you’ll find the name and address for both the creditor and the
debtor, plus a description of what was purchased. Filed in most staes with the
secretary of state. Limited UCC data is also available on Nexis, for a price of
course.
• Credit reports. Dun & Bradstreet provides credit reports on businesses of all
sizes. Typical contents include annual sales, number of employees, average
time for paying bills and, of course, credit rating. You can get D&B via Nexis.
• Mortgages. It’s not uncommon for an entrepreneur to finance his or her
business by mortgaging a property. When in doubt about where the money is
coming from, check to see if the owner has refinanced the mortgage and
increased the debt. This is a clue that the owner is self-financing.
• Liens. Sometimes the easiest way to keep a company going is to just ignore
bills. Mechanics liens list the creditor, the debtor and the amount owed. The
IRS and state taxing authorities (particularly, in California, the Employment
Development Department) file thousands of liens every year against
businesses for unpaid employee withholding. Liens are filed in the county
recorder’s office. They are also available on Nexis. Caution: If you find liens
on Nexis, always, always, always go to the recorder’s office to make sure a
release of lien has not been filed.
2. I fought the law and …
• The states license hundreds of professions. Every state licenses doctors and
lawyers. Many also license professionals who deal with interesting amounts
of money such as real estate agents, building contractors and insurance
agents. California has pioneered new frontiers in licensing; its Department of
Consumer Affairs regulates, among many others, matchmakers (as in boxing
matches, not “Hello Dolly”), cremated remains disposers and locksmiths.
• Planning and zoning records can be valuable sources of information about
businesses. Planning departments are particularly good places to look if
neighbors are complaining that a business is creating a nuisance. Zoning law
exists to separate conflicting land uses; that’s why you seldom will find a strip
club next to a church. Depending on the zoning, a business that wants to
expand may have to explain in writing how, where and why it wants to
expand.

-2©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

•

Liquor licenses. In states where liquor is not a state-run monopoly, licenses
are typically issued by a state agency. These licenses, of course, can be
immensely valuable to the businesses that crave them and the politicians who
dole them out.

3. I the Jury
Businesses wind up in many kinds of litigation. You can get great information if
you know where to look.
• Local courts. A lot of biz lit occurs in local courts, in most states the Superior
Court. Increasingly these courts are putting their dockets and sometimes legal
documents online. Key types of litigation:
o Landlord-tenant (unlawful detainer). It doesn’t sound sexy, but an
unlawful detainer lawsuit can tell you when a business moved into a
particular address, how many square-feet it leased and when it
stopped paying. Sometimes other useful details pop up, like the names
of several businesses sharing one address.
o Employee litigation. In California an employee files a claim for unpaid
compensation with the state labor commissioner. If the state returns a
judgment for the employee, it’s usually up to the employee to collect.
Sometimes that means filing a lawsuit. A great way to get former
employees. Also key to understanding when a business ran out of
money.
o Wrongful injury and malpractice.
• Federal courts. The federal court system is a playground for biz lit.
Fortunately, the court system’s online search tool, PACER
(http://pacer.uscourts.gov/), is up to the job. You can search civil, criminal and
bankruptcy cases in every federal court in the nation. In most courts you get
not only the docket but copies of almost every filing. Best part is the cost: 8
cents per page. It’s hard to convince editors and news directors to spend
money these days, but PACER is worth every penny.
o Intellectual property. Where does Company A’s patent end and
Company B’s highly similar patent begin? Can Company A claim all of
Company B’s revenue, as Mattel recently did to the maker of Bratz
Dolls?
o Breach of contract. May go to federal or state court. This covers a
variety of sins. At Broadcom, the Orange County company charged
with running the biggest backdating scam ever, one ex-employee
drafted a breach of contract suit alleging that he was promised millions
in backdated options. A contractor filed a breach of contract suit
against Broadcom’s co-founder, alleging he was cheated from his pay
for building an underground drug-and-sex dungeon. In the immortal
words of Dave Barry, “I’m not making this up.”
o Class action lawsits. Another term that covers a variety of sins. Always
worth reading.
o Bankruptcy. Be still my heart. My favorite type of court. It is truly
amazing what a patient reporter can find in a bankruptcy file.

-3©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

•

U.S. Tax Court. Not covered by PACER, this court is the playground of the
rich and famous. Have you gotten into a tax dispute with the IRS and lost?
Are you willing to pay lawyers millions to cheat the tax man of more millions?
This is the place. Want to read about these people? Go to
http://ustaxcourt.gov/ and click on Docket Inquiry.

4. Federal agencies
• The Securities and Exchange Commission (www.sec.gov) is the go-to source
for publicly traded companies as well as for some private companies that
issue publicly traded debt such as commercial paper or bonds. Key sites
within the SEC empire:
o EDGAR, recently rechristened IDEA (http://idea.sec.gov/) is the
repository for mandatory disclosures by public companies. The full-text
search is a gold mine. Most important SEC forms are:
• 10-Q and 10-K (quarterly and annual reports)
• DEF-14A (proxy statement, includes salaries)
• S-1 (initial public offering)
o Litigation releases. If you run into someone who seems squirrelly, look
him up here: http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases.shtml
o Investment adviser disclosures:
http://www.adviserinfo.sec.gov/IAPD/Content/IapdMain/iapd_SiteMap.
aspx
• Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, is a self-regulatory
organization that monitors broker-dealers. It operates under SEC supervision.
Mary Schapiro, the new SEC chair, previously ran FINRA. Look for a broker’s
dirty launder at the FINRA Broker Check:
http://www.finra.org/Investors/ToolsCalculators/BrokerCheck/index.htm
• Federal Trade Commission (www.ftc.gov) monitors unfair trade practices and
has filed many, many fraud lawsuits. Its website is far easier to navigate than
the SEC’s, and its attorneys are far more likely to return a reporter’s call.

-4©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

