Investigations on the beat: Eden Laikin, Newsday
DATABASES for specific beats:
1. Whether you cover a municipality, government, public agency or topical beat, odds are there
are relevant databases you should regularly request:
a. employee payrolls. Who works for the agency? names, titles, depts, hire dates, salaries, yearly
earnings, overtime pay, termination pay and date (if applicable).
b. Vendor lists, With whom does the agency do business? amount and date paid, services
provided, contract start & end dates, number of bids for job(if applicable)
c. Campaign Contributions. They are on line in NY since Jan 2007. download filings for your town
supervisor, board members and other elected officials.
d. Financial disclosure forms for elected officials. They are supposed note any conflict of
interests and every source of income.
e. Convictions
Disbarred attorneys
Disciplined teachers
Deadbeat dads
Voter registrations
Day care complaints
Retirement/pensions
FOILS:
LAWS & APPEALS:
1. Know your state’s FOIL laws. In New York, an agency has 5 days in which to respond to a
Freedom of Information Law request. Unless20there are extenuating circumstances, which the
agency must provide, the data is to be turned over to the requestor within 20 days. Keep track
of any follow up phone calls regarding your foil for a possible appeal which in New York must
happen within 30 days of a rejection of the request. I often will make the first appeal myself and
use an opinion from the NYS Committee on Open Government:
http://www.dos.state.ny.us/coog/index.html.
2. If the agency tries to tell you that they don’t keep the information in the way you’ve
requested it and are not obligated to create a record, know this: downloading only certain
information or fields of information from a computer system does not constitute “creating a
new record.”
3. Know what fields of information are available before putting in the FOIL request so the
agency can’t say the request is too general.
4. Know what’s public.
THREATS:
1. If I know there’s going to be some resistance to a FOIL, I will include this standard graph in
the FOIL letter: “If any part of this FOIL is denied, please provide me – in writing ‐ with the
section of law that permits the denial as well as the person to whom our attorneys should
appeal.”
2. If that doesn’t work, I’ll threaten to do a story o r include in a story a paragraph about
how the agency refused to turn over records. Often, that’s all it takes to free up the information.
3. If neither of those approaches work, I’d turn it over to our paper’s legal counsel.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

