Trouble in the Walls
IRE Conference
Baltimore – 2009
Aaron Kessler – Sarasota Herald-Tribune

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Defective Chinese Drywall
Where is it?
What is it?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

What’s causing it?
“Out-gassing”
The damage is being caused by gases coming out of
the drywall
Chemicals released attack metals, begin to break
them down
Full spectrum of culprits still being investigated
Found so far? Hydrogen Sulfide, Carbon Disulfide,
Carbonyl Sulfide
The big fight: Concentrations high enough to be dangerous
to human health?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Why China?
Building Boom – Crazy Times
Hurricanes in 2005, including Katrina
Result: Drywall shortage
Suppliers and builders desperate for
material. Result? Turned to China

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Red flags to look for:
Repeated air-conditioning failures
Corrosion of wiring, plumbing, jewelry, and other items in the home.
Failures of electronic devices like televisions, computers and
appliances.
A sulfur-like or vinegar-like smell (some affected homes have no
odor).
Rust or corrosion of galvanized metal components like hurricane
clips and framing plates.
Health problems: respiratory and sinus problems, severe
headaches, and nosebleeds – among other symptoms -- have
been reported by many residents.
Even the dog? Pets acting strangely, getting sick
Children also appear more vulnerable as you might imagine

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Let’s see what we’re talking
about…

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

A/C Coils

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Copper Pipes - Comparison

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Copper Ground Wires

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Electronics – e.g. speaker wires

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Jewelry, Coins, Mirrors, etc…

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

And of course the Smoking Gun…
Once you have
the symptoms,
time to…
Cut to the
chase.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Use the case definition to your advantage
Builders deny they have a problem?
Develop homeowner sources, then go out in the field,
get the proof yourself
Not one builder has stepped forward to admit the
problem until caught red-handed
Even then, some still attempt to deny (e.g. Beazer..)
Get your evidence in order – organization a must

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Government Action/Inaction
Recall? Remediation? Root causes?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

How did it begin?
Builders, contractors, manufacturers: knew of
problems in ’06, ’07, esp. ‘08, but kept them
under wraps
First government official to crack the case?
Bob Kallote – Sarasota County Health Department
A true old pro – figured out it likely was drywall
raised the alarm in August 2008 to all state and fed
health officials who would listen…

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Some of the government agencies
now investigating the issue:
EPA
CPSC
CDC / ATSDR
Federal Trade Commission, Office of the U.S.
Trade Representative
State Health Departments: Florida, Louisiana,
Virginia, etc.
Florida Attorney General
China: AQSIQ
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The “Hot Potato”
Agency turf battles in reverse –
No one wanted to take the lead on drywall
“After you, no after YOU…”
What it means for sourcing
Agencies tight-lipped – but love talking about
how much other agencies are screwing up
Same true with all parties, such as… >>

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Congress
First in: Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla.
Most instrumental in pushing CPSC, EPA
Now host of Senators and Reps piling on
(Landrieu, Warner, Wexler, Whitehouse,
Sessions..)

Last month: first set of hearings on
Chinese drywall
White House: Chief of Staff level briefings

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Builders Who Used It
Dozens of builders implicated and more
suspected. Confirmed builders include:
Lennar
WCI
Taylor Morrison
Beazer
Numerous local builders
Their standard line? “We’re the victim…”
See no evil, hear no evil.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Some Manufacturers

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

And Now the Rub…
Potentially not just CHINESE drywall
Good ‘ol Made in the USA material raising
flags as well
National Gypsum
Georgia Pacific
CPSC has expanded their probe to also
investigate American manufacturers

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Finger-pointing
Builders, suppliers, manufacturers, insurance
companies
Doing their best to avoid responsibility
The homeowner: caught in the middle
Can’t live in in it, can’t sell it.
Sick kids, pregnant, what do you do?
Waiting for government to make determination of problem,
take action…waiting…waiting…waiting….

Estimated cost of removing drywall from a typical
home: $100,000+
Who’s going to foot the bill?
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

An Example: Lennar
Builder thus far known to have the most
affected homes in Florida
The company hasn’t provided any numbers
since January, when the number of homes it
suspected or knew had the drywall was 120 in
SW Florida alone.
The company is attempting to remove tainted
drywall from some homes – but..
Before repairs, owners must sign extensive waiver of
rights absolving the company of future damages,
known and yet unknown
Disposal locations and protocols? Still a mystery.
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Disposal: Environmental
Concerns?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Worker Safety?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Off to the Dump… (Virginia)

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Other investigations
News organizations
Private consultants and inspectors
Advocacy Groups
Attorneys
Deluge of Class action claims
Multi-District Litigation Panel to rule shortly
Likely Candidates: Miami, Tampa, New Orleans

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Shipping Data – Going to the
Source
PIERS
Maintains a database of shipping records taken from the original manifests. Normally, the
company serves commercial firms and charges a premium for its data. But they have
shown a willingness to work with news organizations to provide data and little or no cost,
provided they are cited as the source.
The contact person that has been friendly to us is:
Beth Adams
Marketing Director
PIERS Global Intelligence Solutions
33 Washington Street, 13th Floor
Newark, NJ 07102
T: (973) 848-7151 (800) 952-3839 F: (973) 848-7070
badams@piers.com

Federal data: Customs, now rolled into Homeland Security, also maintains data –
though it generally does not identify individual companies, only aggregate amounts.
Port operators: talk to the local port folks. A lot of operators are intimately familiar

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

aaron.kessler@heraldtribune.com
(941) 361-4873
www.heraldtribune.com/chinesedrywall

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

