Martha Woodall, Staff Reporter
The Philadelphia Inquirer
martha.woodall@phillynews.com (215) 854-2789
http://www.philly.com

2009 IRE National Conference
Baltimore, MD
On the Beat: Schools
“Investigating Charter Schools”

Since the nation’s first charter school opened in Minnesota in 1992, the charter movement has spread to 39
other states and the District of Columbia. Charters are publicly funded alternatives to traditional public
schools. Today, 4,729 charter schools nationwide are educating 1.4 million students. They are free from
many of the mandates and regulations that affect traditional schools and are supposed to be laboratories of
educational experimentation and innovation. They also can be reach sources for investigatory reporting.
Each state has its own charter law. Pennsylvania’s provides relatively little oversight. As a result, we’ve
found that many educators and non-educators have found ways to exploit the law’s weaknesses to turn
charter schools into money-making enterprises to enrich themselves and their families. Some have cashed
in by collecting salaries from multiple schools. Others have generated new income streams by founding
nonprofit and for-profit entities, including consulting firms and management companies that do business
with charter schools. In other cases, troubled organizations have opened charter schools and used money
from them to prop up their organizations.
While test scores and academic performance are important factors in examining charter schools, this tip
sheet focuses on spotting possible financial mismanagement and wrongdoing:
1.
2.

Examine all public reports that charter schools are required to file annually.
If necessary, follow-up with public information requests to obtain audits and any other financial
documents.
3. Compare expenditures of individual charter schools against information collected by your state to
determine whether a charter school’s expenditures on CEO salary, administration, building costs,
instruction, travel and legal fees are out-of-the norm for your state.
4. Pull all federal 990s and look for salary and expenditure data, board members and related-party
transactions.
5. Examine the charter’s application to help gauge whether the school is doing what it promised to
do. In Pennsylvania, many charters’ founding groups have included state legislators who continue
to have direct and in-direct involvement with the schools. Their presence complicates oversight.
6. Look at incorporation documents filed with the state government for nonprofits and for-profits to
find relationships of entities doing business with charters. Sometimes, charters fail to disclose all
these ties on their 990s.
7. Examine backgrounds of the charter board members to see if they are the founder’s and CEO’s
relatives, friends and employees of other charter schools. Although the boards are supposed to be
independent, members can be cronies of the founder and/or CEO who merely rubber stamp
decisions.
8. Check all available court records. Current and old civil suits can provide insight into a charter
school’s operations, including a pattern of delinquent payments.
9. Don’t overlook other public documents. Real estate records, mortgages, records for tax-exempt
financing, zoning files, building inspection records and documents charters have filed to obtain
tax-exempt status for their buildings can provide unexpected information.
10. Look for inside sources. Parents and current and former teachers and administrators can be crucial
in untangling complicated personal and business relationships, providing insight into the charter’s
day-to-day operations and offering guidance in understanding the significance of information in
public documents
11. Take a look at land deals and building purchases for possible abuses, including exorbitant rental
fees. We found cases of related nonprofits charging charters rents far in excess of the amounts

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

necessary to cover mortgage and related costs and using the surplus to purchase buildings for
non-charter entities.
12. Examine special education funds to find out whether the school is over-indentifying special
education students to increase funding. We found cases of charter schools spending barely half
their special education money on special ed. services. They used the surplus for unrelated
purposes.
Examples of some of the Philadelphia Inquirer’s charter school coverage can be found at
http://go.philly.com/charter
Some sources for general charter school information:
The National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, William Schultz, communications, 202-521-2828;
wschultz@publiccharters.org
http://www.publiccharters.org/
The National Alliance has published a guide providing recommended standards for financial and
operational performance.
http://www.publiccharters.org/Framework+for+Operational+Quality.

Center for Education Reform, Washington, DC: 202-822-9000
http://www.edreform.com
National Association of Charter School Authorizers, Chicago: Phone: 312-376-2300
http://www.qualitycharters.org
The National Center for the Study of Privatization in Education, Teachers College, Columbia University;
New York City: 212-678-3259
http://www.ncspe.org/
The Evaluation Center, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI.: 269-387-5895
www.wmich.edu/evalctr/

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

