FOLLOWING THE MONEY
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
The Federal Election Commission site, www.fec.gov, is the original
source for almost all data on contributions given to federal campaign
committees, national political parties (the RNC, the DNC, the DCCC, etc.)
and political action committees. While it still has major shortcomings,
the site has gotten better recently. Users can now search raw FEC data
by individual donor or employer
(http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/disclosure_data_search.shtml),
download Excel spreadsheets containing individual or PAC contributions
to each candidate for House and Senate seats (just pick a state from this
map: http://fec.gov/DisclosureSearch/mapHSApp.do). Great if you’re
digging into a member, but the downside is that this data is only
available in this form for the 2008 election cycle and the 2010 election
cycle. If you want total control over the data, this link
(http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftp_download.shtml) let’s you
download all the campaign data from the last few cycles so you can
create your own database raw data—however, note that the Center for
Responsive Politics now offers all of its data for download, with
standardized names, industry coding, spouse matching and more.
(Available at http://www.opensecrets.org/action/data.php).
CRP also provides the top 20 donors to every members of Congress by
cycle and for their whole career; codes contributions by industry and
sector; provides data on contributions to committees from the industries
they oversee; and provides additional info like campaign expenditures for
House and presidential candidates. They also track contributions to and
from PACs and independent political groups known as 527s after the
section of the tax code that regulates them.
The Sunlight Foundation’s Political Party Time site, online at
http://politicalpartytime.org, publishes invitations to fundraisers that
are collected from lobbyists (there are upcoming events as well as an
archive going back to 2007). The site publishes the actual invitations in a
PDF-like format, and also digitizes some information so one can search
for the host of an event (these are often lobbyists), the location, the
beneficiary, other members in attendance, the date, and so on.
IRE’s Campaign Finance Information Center has a database that
includes contributions and how the candidates spent their donations. In
some cases, it includes money flow to and from PACs, candidate
committees and party committees. http://www.campaignfinance.org/
Tips about stories: http://www.campaignfinance.org/background.html

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The Internal Revenue Service has an online search for 527 committee
WhiteHouseForSale.org comes from an advocacy group, Public Citizen,
and focuses on presidential politics, particularly the huge sums of money
raised by candidates, as well as the people who raise it. CRP also has a list
of bundlers at http://www.opensecrets.org/pres08/index.php.
filings. They don’t run candidates, they don’t contribute directly to
candidates, they don’t engage in express advocacy (“vote for Jones”), and
they’re not political parties, and thus are not obligated to follow the rules
(contribution limits, restrictions on sources of funds, etc.) that
candidates and federal PACs must follow. To find their donors and
expenditures, see
http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoAdvanced8871Sear
ch.action When 527 organizations advertise in a federal campaign, they
must disclose that spending to the Federal Communications
Commission, http://gullfoss2.fcc.gov/ecd, and the FEC,
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ec_table.shtml.
National Institute on Money in State Politics compiles campaign
finance information from all 50 states, and makes it available in an
online database at http://www.followthemoney.org. They code
contributions by industry (using a method incredibly similar to, and
derived from, the Center for Responsive Politics). They also trace the
influence of money on state policies, from Enron and utility deregulation
to the privatization of state prisons.

LOBBYING
Lobbyists must file four times a year. Both the company hiring the
lobbyist and the firm doing the lobbying must disclose. They report
information that includes the issues they're working on, sometimes with
specific bill numbers, and which branches of the federal government
they're lobbying. Lobbying firms and individual lobbyists also report
campaign donations.
CRP has a very useful lobbying database
(http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp) but it does not track
new registrations.
CRP also tracks campaign donations to candidates and the poltical
parties, (http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/contribs_srch.php) though
not the donations they make to outside groups.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Raw data: Both the registrations and lobbying reports are available at
the House Clerk’s Office at
http://disclosures.house.gov/ld/ldsearch.aspx and the Senate Office of
Public Records at
http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfields. The Senate
allows you to search by key words.

EARMARKS
Legistorm.com is a site run by a former Hill reporter, Jock Friedly, and
provides access to all kinds of interesting disclosures normally buried in
the bowels of the congressional office buildings. Legistorm has financial
disclosures for staffers of members of congress, a database of foreign
gifts to lawmakers, trip data, earmark data and much more. A truly
useful site for digging deep into Congress.
Once buried in the fine print of congressional committee reports,
earmarks are much easier to track than ever before. Taxpayers for
Common Sense (http://www.taxpayer.net) tracks them, and puts them
online in Excel spread sheets. Definitely a great resource, but it takes
them a while to compile it. Real Time Investigations, part of the
Sunlight Foundation, has a database of links to members’ earmark
disclosure requests—you can find them linked on the right hand column
of http://RealTime.Sunlightprojects.org.
You can follow the progress of appropriations bills on Thomas
(http://thomas.loc.gov) and the earmarks are now disclosed in a list in
the committee report that accompanies each appropriations bill. Also
check the Web sites of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees
and look for copies of the disclosure letters that members file for the
earmarks they request—these include more information than one finds
in the committee reports.
The Office of Management and Budget has a database of every Fiscal
Year 2005 earmark and every FY 2008 earmark online at
http:earmarks.omb.gov. The 2005 data does not list requesters (they did
not have to be disclosed then); the FY 2008 data does. It’s not clear
whether the Obama administration will continue updating the site.

LEGISLATIVE FAVORS
MapLight.org “mashes up” federal campaign contributions with
congressional votes on bills. They do so by first meticulously researching
the positions various interests—companies, labor unions, trade groups,
etc.—take on particular pieces of legislation (they do not just assume

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

that all oil companies oppose all environmental bills), then getting vote
information on the bill from Library of Congress data via GovTrack.us
and campaign contribution from the Center for Responsive Politics
(www.opensecrets.org), and putting them together. The site allows users
to search by bill, interest group or by legislators, and also allows similar
searches of the California legislature.
OpenCongress.org—available at http://opencongress.org—makes the
legislative information available on Thomas much easier to navigate. You
can sign up for an account and track members or issues, see who’s voted
which way on what bill, follow the legislation a member has introduced,
and stay on top of Congress. It’s powered by information from
GovTrack.us (http://Govtrack.us), another site that makes information
from Thomas more readily available. OpenCongress also brings in
information from news sites and blogs, and lets you set up an account
(highly recommended!) to follow members, issues, legislation, committees
and more. Also tracks changes to bills—a useful tool for finding out what
provisions have been inserted to the latest version of a 1,000 page bill.
Members of Congress introduce, in some cases, dozens of bills to lift the
tariff on certain items—chemicals, appliances, high quality golf gear, etc.
The suspensions can be worth no more than $500,000 to the company,
but hey—that’s a $500,000 tax break. The International Trade
Commission tracks them, and lists the beneficiaries; companies disclose
lobbying on them. Real Time Investigations has built a database
combining all three sets of records here:
https://realtime.dabbledb.com/page/realtime/XqKHOtUa
www.Fedspending.org – a project of OMB Watch – combines data from
the Federal Procurement Data System and the Federal Assistance Award
Data System to create a free, searchable database of federal government
contracting and spending. The database allows users to search contracts
and grants by state, congressional district, contracting agency or type of
award, and shows where the money is being spent and whether it was
competitively bid. Really interesting to see who the big contractors are in
a member’s district, and whether they contribute. The Office of
Management & Budget provides much of the same information (and
more up to date) on its USASpending.gov site
(http://www.usaspending.gov). Also, check the Federal Contracts
Database on IRE’s Campaign Finance Information Center,
http://www.campaignfinance.org.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

