Cutting-edge Internet tips and tricks
IRE Annual Conference
Laura Lorek, San Antonio Express-News
llorek@express-news.net
Neil Reisner, Florida International University
nr@nreisner.com
Thursday, June 11, 2009 4:50 p.m. to 5:50 p.m.

Search Sites

1. There is a reason “Google” is a verb. It is one of the best search engines out there. Now
you can explore its advanced features with Google Insights for Search at
http://www.google.com/insights/search/# which just launched in beta mode. It lets you
search by category, seasonality, geography and properties. Google also recently put the
“show options” tag at the top of search results. Click it to get more results including
videos, reviews and even allows you to refine your search by date. You can find even
more ways (weather, time, stock quotes, sports scores, etc.) to use Google at
http://www.google.com/help/features.html Google Zeitgeist for search trends at
www.google.com/zeitgeist Google also works as a calculator and a dictionary. Simply
put enter in a problem into the search engine for simple calculations. Or define: search (or
some other word) for a definition. Google Wave will be available later this year. You can
find a video preview of its features here http://wave.google.com/
2. Sites to track the government stimulus money: the U.S. government’s official site is
www.recovery.gov. One of the best breakdowns by state and city is the privately-created
Recovery.org at www.recovery.org which relies on public notices of projects in
newspapers and other sites to put together a database by city of stimulus projects. George
Mason University’s Mercatus Center created Stimulus Watch at www.stimuluswatch.org
3. PIPL – at http://pipl.com/ is “the most comprehensive people search on the Web.” The
search engine deeply scours the Web and databases for information. It lets you search by
name, e-mail, and user name or phone number. It’s a very comprehensive search engine
for ferreting out everything from criminal records to biographical information and former
addresses and current phone numbers and addresses.
4. Created by a Microsoft employee: BlindSearch at http://blindsearch.fejus.com is the
“search engine taste test” and it lets you type in a search query and gives three columns
of results. You vote for the one that best matches your query and the site reveals the
different search engine brands – Google, Bing and Yahoo. It’s kind of like Dogpile.com.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

5. Technically, Wolfram Alpha doesn’t bill itself as a search engine, but as a
“computational knowledge engine.” The site launched in “beta mode” at
www.wolframalpha.com It lets you enter a question or calculation and it relies on its
collection of data to come up with the answer.
Social Networking Sites
6. The most popular social networking site is Facebook.com with more than 200 million
members, followed by LinkedIn.com with more than 40 million members and
Twiiter.com with 32 million members. Other sites worth belonging to include Digg.com,
Technorati.com, FriendFeed.com, Youtube.com, Reddit.com, Stumbleupon.com,
Flickr.com and del.icio.us You should also create a profile on Google Profiles at
www.google.com/profiles and register your name and create a Web page at
www.networksolutions.com You should also register a Facebook Username at
http://www.facebook.com/help.php?page=897
7. Twitter.com is a micro-blogging site in which people type or tweet 140 character max
messages from a cell phone or the Web. It is a good site for reporters because more news
sources are tweeting like FBIPressOffice, news feed of Securities Docket at SecuritiesD,
and CDCEmergency. It has become the insiders’ network to find out information as it
happens. PR and social media expert Brian Solis keeps a comprehensive guide of
“Twitter Tools for Communications Professionals at
http://www.briansolis.com/2008/10/twitter-tools-for-community-and.html It lists the top
10 apps for Twitter and tools for Twitter Trends and analysis like Twitt(url)y, retweetist
and backtweets.
8. Launched in April, Improving the Web built ConvoTrack at http://convotrack.com that
lets you see comments from Twitter, FriendFeed, Digg, Reddit and any blog mentioning
an online post or article. Simply plug in a URL (uniform record locator or Web address)
into the site and it shows you where the link has appeared.
9. Technorati.com – a searchable database of bloggers. PodZinger, which searched
podcasts and billed itself as the spoken word search engine, changed its name to
EveryZing to let everyone know it has broadened the scoop of its searching capabilities.
The Cambridge, Mass.-based specialist in multimedia search plans to launch a video
search engine later this year. You can find it at http://www.everyzing.com
10. Happn.in at www.happn.in focuses on city-specific twitter information. It shows what
people post to Twitter in a particular geographic area and compiles it into categories.
Comprehensive resources:
11. Poynter Online at http://www.poynter.org/
12. A journalist’s guide to the Internet at http://reporter.umd.edu/

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

by Christopher Callahan, dean of the Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass
Communication at Arizona State University. It is one of the best guides to bring
journalists up to speed in the digital age. And Journalism 2.0: How to Survive and Thrive,
a digital literacy guide by Mark Briggs, from the J-Lab and the Knight Citizen News
Network at http://www.kcnn.org/resources/journalism_20/
13. SPJ’s Journalist Toolbox at http://www.journalisttoobox.org has leads for specialized
search sites and tools on a variety of topical subjects including gas prices, swine flu,
weather resources, public records, social networking tools and college sports.
14. Research groups such as Gartner Group at http://www.gartner.com/ and Forrester
Research at http://www.forrester.com for trend and industry reports. Also, Ibis World at
http://www.ibisworld.com/ has reports on more than 700 industries and 8,000 companies.
PR Newswire’s Profnet has a database of experts and also allows you to post queries
directly to its members at https://profnet.prnewswire.com/
15. Investigative Reporters & Editors at www.IRE.org has more than 2,000 tip sheets and
if you plug in business you will find several useful business resources from past
conferences. This site also has reprints of past investigations in its story database. It’s free
to search for members
Other popular sites
16. Launched in 2005, Zabasearch.com – has information on just about anyone. It gleans
its information from public databases that aren’t always available on the Web. You can
even find unlisted phone numbers using this search site.
17. Internet Archive – at archive.org lets you did up extinct Web sites. Using its Wayback
Machine, you enter a Web address and click on “Take me Back” and the archive will
offer up one or more copies of a defunct Web page listed chronologically. And Network
Solution’s Whois registration site to get names and phone numbers for a particular Web
address at http://www.networksolutions.com/whois/index.jsp
18. Guidestar.org provides IRS data from 990 tax documents filed by nonprofits. Use it to
search for salary information, key employees and board of directors. You can also use it
to compile a list of the highest paid executive directors in your city.
19. Public Access to Court Electronics Records, known as PACER at
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov allows access to Federal, Appellate, District and Bankruptcy
courts. It costs just 7 cents per page. And the Securities and Exchange Commission’s
Edgar Online at http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml to find corporate records for public
companies.
20. Zillow.com – lets you get an estimate of the value of anyone’s house along with sale
history and other information like average home price for a town or zip code. It also has

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

satellite photos, maps and features on “famous homes.” The county appraisal district
records are another treasure trove of data on land, homes and other buildings.

More Fun Stuff
21. Bridge2Science at http://bridge2science.com/ is a free service that quickly connects
journalists with scientists.
22. ZipWho at http://zipwho.com/ and ZipSkinny at http://zipskinny.com/ let’s you enter
your Zip Code for a breakdown of U.S. Census data for that area and to see how it
compares to neighboring Zip Codes.
23. TED stands for Technology, Entertainment, and Design. But the conference, started
in 1984, now covers a wide array of topics. Visit http://www.ted.com to view “TED talk”
videos from past conferences from some of the world’s visionaries.
24. Berkman Center for Internet & Society at http://cyber.law.harvard.edu has created a
new project called the Media Cloud that lets you “see the flow of the media” at
http://www.mediacloud.org
25. To find out about chains and furlongs and other units of measure, visit the ultimate
unit converter – at http://ultimateunitconverter.com/

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

