Parachuting In: How to get up to speed quickly
TIPSHEET

James V. Grimaldi
The Washington Post
grimaldij@washpost.com
202-334-6000

Have a partner in the newsroom -- Work closely with another reporter or a researcher in the
main office so you can coordinate tips, stay organized, do Internet and other research and get the most
out of your time in the field.
Find a crossroads headquarters -- Select a location that is central to where you need to be.
Weigh whether you are going public – let everyone know you’re in town – or under cover. It is generally
difficult to remain undercover. Generally, the best you can do is not make a spectacle of yourself. You
get more with honey than vinegar: Be nice to court clerks. They know a lot.
Have a plan -- Know where you want to go, see. Try to arrange meetings in advance. Get the
location of the local courthouses in case you want to pull lawsuits or criminal cases.
Be flexible -- Just because you have a plan does not mean that you can’t adjust.
Follow your instincts -- If something seems suspicious, spend some time to check it out, even if
it takes you away from the direct assignment at hand. Make snippets of time to pursue wild ideas.
Triage your tips -- Do a cost-benefit analysis of the tips you get. How long will it take to pursue
a lead versus what is the potential payoff. Use a story matrix to help.
Listen to your editors -- A good editor will monitor the competition, watch for developments,
see obvious stories to do, leads to pursue or things that don’t add up.
Ignore your editors – Take care to know when your editor is giving you a bum steer. If you
check something out and you think it isn’t going anywhere, don’t be afraid to defy the direction. If you
make fast progress on an alternate promising lead, report back.
Go to the records -- Often times the local reporters have overlooked lawsuits and court cases
that could be news. Lexis-Nexis and many courts have indices of cases online. Get the case number
before you arrive. Get to know the professional court searchers who work for law firms. They can be
very helpful
Find the Gadflies -- You know they are there, just waiting for you to call. They’ve railed for
years at the local paper, but they’ve gotten so frustrated that they didn’t tell them that they’d FOIA’d
hundreds of expense reports and, by the way, they’re here in boxes in my living room if you want to
come take a look. Contact ethics watchdogs, local universities and regional experts to debrief on the
local scene. Monitor the local media. Pull lawsuits and interview local attorneys and prosecutors.
Palin Billed State for Nights Spent at Home
Taxpayers Also Funded Family's Travel
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/08/AR2008090803088.html
ANCHORAGE, Sept. 8 -- Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin has billed taxpayers for 312 nights spent in
her own home during her first 19 months in office, charging a "per diem" allowance intended to cover
meals and incidental expenses while traveling on state business.
Palin E-Mails Show Intense Interest in Trooper's Penalty
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/03/AR2008090303210.html
EAGLE RIVER, Alaska, Sept. 3 -- Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, the running mate for GOP
presidential candidate John McCain, wrote e-mails that harshly criticized Alaska state troopers for
failing to fire her former brother-in-law and ridiculed an internal affairs investigation into his conduct.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

