Watchdog Investigations for Tough Times
Susan D’Astoli (KNXV), Drew Griffin (CNN), Brian Collister (WOAI),
Kathy Times (WDBD)

Follow the stimulus - What does “shovel ready” really mean, and is that what
your community really needs? Job growth? Who’s counting? Isn’t this pork free
bill just a bunch of previously asked for pork?
Check out your Congressman - Find out how they are spending your money.
Earmark requests filed in advance. The king of Pork-He’s one of the high priests
of congressional pork but even this one seems far-fetched for Rep. John Murtha: a
museum honoring foundry workers. The catch-it’s only open one day a year.
Look at what they are spending line item by line item, particularly
discretionary spending - KNXV found in checking the checkbook the city was
spending more on catering than on consultants.
Ask to view the records, not for copies, this will save you big bucks. Bring a
scanner or a laptop, create a spreadsheet and enter material on your own.
Don’t ignore the obvious - KNXV Producer out on the town noticed government
buildings lit up like a Christmas tree. Spent a week determining they never turned
out the lights, costing the government and the taxpayer big bucks.
After you’ve looked at what they’re buying, look at what they’re building A story by KNXV on a new Courthouse Tower showed $347 million dollars being
spent for a taj mahal complete with a penthouse for judges. And oh yeah there
was that trip for 15 to Philadelphia and New York.
In Big League Dreams we found $20 million + in cost overruns in the building of
a city ball park.
Farm Subsidies - Who’s getting those subsidies and are they actually doing any
farming?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Sick Time on Your Dime - Government workers who are allowed to save up sick
time and cash in at retirement. Governments pay out millions in these dollars.
How are they getting around? - What are they driving, who’s driving them, or
who’s flying them. KNXV was tipped about use of the State Plane to ferry
government workers around the state to promote a state charity. Turned into a
much bigger story about blatant abuse, essentially using state plane as a taxi
service for DOT Board members.
How do they keep track of stuff? - There are always inventories. Check with
local city and county to see what’s lost, missing, or has been stolen. We found
missing police radios, guns, stolen copper wiring, even a missing swamp cooler.
Tax dollars not collected - KNXV found $114 million in tax dollars going
uncollected because most of those responsible for that collection had been laid off.
Blockwatch funds - Is your local government using funds the way they were
supposed to be used? KNXV found Blockwatch funds were being funneled to
other areas that had nothing to do with blockwatch even though it was a legislative
mandate.
Check Construction Projects – WOAI discovered a highway overpass project
that was originally supposed to cost $6 Million had tripled in cost because
engineers did not check to see if the roadway was in a flood zone.
State Retirement Bonus – WOAI found State employees who were retiring and
getting huge bonuses as they walked out the door. The scam here is that their
supervisors would keep their jobs open and re-hire them a month later!
School Superintendent Expenses – School districts are saying they need more
and more money. WOAI discovered some superintendents were begging the
public for money but dining out at fancy restaurants and staying in swanky hotels
while traveling. One superintendent had a $600 phone bill when he stayed at the
Four Seasons!

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Audit the Auditors – Many public institutions have auditors, like school districts,
etc. Ask to see the project list for internal/external auditors. Asking for their
project list (which includes a brief description of the issue they are examining)
allows you to be ahead of the release of the final report.
Examine the Expenses - Credit Cards, Cell Phones, Travel Expenses, any and all
expenses. Especially at financially strapped public institutions that are asking
taxpayers to dig further into their pockets.

More Watchdog Story Ideas:
WBZ
The I-Team has been investigating 2008 travel records at the Authority and found
the executives who run Logan Airport and the Tobin Bridge often stay at some of
the finest resorts when they travel on business.
WABC
A New Jersey credit union pays for trips the board says are education related, but
a former CEO says that claim is false. Exotic vacations taken by board members
and paid for by the union members may not be as innocent as originally thought.
ABC7 Investigates.
WFLD
A Chicago police officer is costing the city millions of dollars for his allegedly
unethical behavior. He’s been sued 20 times and repeatedly accused of abusing his
authority. Fox Chicago confronts the officer and investigates each case brought
against him. Why would the City of Chicago continue to employ, and pay for, this
officer and his mischief?
KTVI
St. Louis Public Schools paid for more than $200,000 worth of supplies it can’t
find. Musical instruments such as tubas, a baritone, and a keyboard are all gone.
Two ice machines are reported missing, along with three vending machines and
more than a dozen laptop computers (most of them just purchased in the last two

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

years). Also on the list is a 77-inch smartboard computer that cost nearly $5,000 in
2007.
WGCL
It’s money that’s supposed to be for your kids but instead is going to an office
supply store. We got a tip the school district is paying much more than they should
for classroom supplies. Why is the Fulton Community School District throwing
the money away?
KOVR
A state department has admitted that more than half a million taxpayer dollars
were spent on an empty building that has not been used. From 2004 to 2008, the
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation leased 5,900 square feet
of office space in a San Diego high rise, which was never used. The cost to
taxpayers totals more than $580,000. What happened?
WSB
Governor Sonny Perdue is paid $137,000 a year. Atlanta Mayor Shirley Franklin
earns $133,000. By comparison to average Georgians, those are big salaries. But
they are nothing compared to a little known, but very powerful, local official who
is probably the highest paid elected official in Georgia. County tax commissioners
can pocket tens of thousands of dollars in extra fees, using facilities and
employees paid for by taxpayers.
KOVR
It’s a quickly vanishing business perk — the company car. But it’s not vanishing
for the California Legislature. In fact CBS13 has learned that the state paid more
than $1.5 million for new cars for your legislators in 2007. And this year, the
numbers aren’t much different. In 2007, the State of California spent more than
$90 million on cars alone. And among the thousands of new state vehicles were
cars for assembly members and senators. The legislators get to pick their own cars,
and taxpayers are helping foot the bill.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

WPXI
Target 11 has obtained the list of claims paid by the city last year. We examined
every claim and determined the most expensive and the most common. The most
frequent claims were for accidents involving city vehicles. One hundred thirtyeight people received more than $111,000. One hundred sixteen homeowners got
$71,000 for tree roots that damaged their sidewalks. The trees were planted by the
city. The city paid 42 drivers nearly $15,000 for potholes that damaged their
vehicles.
WTXF
Hawaii and the Virgin Islands are hot vacation spots, but some Philadelphia judges
will tell you they’re a good place to sharpen your judicial skills too! Investigative
reporter Jeff Cole tells viewers of a little-known fund that helps judges to hit the
road to exotic getaways.
WBZ
Every time someone in Massachusetts gets a speeding ticket, they pay a $50 Head
Injury Surcharge. In 2008 more than $10 million was collected to help offset the
cost of caring for people with head injuries. But only about half of that actually
made it into the Head Injury Trust Fund. Why? Back in 2003 the legislature
doubled the fee from $25 to $50 but kept the other half and put it into the state’s
General Fund. That means they can spend the money on anything.
WSB
A special list contains more than 5,000 items valued at more than $9 million ―
guns, cars, and enough computer equipment to fill a warehouse. Your tax dollars
paid for it, and it’s all on the list because it’s missing. Consumer investigator Jim
Strickland had to push a lot of paper for this story.
KMOV
Missouri and Illinois are expected to control $2 billion in transportation-related
stimulus funds. News 4 Investigates’ Craig Cheatham looks at why critics in
Missouri and Illinois are already complaining that much of that money is being
misspent.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

KDFW
Government spending is supposed to be a transparent process but when FOX 4
asked to review the credit card records from the Tarrant Regional Water District,
the agency tried to charge us outrageous fees, then made us wait for months. Our
investigation found this public agency traveling and wining and dining on your tax
dollars. FOX 4 agreed to review the 2006 and 2007 records of the top fourteen
executives at the district. We found tens of thousands of dollars spent at pricey
restaurants, like an $1,122.08 bill at Clary’s in Galveston. We found another bill
for $1449.99 at Bohanan’s Prime Steak & Seafood in San Antonio.Hotel receipts
show the water district spent nearly eighty thousand dollars for lodging at luxury
places like the Westward Look Resort in Tucson, the Chateau Elan Resort in
Georgia, and the Hyatt Regency in Newport
WSMV
In May, state employees were ordered to not travel on the state's dime. Taxpayers
paid lawmakers to take trips to New Orleans, Florida and Washington, D.C. An
analysis of reimbursements and travel expenses for lawmakers showed state
representatives and senators spent more than $109,529 in taxpayer money to travel
all over the country.
WSMV
A federal program is designed to keep local farmers afloat and food on the table.
But the program is funneling money to people in some of the city's wealthiest
neighborhoods. Farm subsidies are money designed as a safety net for farmers
who have rough years, like the drought in 2007. But people you'd hardly think of
as "farmers" are getting hundreds of thousands of dollars of this money. Many of
the people who received big farm subsidies in the Nashville area in the past 11
years don't drive a tractor, work the land or raise animals. Such as the banker who
lives in a mansion and received $763,672 in farm subsidies, the business owner
who lives in Belle Meade and received $289,502 and the publisher who lives in
Green Hills and got $220,356.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

WSMV
The Channel 4 I-Team reported that hundreds of city workers are commuting on
taxpayer dollars. According to the I-Team, more than 800 workers use a car that
the city provides, and residents are not just paying for cars and gas for emergency
responders but also some clerks and water department employees. With gas prices
rolling anywhere but down, imagine having a car and gas paid for. For 858
workers in Nashville, that's their reality, according to city records obtained by the
I-Team.
KPRC
Found that the county tax office is holding millions in overpaid taxes. In all they
found $37.2 million just sitting at the Harris County Tax Office. 57,875 taxpayers
paid too much and may not even know it. Crocker discovered a database on the
Harris County Tax Office Web site that lists everyone who overpaid.
Channel 10 in San Diego
The 10 News I-Team learned the city’s water department employees have been
paid more than $18 million in bonuses in the last three years. Through a public
records request, the I-Team found that the program paid several employees more
than $8,500 in bonuses in 2008. Most employees received between $1,500 and
$4,700. The total bonus payout last year was $6.9 million.
ABC Channel 5 in Boston
Public land used at no cost--Stoneham Town Meeting members voted Monday to
end a 25-year arrangement that allowed a small group of businesses to use town
land at no cost, an arrangement that Massachusetts Inspector General Gregory
Sullivan called a "sweetheart deal." Team 5 Investigate discovered 11 parcels of
land along former rail lines had been turned into parking lots, private driveways
and dump sites for abutting businesses.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

