SUCCEEDING AS A FREELANCER AND AUTHOR
IRE 2009 Saturday, June 13, 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Russ Baker russ@russbaker.com, Rose Ciotta rciotta@phillynews.com, Penny Loeb
cfdodge@msn.com, Steve Weinberg weinbergs@missouri.edu
USEFUL BOOKS
Betsy Lerner, The Forest for the Trees: An Editor's Advice to Writers
Susan Rabiner and Alfred Fortunato, Thinking Like Your Editor: How to Write Great Serious
Nonfiction and Get It Published
GROUPS
(Some of these offer reasonably priced insurance—medical, dental, life, libel):
Washington Independent Writers www.washwriter.org
Freelancers Union www.freelancersunion.org
National Writers Union www.nwu.org
MediaBistro’s AvantGuild www.mediabistro.com/avantguild/
Women in Film and Video (more men than women) www.wifv.org. Great for trying screenwriting
American Society of Journalists and Authors www.asja.org
Author’s Guild www.authorsguild.org Many perks, including book contract reviews, low-cost
website services
WEBSITES
www.publishersmarketplace.com daily news on book deals and publishing
www.mediabistro.com/galleycat/ daily gossip on publishing
www.contentious.com Amy Gahran (Poynter contributor) on cutting edge online media
AGENTS
*Ask friends for agent recommendations, and be sure to find an agent who meets your particular
circumstances and requirements—in terms of the work you do, how experienced you are.
*When looking for an agent, define the book genre you are interested in writing in and read the
acknowledgments for the names of agents. Authors typically thank their editors and their agents.
MARKETS
*Cultivate a wide range of publications—print, online, domestic and foreign. Also try your hand at
entry points for radio and TV.
*Find clients for specialized work, even if they’re not the most glamorous. It is important to have a
relatively steady, reliable stream of projects, and those will make it possible to do the higher-risk,
higher-reward work.
*Make sure you identify the final decision-maker at each outlet, and if possible, deal directly with
them. The exception is when you have a close relationship with a subordinate editor who will guide
you and fight for you.
*Don’t wait long for a reply to story queries before pitching elsewhere. The odds are small that any
publication will say yes, and you need a lot of leads out.
*Newspapers may be cutting staff but they often have freelance money. Cultivate the editors of the
sections you want to write for. If one isn’t interested, another one may be. If you know it’s a good
story for the publication, ask what other section may consider it.
*Send queries, not stories. No sense wasting your time on something they can send a staffer to do.
*Nothing works like personal relationships. If an editor knows your work, you could get a look.
OTHER
*Books and magazine articles often require different styles from daily newspapering. If you are
transitioning, you will have to work on writing skills, including narrative voice and providing color.
*Create a web presence, at least a Facebook page, then move to your own web site as soon as you
can. This helps promote yourself and your stories and books as they publish.
*Build a support group for sharing information and keeping up each other’s spirits.
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

