Andrew Donohue
Editor
voiceofsandiego.org
andrew.donohue@voiceofsandiego.org
619.325.0526
IRE Panel: Creating and managing a local nonprofit online daily publication.
Getting Started
1. It doesn't need to cost that much.
Overhead is low.
You can spend 3/4ths of your budget on journalists.
We started on a $350,000 budget in 2005 and four employees and have slowly
grown that to a budget of more than $1 million and 12 employees.
2. Be OK with smarting small.
You may come from a newsroom of 100 people. But that doesn't mean you can't
build a meaningful organization around a small, focused and aggressive newsroom.
It's better to start small and grow than start big and contract.
You're not a jobs program ‐‐ you're growing an organization from the ground up.
You can't try to create the newsroom you came from.
3. Be prepared to work. A lot.
You're joining a revolution. You've got to be a true believer and ready to work.
4. It's not that wild or exotic of an idea.
Residents across the United States for decades have given donation to receive
the kind of news and content from public broadcasting that they can't get anywhere
else.
With other newsrooms shrinking and a dearth of quality news, they're starting to
understand that they have to fund public‐service journalism just like they do so many
other public services ‐‐ through philanthropy.
Content ‐‐ Who are you and what do you do?
1. Know your personality.
You'll have limited resources.
You can't be everything to everyone.
Every day you'll have to make difficult decisions about what to cover and what to
let slide. If you define early who you are and what you do, you will make those difficult
decisions a little earlier.
2. Focus.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Be the best at something, whether it be politics, crime, education or the
environment.
Then, you will get readership, recognition and revenue. From there, you can
slowly expand.
Resist the urge to spread yourself too thin ‐‐ you'll be a mile wide and an inch
deep.
3. Exploit the gaps.
Don't cover something that's already being done well in your community.
Only do something if you can be the best at it or if no one else is doing it.
Each community is different. Look at what's not being done in your community
and what needs to be done in your community and go after it.
4. Be ready.
Those gaps change quickly.
What can be the strength of a publication can become its weakness in one round
of buyouts or one departed reporter. Be ready to move into a new area at the drop of a
hat.
5. Move quickly.
Be OK with failing.
Try new things every day.
Scrap the things that work. Keep the ones that don't.
6. Don't get too caught up in hits.
Measure impact.
Revenue Streams ‐‐ You'll have more available than anyone if you go nonprofit.
1. Online advertising/corporate sponsorship.
It likely on its own wouldn't be able to support much of a staff, but it can be one
important and potentially growing pillar.
2. Individual memberships.
Just like the on‐air fundraising drives done by public radio and public television.
E‐mail campaigns, events and forums.
3. Large donors.
For 1,000 people that read your work and don't pay for it, there's a wealthy
philanthropist who could easily kick in between $25,000 and $100,000 a year for a cause
they believe in.
The key: Identify people who are interested in specific fields, like education and
the environment, and show them what their world looks like absent investigative
reporting.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Very few people outside of us are all that interested in just broadly "saving
journalism."
4. Foundations
The Knight Foundation is taking the lead in realizing that public‐service
journalism needs to be funded like a public service.
It is also working hard to spur local foundations to do the same.
Foundations that serve your areas of coverage.
5. Be Creative
Syndication
Conferences
Obituaries
Whatever else you can think of
Marketing ‐‐ Don't be bashful
1. Partnerships.
All other media organizations are dying for content as they trim staffs.
You can leverage this by forging partnerships and exchanging content for
publicity and in the process adding multimedia (professionally produced video, audio)
for your site.
2. Use the PR skills you've acquired by osmosis.
You know what works and what doesn't work in getting reporters' attention.
Use those skills to get free publicity and get your story out there.
3. Be humble.
Don't say you're the future of journalism.
Don't promise the world.
Just do great work and let it speak for itself.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

