“Parachuting In” Tip Sheet
Sharyl Attkisson, CBS News Investigative Correspondent
Get on scene (out of the trailer/office/workspace/car).
•
•
•

What can you find, tell, show or describe only by being there yourself?
What interviews or encounters can you capture by just showing up?
What new ideas will you be led to by listening to those on the scene (from witnesses , victims and
first responders to residents)?

Go an extra step and find a fact that explains why the story is more significant.
•

Example: Taxpayer stimulus money spent on an overpass benefitting Microsoft.
What makes it worse? Microsoft has $20 billion cash in the bank and just a few miles away, a
functionally obsolete public bridge used by thousands each day gets no stimulus funds.

•

Example: Taxpayer stimulus money being spent to build a skate board park in a town.
What makes it worse? The town is going bankrupt, school bills are unpaid, it’s laying off firefighters
and city employees.

Explain how the story relates to taxpayers: show your audience how it hits their hard-earned dollar.
Follow the money trail.
•

Ask: who benefits financially?
http://fec.gov/disclosure.shtml : Find out which people and groups have contributed to which
candidates and parties.

•

Find out if money is being spent properly (waste, fraud, abuse?)
www.guidestar.org : Charity and non-profit tax forms which will give a hint as to where they get
their money and how they spent it.

Look at the record for contradictions and contrast the positions in your story.
•
•

First examine the written record. If you find relevant contradictions, look for videotape of the
events/statements (public meetings, Congressional hearings, news conferences, videotaped
depositions).
For business dealings, audio from earnings conference calls remain available online and
Bloomberg will often provide or sell video.

Use deadline techniques to press for interviews and visuals.
Don’t ignore the obvious just because nobody else seems interested. You really might be the first!
Other helpful information:
The PR Playbook: Top Ten Tactics to Influence Negative News
http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/12/29/2005/main1171279.shtml
“Writing Right for Broadcast and Internet News” Attkisson/Vaughan
http://www.amazon.com/Writing-Right-Broadcast-Internet-News/dp/0205343511
Just because nobody’s done it doesn’t mean it’s not a story. Just because somebody’s done it doesn’t
mean you can’t do it better.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

