Misuse of the obstructing and resisting arrest charge
Rita Hibbard
lnvestigatewest

When these charges are used repeatedly by themselves, when no other crime is being alleged

- often by a core group of officers - it can suggest the accusations are being wrongly used to

intimidate, retaliate against and abuse citizens. This investigation, by former Seattle Postlntelligencer reporters Lewis Kamb, Eric Nalder and Daniel Lathrop and edited by Rita Hibbard,
found all of that, including use of the charge to cover up bad and abusive police work.
Find the stories here: 'The Strong Arm of the Law - Obstructing Justicen
http:/~.seattlepi.com/loca1/353020~obstructmain28.asp
Resources:
Obtain court files - municipal, county or state. Look for those that are searchable by
arrest, demographics including race, and officer and precinct if possible.
Once you identify problem officers, make FOI requests for their disciplinary records
Obtain court transcripts or recordings. Get the cases and dissect them. When you read
or hear things like suspects throwing themselves on cars or walls to injure themselves,
or see obvious untruths in the police reports or testimony, look harder at the story.
Sometimes what appears unbelievable is in fact, unbelievable.
Ask if your department has an early intervention program to identify problem officers,
and if so, look at the criteria
Look at the typical resisting arrest rate for officers, and look at those far outside the norm
Some departments have early intervention on obstruction or resisting write FOls on
those and see what it yields
Look at the court case files for what secondary officers were on the scene. This
validated what we had been told anecdotally that much of the issue was a core group
in one precinct

-

-

Experts

Sam Walker, Department of Criminal Justice, University of Nebraska at Omaha, 402554-3590, samwalker@mail.unomaha.edu
Barbara Attard, former San Jose Independent Police Auditor, now a police oversight
consultant, barabara.attard@comcast.net, 415-994-5944.
National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement, Indianapolis, 8664622653, www.nacole.org
Merrick Bobb, founding director of the Police Assessment Resource Center, a national
resource on police reform, 213-623-5757, merrickbobb@~arcinfo.net,www.parc.info
John Jay College of Criminal Justice, Oftice of Continuing and Professional Studies,
Dean Judith F. Kornberg, 212-4841 101

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

