Lyndsey Layton, National Staff Writer
The Washington Post
lavtonl@washpost.com
(202) 334-7493
http://www .washingtonpost.com

2009 IRE National Conference
Baltimore
"Investigating Outbreaks"

HOW TO COVER FOODBORNE ILLNESSES ON THE FLY
JOIN ALL THE MEDIA BRIEFINGS HELD BY THE FDA AND CDC.
These are sometimes the only way to directly question the federal investigatow tracing the
outbreak and the health officials monitoring illness. They can happen at odd hours with little
warning; make sure you're on the email alert for both agencies so you don't miss the call.

READ THE RECALL LIST ON THE FDA WEBSITE OF PRODUCTS being
pulled and contact those manufacturers, growers' associations, anyone whose got a financial stake
in the product. They can be good sources.
WATCH FOR COURT FILINGS against the companies or growers and talk to the
lawyers representing victims.
TALK to the LOCALS. Community health officials are the first to notice an outbreak, state
epidemiologists know quite a lot and are often more accessible and helpful than federal officials.
State health departments often do their own inspections of food facilities.
FIND THE CERTIFIERS. Products with special labels - organic, Kosher, etc. mean some
type of third-party certifier was in that facility. Often major corporations (Nestle, for instance) that
purchase from suppliers or other manufacturers will send their own inspectors to check out a
facility. Anyone who spent time in the facility at the source of an outbreak could be a good source.
SEEK OUT INDUSTRY INSIDERS. From leafy greens to pistachios, nearly every
product has an industry group, people who know the major players, the problems, the scuttlebutt.
READ THE RECORDS. Ask for inspection reports from state and federal officials for the
facility in question. When the FDA completes an initial investigation of a facility, it posts a report
of its findings on its website. It's known as a "483" report and it's valuable.

SOURCES
Food safety advocates with consumer groups:
- Caroline Smith DeWaal, Center for Science in the Public Interest, (202) 777-8366
-Jean Halloran Consumers Union (914) 378-2457
Food safety scientists:
- Donald Schaffner, a food microbiologist with the Institute of Food Technologists, also
teaches in the Food Science Department at Rutgers University. (732) 932-9611 X.214
- Mike Doyle ,microbiologist and director of the Center for Food Safety at the University
of Georgia 770-228-7284 mdovle@up.a.edu
Attorneys
- Fred Pritzker, Minnesota lawyer, prominent food safety atty
fhp@pritzkerlaw.com
- Bill Marler, Seattle lawyer, represents most of the victims in the biggest foodborne
illness cases in the country. Marler Clark LLP,206-346-18go,
bmarler@marlerclark.com,www.marlerclark.com
Former FDA types
- William Hubbard, top official at the FDA until 2005,919 370-9618,
wkhubbard@grnail.com
- Michael R. Taylor, a former top official at both the FDA and USDA, now teaches at
George Washington University. mike.taylor@gwumc.edu

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

