PROGRAMMING: LEARN THE BASIC LINGO AND GAIN NEW POWERS
IRE 2009: Baltimore
Anthony DeBarros, USA TODAY
WHAT IS PROGRAMMING?
In this context, it's writing a computer program -- a sequence of instructions telling the computer to
accomplish tasks.
WHY LEARN IT?
Make your computer work for you. Do more, faster. Are you doing the same five things with a text file
or spreadsheet every week? Want to pull three numbers from each of 250 identical html files? Your
fingers and wrists will be much happier if you write a program to handle those jobs, and you'll have more
time for writing and reporting.
Get a new perspective on what's possible: Opportunities that seemed impossible become doable. You
can scrape hundreds of records from a government web site, rearrange the data in 2 million rows of a
database, relate data to geography and other tasks on a scale not possible by hand.
Get data online: Readers expect to browse information on the Web and interact with the data we report.
Programming skills can help you put it there, either by building databases or interactives.
PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES --WHICH ONE'S FOR YOU?
If you've ever learned a foreign language, you probably found that along with the grammar and
vocabulary came a new way of thinking and looking at the world. The same is true with a programming
language -- each has its own syntax, conventions and ways to address tasks. Start with one that will be
useful for a specific task (scraping, web development). Consider whether you can find a mentor to share
examples and help you solve problems. Some choices:

C#: Object-oriented language developed by Microsoft and used in, among other things, Microsoft's .NET
framework. Used frequently for app building, web development. (msdn.microsoft.com/enus/vcsharp/aa336809.aspx)
JavaScript: "The Netscape-developed object scripting language used in millions of web pages and
server applications worldwide." (https://developer.mozilla.org/en/About~JavaScript).See also jQuery:
(jquery.com/)
Perl: A "general-purpose programming language originally developed for text manipulation and now used
for a wide range of tasks including system administration, web development, network programming, GUI
development, and more." Using regular expressions in Perl is a favorite way to scrape web sites.
(www.perl.org)
PHP: A "widely-used general-purpose scripting language that is especially suited for Web development
and can be embedded into HTML." Server-side scripting. (www.php.net)
Python: A "dynamic object-oriented programming language that can be used for many kinds of software
development." Used in the Django web application framework. (www.python.org)
Ruby: A "dynamic, open source programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity. It has
an elegant syntax that is natural to read and easy to write." Used with the Ruby on Rails web framework;
variants available. (www.ruby-lang.org)
DATABASE LANGUAGES
SQL: Structured Query Language is used to query and modify data and objects in databases as well as
create procedures to automate those tasks. Knowing the basic syntax will help you query a range of
database systems, from MySQL to PostgreSQL to SQL Server.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

