INVESTIGATING PROBATION
Joseph Neff
jneff@newsobserver.com
919-829-4516
Probation systems are the red-haired stepchildren of the justice system: overloaded with
offenders, underfunded by the legislature, unappreciated by the public, and generally
ignored by the press. Done well, probation can get offenders off drugs, into jobs and out
of trouble, for a fraction of the cost of prison. Done poorly, probation can let offenders
run wild and create havoc in the community.
There many more offenders on probation than in prison (3 – 1 ration in North Carolina).
Probation officers tend to have big caseloads that make supervision difficult or
impossible. Vacant positions are a cancer to the probation system: who's supervising the
offenders on a vacant caseload? Probation systems are often run by political hires, not
professionals. Our series on North Carolina's crippled probation system can be found at:
http://www.newsobserver.com/probation/

FIGURING OUT THE ROAD MAP:
* Request record layouts (aka data dictionary aka file structure) of all databases in
departments you are investigating. Read. Seek out technical person to explain layouts and
guide you through contents.
* Read state law governing probation.
* Obtain departmental policy and forms manual. This manual explains how the job is
supposed to be done. It allows you to write with authority when things go wrong. It also
lists forms that probation officers must fill out, forms that you can request.
RECORDS AND OTHER BUILDING BLOCKS:
* Court records. Digital records of all criminal cases filed in North Carolina since 1990.
These records are skeletal: name, DOB, charge, disposition, etc. We had to pull the paper
court files of anyone we reported on.
* Serious crime reports. Probation officers are required to file this one page form
whenever a client is charged with a serious crime.
* Serious crime case audit: managers follow up the serious crime reports with an audit
of how the probation officer, his supervisor, and the officer performed.
* Prison records: digital records on all people sentenced to probation, their criminal
histories, sentences, etc. About 1 million individuals.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

* Probation violation records: digital records on every probation violation filed in
court, including date filed, type of violation, comments in memo field, outcome, judge,
probation officer, etc. About 270,000 unique individuals.
* Emails of probation officials.
* Internal and external audits
* Internal management reports.
* Staffing reports. Vacant positions are like cancer to overworked probation officers.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

