2009 CAR Stow Ideas

Police Overtime - How much overtime is your local law enforcement agency paying. Could it save
money by adding officers instead of paying time and a half? File an open records request for the
amount paid last year. Make sure to ask for the OT and extra pay in addition to the base salary.
Steven Stock, CBS4 found Miami PD spent $70 Million on overtime and extra pay for officers.
Government Salaries - People love reading and seeing how much we're paying government
employees. Again, make sure you ask for all forms of payment, such as overtime, bonuses etc. It
adds up. If you have data from previous years, also compare who got the biggest raises.
School Superintendent Salaries - Superintendents are among the highest paid school employees.
In addition to their base salary, many get perks such as housing and car allowances, paid vacations,
private club memberships etc. Many also are allowed to moonlight. Many get raises every year even
when the teachers and other employees do not. Compare the increases to rank and file employees.
Check to see if the school district is cutting programs and services.
University President Salaries - How much is the president of your local colleges and universities
earning? How does it compare to other schools? Any perks to go along with the salary? Compare
the increase in salary to the increase in tuition costs. Bennett Cunningham, K M did the story.
Airport Salaries -We often overlook salaries of those working at our airports. Bennett Cunningham,
KTVT did this story and found some surprises.
School Superintendent and College Professors Credentials Some top level educators have
questionable degrees, obtained through colleges and universities that are not accredited. Here's one
list of such institutions: htt~://www.mi~hiaan.aov/documents/~on-accredited~chools
78090 7.pdf
Google the name of the institution and your city or state and see what comes up. Check to see if it's
illegal in your state. Nanci Wilson, KEYE-TV and Mark Greenblatt, KHOU-TV both did the story and
found lots of educators with bogus degrees.
School Violence - Crunch the data and see which schools have the most fights, weapons, drug
arrests etc. Jeremy Rogalski at KHOU did a story on how many times schools hide the numbers and
don't "report it all"
Stolen Luaclane at Airports - How safe is your stuff? The TSA posts data of stolen luggage here
from 2008. http://www.tsa.gov/research/readinsl/index.shtm How does your airport fare?
Federal Stimulus,-How is it being spent in your local community and schools? Is it on projects that
are really important or on things like the new Frisbee Golf Course in Austin, Tx?
FEMA Fire Money How is this being spent in your community?
Farm Bill dollars spent on people who don't live or actually work A FARM!!! Here's a site with the
data: http://farrn.ewg.org/farm~
TASER Use -Who gets tasered the most in your community? Jason Whitely WFAA did the story in
Dallas and Houston. The police department has the data of who, when and where tasers are used.
Does the Tax Office Owe vou money? You'd have to check with your local tax office, but in Texas
if you don't realize that you've overpaid your property taxes and file an application to get a
refund within 3 years, the tax office keeps that money. Some counties send 1 letter... that's it. If the
taxpayer tosses it, they'd never know they may have overpaid. The Texas Property Tax Code won't
allow the tax office to just issue a credit on your next bill. Amy Davis KPRC did the story.
http://www.click2houston.com/news/l9441939/detail.html
Unclaimed money funds - Check the listing of your local unclaimed money funds and see how
many people or businesses are listed that are well known and have been in same location for years.
I found funds owed to our city and county. Many citizens on the list have not moved or changed their
phone numbers. Don't forget to check the bankruptcy courts. It also has a list of unclaimed funds.
Also ask for any complaints filed. Did someone leave something in a safe deposit box only to find it
was sold off because the bank couldn't locate them? Another angle is to look at how your
government sells off unclaimed property. The Texas Comptroller uses EBay.

-

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Lawmaker Owned Businesses in Forfeiture - Run the names of your lawmakers through the state
agency that registers businesses to see if any have forfeited businesses for non-payment of taxes or
failing to submit the proper papenvork.
..
Which Grocery Store is least expensive? Consumer stories that show viewers how they can save
money have really done well for me in this economy. We picked the 5 largest grocery stores,
selected 15 items and priced them at each store. (We did 3 trips and checked prices over 3 months
and took the average to account for sales). Amy Davis, KPRC filed an open records request with the
state agency that handles complaints of scanning errors at grocery stores to see which stores are
overcharging most often.
Sam's or Costco -Who's cheaper? Compare prices at both. Is one better than the other? How do
they compare to WalMart or other smaller stores?
Test the Car Mechanic- Amy Davis, KPRC hooked up with AAA and had a vehicle checked out.
Then we wired it with hidden cameras and took it to 5 repair shops (with AAA inspecting it after each
visit). Did we get what we paid for? Did the shops make repairs at all? We did this as a 3 part series.
On the last day, we had a phone bank with mechanics at the station answering viewer's calls about all
things car-related.
Citv Claims: How many people file claims with your City for damaged property caused by City work
trucks, cruisers, etc? How many are paid? How are many are not? What's the criteria for deciding
who gets paid and who doesn't?
Damaue to CiW Property - When a driver crashes into a pole, guardrail etc, does your local
governmental entity make them pay for the damage? If not, why?
Arthritis Kits- Check with your local Medicare office about this. Businesses are targeting seniors and
signing them up for "arthritis kits." The senior doesn't have to pay anything, but Medicare is billed
- more than $1000 for these kits that are nothing more than a bunch of elbow, wrist and knee pads.
Tow Trucks - Check complaints against wrecker companies and storage lots in your area. Who has
the most complaints? What kinds of complaints are they? Is it far more expensive to get towed for
parking in the wrong spot than if your vehicle is disabled? If so, why? Is it cheaper to call a tow truck
yourself or have the officer at the scene of the accident call?
Government Funded Lobbvinq - Did your city, county, school district use tax dollars for lobbying?
Were they using taxpayer's money to lobby to raise more taxes? What were they lobbying for or
against? Is your school district spending funds on lobbyists instead of teachers or books? Amy
Davis, KPRC found the City of Houston paid lobbyists to lobby the Texas Legislature for red light
cameras, even though the majority of taxpayers are against them. Some lobbyists are required to
register their clients, otherwise file an open records request. Another note, many governmental
entities belong to associations that already lobby for their interests.
Elected Official Campainn Expenditures - Check to see how elected officials spend their donor's
money. Most people assume they are giving to help get someone elected, not to spend it on leasing
airplanes, $l,OOO/month cars, luxury dining and travel overseas or to big name golf tournaments.
Also, many used their donor's funds to support other candidates.
Amy Davis, KPRC; Stephen Stock, CBS4 Miami; Jason Whitely WFAA

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

