June 11,2009
Investigative Reporters and Editors Annual Conference -- Baltimore
Joe Bergantino and Maggie Mulvihill, New England Center for Investigative Reporting, jbergant@bu.edu,
mmulvih@bu.edu
David Cohn, Spot.Us, David@spot.us
Andy Hall, Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism, ahall@wisconsinwatch.org

Building Investigative Centers:
Getting Through the First Year
I) Build a strong framework. Have as much as possible in place before you leave

your old job or publicly announce the creation of your organization.
Consider:
--A written summary that will excite the public, other media and potential funders while also containing enough
nuts and bolts to be tangible and realistic.
--An early budget that outlines how your group will grow as its resources increase. This becomes a summary of
your priorities.
--Pro bono legal help in forming the organization and in assisting with full range of services from contract reviews
to pre-publication reviews. In some states, lawyers donate start-up services to nonprofits. FOI lawyers may be
willing to make a written, long-term commitment.
--A strong blend of journalistic, nonprofit and financial expertise on the board of directors.
--A board of journalism advisers to provide assistance (on an ad-hoc basis, not meeting as a group) and to raise
your group's profile.
--Which journalism organizations might make strong partners for your organization.
--An ethics policy -- whether to write your own or adapt an existing code, such as SPJ's.
--A system for ensuring that your news releases and news reports receive visibility on others' Web sites or in news
coverage.
--A working list of story ideas.
--A fundraising policy and a separate but related fundraising plan.
--A bank or credit union account with a credit card -- and policies for who can sign financial documents.
--What roles you might allow volunteers to play in your organization -- and policies for managing them.
--How you'll design and manage your Web site.
--Setting up conference calls for board meetings to save time, and money on travel.
--A private wiki to keep track of all of this while keeping board members and other insiders informed.
-- Reading about nonprofit management and running a business. Perhaps attend a workshop at local university.
2) Establish an identity. Set up a table at press and broadcast association meetings. Become a dues-paying

member of print, broadcast and online associations and training groups such as IRE. Take time to develop the right
name, Web address, logo, business card, letterhead, start-up Web site and working Web site. Spread the word and
be ready to be interviewed by local, national and trade media. Offer to write articles for journals and Web
publications. Find ways to freshen your Web site at least a few times a week -- it may initially be more valuable as a
marketing technique than as a journalistic move. Appear on panels at as many events as possible. Speak to college
classes. Even before you're ready to publish, do something useful to attract attention and build goodwill, such as
hosting a Better Watchdog Workshop.

3) Know that the "start-up"phase will take over your life.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

You're juggling:
--Research on potential funders at the national, regional, state and local levels. Seek free resources at libraries,
such as electronic directories of foundations. Look at Web sites to see who's funding the kind of work you hope to
produce. Nurture relationships with people who don't have to help, but who will if they're excited, such as
fundraising experts for a university with which your organization is affiliated. Talk to people who've written
successful grant applications. Ask for copies of the proposals. After you've done your homework, seek opportunities
to speak with representatives of potential funders. Use an intermediary, such as a board member, to ease your path,
if possible, to avoid sending out blind (unproductive) inquiries.
--Discussions with sources and other journalists about potential story ideas. And methods for determining how
projects will be developed and made available to other media and the public. You may decide to develop an embargo
system for releasing content to other media. Will you allow media to republish or rebroadcast your content under a
Creative Commons license, and if so, will you allow them to make modifications?
--Creation of systems for keeping track of the budget (updated at least monthly), major action items (updated at
least weekly), payroll, taxes and withholding.
--Insurance needs, from property to errors and omissions, to directors and officers to media and liability, to
workers compensation. May need to pay state and federal unemployment tax in some cases.
--Development of systems for managing story notes, story drafts and final versions, audio and video files, along
with basic corporate information, within your organization. If nonprofit, consider applying for free Education
Edition of Google Apps (uses your domain address for sharing e-mail, a variety of file types including text and
spreadsheets, and creation of simple, private Web sites) or similar Web-based system.
--Networking with other journalists around the country who are engaged in similar ventures -- valuable, but
manage your time and build toward tangible results.
--If nonprofit, filing an IRS Form 1023 application for tax-exempt status. May need to file separate form with
state regulator of charities. May wish to apply for exemption from state sales taxes.
--Office space, rent, utilities and equipment. If nonprofit, remember that reduced-cost or free services or
equipment may count as in-kind contributions, which may boost kligibility for some grant programs. For software,
check out discounts for nonprofits at many vendors, and see software deals at www.techsoup.org (application
required).
--Internet and telephone service. A travel budget. Office rent and utilities.
--Fatigue. The stress and long hours may make you vulnerable to illness. Take care of yourself. Pace yourself.
Delegate to staff and volunteers.

4) Learn technology but don't get distracted by it.
Build the project out in phases.

5) Adaptability is the most important skill. So says Center for Public Integrity

founder Chuck Lewis. And he's right.
Receive a rejection letter from a potential funder? Don't give up. Call and seek suggestions for reworking your pitch
or seeking support elsewhere. Retired or laid-off journalists express interest in volunteering? Find a way to add this
to your business model. Overwhelmed by how much there is to do and how much you don't know? Draw upon the
resources of IRE, other non-profits, existing organizations and friends and contacts to combine their knowledge
with yours. Seek someone who's not on the board of directors to serve as a consultant and sounding board -- as a
volunteer at first and perhaps receiving pay as the organization grows.

6) Keep track of your original dream -- it will guide and fuel you, and will inspire
others to join.
Congratulations: You're on your way to year two!

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

