June 12,2009
~nvesti~ative
Reporters and Editors annual conference -- Baltimore
Andy Hall, Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism, ahall@wisconsinwatch.org
David Kay Johnston, author, davidcay@mac.com
Norberto Santana, freelancer, nsmaximo8~1@gmail.com

Back to basics: Finding stories in what
is readily available but rarely examined
Investigative stories can spring from easy-to-get information. Here are some ideas for
digging into issues even if you have little time and a small budget.
Claims and lawsuits against local government: The clerks' offices at public agencies are a
goldmine for these often-overlooked documents that provide details of problems ranging from people
tripping on sidewalks to severe cases of sexual assault.
Depopulation of rural areas: Is the recession hastening this trend in your state or region? Use
American Community Survey and school enrollment data to find out. If some areas aren't
experiencing drops, find out why. Perhaps there's a surge in immigrant workers to farms in the area?
How is that affecting that area's schools (ESL programs, for example) and neighborhoods?

E-mails,schedules and phone records (including cell): Great insights into how public
officials spend their time and cut deals. Is the city manager calling hookers on a city-owned phone?

Financial disclosure forms: What do public officials own, what stock do they hold, and where do
they receive income from? Conflicts of interest with their public policy decisions? Get these at clerks
or ethics offices.
Minutes of closed sessions: The public was barred from the meeting, but the minutes are public
records.
Neighborhood poverty and changes in demographics: Data on free and reduced price lunch
eligibility for elementary school attendance areas. Compare multiple years to find trends. Elementary
schools have the smallest attendance areas, generally, so they're the most sensitive indicator of
neighborhood changes. Data updated annually. Note: Some districts also gather data on parents'
educational attainment, another potent indicator.
Neighborhoods being neglected: Gather past task force reports studying troubled
neighborhoods. How many recommendations have been adopted? How are the neighborhoods
faring? How well does your community revive failing neighborhoods? Note: Find great neighborhood
sources in the lists of residents who helped produce the reports. Reports available in local Community
Development Block Grant offices and economic development agencies.
Prison populations: Always good to cover trends in how many people are locked up, compared to
other states. There are more layers to the issue. Look at factors influencing the size of the prison
population such as length of sentence and reason for admission. You may find surprising trends,
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

y:.,

".'#*a . .
.".%

t'"
: &'?%
'

' b 5 '

, ",%

particularly if your state has enacted truth in sentencing laws. For example, in some states, inmate
populations' growth increasingly is driving by large increases in the numbers of residents being sent
back to prison because of probation rule violations, not because they committed new offenses. The
crime rate can decline while the inmate population rises, driving up expenses during a time when
budgets are squeezed. Is this good public policy? Are there geographic differences in these patterns
within your state?

Public employees' rising incomes: Perhaps your news organization has reported on the small
average raises being provided to public employees in local and state government and schools. There's
more to the picture. Try tracking the actual compensation levels over time of specific employees,
particularly aides of the governor, mayor of key public leaders. You may find that through promotions
and bonuses, many officials have beaten the average by a wide margin. How do those pay increases
compare to what's happening to incomes levels of typical families in your community? Have any
public-spirited employees voluntarily taken pay cuts or freezes?
Risk management departments: Every public agency has one. And it's a window into every
lawsuit filed against the agency. Just file a public-records request. How many suits? Types of
problems? Settlements?
Safety net and nonprofit sector are shrinking: Get IRS Form ggos from www.guidestar.org or
directly from top organizations in your community, combine with interviews to estimate how much
less money is available for the local safety net for vulnerable residents, as well as for other causes such
as the arts and education. Could yield wide variety of coverage. How are these reductions affecting
people already, and what's going to happen next year, when many foundations will have even less
money to disperse?
Sales tax revenues: A critical source of state and local revenue. What do the trends mean for
governments and residents?
Schooblopen enrollment: IS it really open? Get open enrollment data to look for trends over time.

Which schools and districts are families attempting to leave? Which schools and districts are hot?
Importantly, look at rejected transfer requests. Why did a district say no to a family? Were the reasons
valid, particularly in light of U.S. Supreme Court ruling limiting the ability of schools to use race as a
basis for school assignment?

Stimulus spending: Go local. Dig into the details of a local project that officialsare touting as
shovel-ready and worthy of stimulus funding. Is it really? Are the plans up to date? Often not. How
well researched are the projections regarding how many jobs the project will create? Is a project
residents in your community really want? If it's a transportation project, will it increase safety and
save lives, or just put some people to work? How solid are the ridership and cost projections? Look at
past projects. Did those projections come true?
Traffic data: More than just a story about roads (although that often is useful), data may help depict
the impact of the recession upon certain areas.
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

