Consumer Investigations for
Tough Times
2009 IRE Conference
Baltimore

THE ULTIMATE
REFERENCE
To Help You Tame
The Consumer Beat
BY
McNelly Torres
Freelance Writer
CaSe529(~2aol.con1
-

Jim Strickland
Consumer Investigator
WSB-TV, Atlanta
strickland@wsbtv.com

Matt Meagher
Investigative Correspondent
Inside Edition
rnmeagher@,cbs.com

Jackie Callaway
Consumer Reporter
WFTS-TV, Tampa
jcallawayiii2wfts.com

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Consumer Investigations for Tough Times

2009 IRE Conference - Baltimore
The down economy gives investigators great opportunities and difficult challenges. Scam artists
target job seekers and lure investors with promises of stable returns. From using President
Obama's stimulus package to rip off consumers to identity theft and foreclosure rescue schemes,
scams artists are lurking every day for new opportunities to take advantage of consumers. Our
challenge is to uncover these stories and turn around quick, watchdog dailies.
We have some ideas on quick stories you can do in your own backyard, but since old habits are
hard to break, w e also offer a few longer form pieces that will take some time.
Acai-Berry: Free trial offers are sometimes a trap for consumers. That was the case with the
miracle berry known as Acai-Berry and the South Florida-based companies selling these pills on
the Web. Consumers were lured to take the 30-day free trial but soon found out that it was just a
scam. There are many companies like this on the Web. Check their background and complaint
history and also consumer boards on the Internet. You'll find a wealth of information about them.
Fee-based job offer scams. These schemes offer people access to job listings, but they are not
read. Jim just busted a nationwide scam advertising assistance taking the postal exam. Search
"Testing Authority" on Ripoff Report for victims in your area, Jim can help ABC affiliates with
tape.
Beware if you are looking to rent a home. Many renters are renting homes that are in foreclosure.
Find out how many folks have gone through this in your community and tell readers or viewers
how to look for records like the clerk of court web sites to protect themselves. Also, tell your
readers there's a new federal law that offers some protections to renters.
Stimulus money: Not everyone has received a stimulus check.
Debt Collection: Two of the country's most notorious debt collecting law firms are in Atlanta.
Ripoff Report has plenty of victims. The collectors hide behind their law licenses to avoid state
regulation, and pay off consumers who file individual federal lawsuits. Jim has tape of each
firm's big-wig, and can help ABC affiliates.
Inside Edition obtained disturbing actualities of threatening phone calls made by debt collectors
for a story they did. Matt and producer Cindy Galli offer the following tips if you're considering
doing a story about a problem that is likely to get worse:
o Don't dismiss the deadbeat. Get over the possibly unsavory idea of defending someone
who hasn't paid his bills on time. In this economy, it's easy to find well-meaning people
who simply couldn't make ends meet and fell prey to someone engaging in much more
nefarious behavior (i.e. a rogue debt collector).

o Make friends with your local consumer attorneys. This story came from our relationship
with a firm that specializes in debt collection abuse cases. When an interesting case now

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

comes across this attorney's desk, he calls us first. He is also savvy enough to know that
if audio exists, his case - and our story - will be much more compelling.
o

Jim adds the National Association of Consumer Advocates (naca.net) lists the attorneys.

o

Take the next step if you have the time and resources. The phone calls were egregious
enough to make a compelling quick turn story, but we wanted to put a face on the calls by
then tracking down the debt collector. We had a first name and a phone number for her,
but it still took a bit of digging to get her identity and location. In the end, seeing the
person who made the racist phone calls gave the story a bit of closure.

Unlicensed contractors are a big problem in Florida and it might be an increasing problem in
other states because of the economy. Seek fraud investigators who can provide you a compelling
victim you can use in your story to educate others.
Lottery tickets: Sometimes the scratch-off games have already given away the big money but not
everyone knows it and consumers are still buying the tickets. Usually the state has a database or
web site you can point people to find out iftheir favorite game is a loser.
Loan modification companies: There are many of these companies taking advantage of
homeowners who are about to lose their homes. In Florida, for example, a state law was passed
last year that forbids a company from charging homeowners upfront before they have done any
loan modification. HUD certifies non-profits that provide the same service free to the consumer.
You can find these agencies by searching your state from a link on HUD's front page.
http://www.hud.gov/offices/hs9/sfh/hcc/fc/ These agencies can provide real people to tell
housing downturn stories.
Inside Edition found that some lawyers, allowed to take large up front fees they call "retainers",
are selling their name to basic boiler room operations that promise great things and deliver little.
Also they found a number of victims of loan modification scams had been contacted by someone
who had inside information about their financial plight. As a result, they thought they were being
contacted by someone associated with their mortgage holder, when in fact it was a scam
company.
Foreclosure rescue scams: yes, everyone has done them already - so find a twist. Your best bet?
Find a great bad guy. Inside Edition found multiple companies all logging thousands of
complaints, but before shooting a frame of video, we did a thorough background of all the
principals. Had they been involved in other scams before? Were they living large with nice
homes and fancy cars? Was there an indication of where the money was going? This made it
easier to narrow our target.

o Other tips: Don't ever forget to do a comprehensive court search ... and don't be content
with pulling just the complaint and the disposition. A so-so foreclosure scam story came
to life when we obtained documents from a court case brought by an attorney general.
We hired a researcher to pull the thousands-plus page court case, and from this, we
obtained telemarketing scripts, bank statements, even cancelled checks to the company's
principals, making it much easier to follow the money.
o

Always look for the emotional big picture. It's a given that you're going to play up a
homeowner's despair over not only losing her home, but being out hundreds or thousands
of dollars to a scam artist. But everyone has heard this story now. Look for the further

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

implications of their situation. One of our victims had to move in with his elderly
mother, a humiliating situation for him; another victim had to move into a small
apartment, which meant breaking up her children and sending one to live with his father.
The unemployment rate has eclipsed what the gov't considered to be its worst case scenario.
State officials are jammed with unemployment applications and many people are left in limbo
after applying online. Expose this with your local Labor Department to find out why some folks
have been left out. This is a quick turnaround that shows results.
Also, in this economy, people will take unsavory jobs they might not usually ... and they'll go to
great lengths to keep them. In researching a consumer story about the sales tactics of Kirby
vacuum salespeople, Inside Edition found many of those people couldn't find work elsewhere . . .
so they'd result to unethical means in order to earn a paltry commission on a sale. Many
salespeople had criminal backgrounds and since they were most likely unemployable elsewhere,
seemed to have no problem using shady tactics to keep their door-to-door sales job. Another tip:

o Turn an investigation of shady salespeople on its ear and look at how the company treats
its employees. We received many complaints from current and former Kirby employees
who say they were never paid earned commissions on their sales - a typical complaint in
door-to-door sales. These salespeople felt taken advantage of by bosses who knew they
coi~ldlikely not find other work in this economy.
Fees dealing: From credit cards to your cable bill and even medical bills, you can negotiate those
fees down to a reasonable price.
Credit Repair or Credit Counseling Scams: They tell you they can help you avoid bankruptcy and
lower your credit card interest rates, but they'll need a sizeable upfront "deposit" and you'll need
to authorize them to take money directly from your checking account every month so they can be
sure your bills are paid on time. Inside Edition found they're often registered as "not for profits"
and have the words "Christian" or "family" in their titles. But when we pulled the 990's on a
company in Florida we found that they were shoveling money to "independent", "for profit"
companies that they just happened to own. More tips:
o

Don't let official records be the "end all" Although we knew the owner of this company
was involved in the day-to-day operations while consumers were getting ripped off,
records from the state's Department of Corporations showed he had been removed
months earlier. Conversations with associates and former employees, as well as other
documents we uncovered contradicted this.

o Don't be afraid of anonymous sources. Instead, use them as a great jumping-off point for
fact-finding. We spoke with many former employees of this company, none of whom
wanted to speak on the record .. . but ALL of whom had plenty to say about the owner's
lifestyle. One in particular, whose name we never even knew, mentioned his penchant
for race horses and frequent trips to another state. From this, we found dozens of race
horses and investment properties, all curiously purchased by him while he owned the
scam company.
o Graphics are your friend - but keep it simple! This scheme was a complex set-up of forprofit companies funneling unsuspecting consumers into a non-profit company, and we
needed a simple way to explain how consumers were getting taken. What resulted was a

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

seemingly elementary but easy-to-follow graphic of various logos all being "funneled"
into one. Don't overthink the graphic -just walk viewers through it.
Credit monitoring companies: Many Americans worry about identity theft and they will pay these
types of companies to monitor their credit reports. But you need to be aware what they really do
because they are expensive and these are things you can do yourself for free.
Credit Card Fee Rush: With the new federal regs, banks are hiking fees and interest rates before
the law goes into effect. Should be easy to find real people using tips revealed later in this
tipsheet.
ChryslerIGM Suits: The bankruptcies will wipe out tort claims for victims alleging damages due
to defective cars. Brian Ross did the story nationally last week, but you can localize it with a
quick search of your local Superior Court's civil records. Hunt for G M and Chrysler named as
defendants. The widow of a man killed in a Jeep has already e-mailed WSB.
Foreclosure Pools: Sub-divisions built by developers hit hard by the downturn often have
swimming pools that are left unattended and unclean. WSB has found two of them recently, and
got the health dept. to shut them down. They're so slimy a child who falls in will never be seen.
15% Ethanol: The DC green machine is pushing a gas blend with 15% ethanol. It destroys lawn
mowers, WSB shot this daily in 90 minutes. Get a small engine repair guy to give you a show
and tell of what the current 10% blend does to fuel lines,

Infomercial Investigations - We see them all the time on late night television, but who's checking
to see if they really work? Inside Edition's Matt Meagher and producer Larry Posner investigated
one of the most popular, "John Beck's Free and Clear" real estate system and found many of the
claims either deceptive or wrong. Tips:

o One great source of information was the infomercial producers. They supplied us with
documentation supporting their claims. We checked them out and found a goldmine of
information showing deception.
o When looking for victims, look for websites that might be dedicated to the issue. We
found a person who compiled hundreds of victims. This person was not affiliated with
any government agency or consumer group.
o Don't forget to FOIA the FTC and state consumer agencies. There are many
infomercials out there, and no one seems to be checking them out.
Another infomercial-internet story Inside Edition had a lot of success with recently was "Cash 4
Gold". Some tips for that or any "sell quick" story from Inside Edition producer Ned Berkowitz

o Assemble some old gold jewelry, stuff that's been sitting drawers for years, more is better
and will result in larger discrepancies in your offers. Find at least one trustworthy local
expert or academian, who can tell you what it's worth. Take it to as many different shops
as you can.
o Where legal, use hidden camera to tape the offers you receive.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Keep an eye out for gold buying ads in your local paper. Many buyers travel through
towns, setting up shop in local hotels. Even Cash4Gold is doing this now.
Note whether the gold buyers promise to give you the most for your gold or offer any
other guarantees. Whatever you're offered, refuse. This will result in a better offer.
Also, yo11 have to keep the gold to take to other places. Send your gold to Cash4Gold or
another mail-in service to compare. They almost always offer less than brick-and-mortar
shops. Check the reputations of your local jewelers and gold buyers with the BBB, and
check local courts to find out if they've been sued. You can also take your gold to pawn
shops or jewelers who buy estate jewelry to compare offers.
Add'l Stow Ideas Unrelated to the Economv

Exploding Patio Tables: Done in a few markets, but happening all over. Chinese-made glass
patio tables sold mainly at Kmart and Home Depot explode with no warning. CPSC has refused
to recall them, despite knowing of the issue for years. Lots of real people on
consumeraffairs.com. Several postings per week on this one.
Exploding Volvo Moonroofs: Certain Models of Volvo sedans suffer moonroof implosions while
going under the car wash blow dryer. The Int'l Car Wash Assn put out a warning about it. Find
real people on Volvo owner blogs, or by calling local body shops.
Moldy LG Washers: Also all over the blogs. LG front loading washers make clothes stink
because water does not fully drain, allowing mold to grow.
Skin Deep: That's the name of a data base put together by the Environmental Working Group. It
lists hundreds of cosmetics and grades them based of the dangerous chemicals they contain.
There's a separate list of baby products. WSB had some school teachers pour there make up bags
onto a table and ran the products through the DB. An eye opener.
Congressional Junkets: While federal lawmakers were chastising bailed-out corporate chieftains
for luxurious travel, many of them were planning their own extravagant getaways that the
taxpayers will pick up the tab for. When Congress is in recess, many Democrats and Republicans
head out on "fact finding" trips to some of the most exotic locations in the world, often taking
along spouses. While some of the trips are easy to justify, many will baffle you. Why do so many
committees go to the same place? Why does every trip seem to have a layover in Hawaii or
Paris? Couldn't the hundreds of millions of dollars spent by the military to provide luxury air
travel be better spent on defense? Matt Meagher and Inside Edition producer Charlie McLravy
discovered it's almost impossible to find out the true purpose or cost of some of these trips. You
can search for the trips members have been on in the congressional quarterly, but don't expect
many specifics.

More storv ideas from Inside Edition:
Dirty Hotels - Check Tripadvisor.com for traveler reviews -then go visit the worst hotels to
check out the rooms on camera.
Carnival Workers - If you have the time and some guts, apply for a job as a trainee at a traveling
carnival. We found dangerous practices, lack of training and rampant drug use by workers who

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

were in charge of operating rides. You need to look like you fit in with the "Carney" crowd in
order to get friendly with the workers.
Food Cart Vendors - Ever wonder how they wash their hands - or keep the food refrigerated?
Just spend a few hours observing various vendors and you can often capture some pretty
disgusting practices.
Fake Sushi - D o DNA tests on your local sushi restaurants to find if they are substituting
expensive fish with cheap tilapia.
Library Crime - Check out public libraries in your area to see if they are seeing an increase in
crime. Police departments may be able to help. Often the crime is related to use of the libraries
internet access or due to disturbed people taking refuge in the library.
Grandma Scam - Elderly person gets call from grandson claiming to need money for some
emergence - arrested, car impounded, etc. Needs money wired ASAP. Of course they comply
and later find out it is a scam. Occasionally it has been caught on voicemail.
Glass Table Danvers - Most glass tables are not made with tempered glass - when they break,
people, often children are horribly slashed by huge shards of glass. Try to go into a furniture
store and ask if it's made of safety glass. Odds are they will say sure - or they won't know.
Off Campus Fire Safety - Find an independent fire safety expert who will inspect off-campus
rental housing to see if dangerous conditions exist.

Good consumer stories use thorough reporting from documents and CAR, and profile people behind the
paperwork. Here are some of the basics we've used in researching consumer stories.

Nexis. Mc Nelly's best Nexis moment so far was finding the criminal background of a top executive at a
home remodeling company. She thought it must be just someone with the same name, until his mug shot
confirmed his ID. Criminal charges are possible.
Better Business Bureau. http://welcome.bbb.ord.
Run firms through the local Better Business Bureau to get a sense of how many complaints they have. Get
to know the head of your local Better Business Bureau.
Regulatory agencies. Find out what agencies regulate what you're writing about. McNelly discovered
that Florida has an agency that regulates oranges (makes sense) when she was writing about a citrus
dealer. It turned out the agency had a file on him including a letter where he was called an embarrassment
to the industry. Jim found Georgia's Used Car Licensing Board totally ineffectual, and they called him
with the story to expose it!
Court records. Always a good source of information. McNelly looked at the divorce records of the
citrus dealer and found that he had been sued bther citrus companies and prosecuted by the state
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

PACER. This is the nationwide federal court document system. Get a subscription if you don't already
have one. For .08 per page you can print/download any federal court documents the filed. WSB had the
list of Chrysler dealers closing in moments thru PACER. Mike Vick's bankruptcy file in a snap.
A CAR Shortcut: if you're a subscriber, start with an Accurint or Autotrak search when backgrounding 2
company or individual. It'll give you good starting points, such as where the person has lived (to then
conduct detailed court searches), what companies he's affiliated with or if he has any criminal history.
It's by no means exhaustive, nor should you rely only upon it, but starting there will cut your overall
background time considerably.

Sources and Shortcuts
Bankruptcy Trustees: These lawyers are often in private practice working for the court. Ponzi schemes
often die in Chapter 7, and trustees dismantle them and liquidate on behalf of victims, usually for .05 on
the dollar. Get to know your trustees (Receivers too!). Jim's been tipped to great stories from these
sources.
Liquidators: When a bad guy gets caught, he often has cars, firs and jewels bought with ill-gotten gains.
Your city probably has an auctioneer or liquidator who gets the jobs of selling the loot. Jim has a
fantastic source who parades him though goodies like wine cellars, sports car collections, and Rolex
drawers just before she sells them off. Huge outrage factor.
Securities Attorneys: Victims usually call them before they call the SEC. Find out who they are in your
city and cultivate them for scam stories. Bernie Madoff is just the tip of the iceberg.
Closing Attorneys: Need real people for a mortgage refi story, get a closing attorney to let you sit in as
folks sign their docs. You gets the expert and real people in one-stop shopping.
lnstant Expert: A quick way to find a local expert on anything: Google your city your subject and the
word consultant. Jim found an automobile consultant in Atlanta while doing a GM story. The guy had
just gotten off the phone with Reuters. A banking consultant he found is in the business of dealing with
banks about to fail. Georgia is the #1 bank closure state.
Make friends with social networks. Twitter is actually a great resource for stories now that more
agencies are registering. Not only can you follow sites like ConsumerAffairs.com but Inside Edition
follows attorneys general, BBBs and many consumer-friendly lawmakers who have accounts and
routinely "tweet" what they're currently investigating or interested in. (A helpful tip: download
TweetDeck for your desktop so you can get the updates in real time).
Web-Based Catlle Call: WSB uses this with great success. If you need to find a victim, just post on
your website that you're looking for one. Be specific and make sure you post that you need their contact
info and they need to be ready to talk. Wednesday Jim out out a call for "Cash for Clunker" potential
buyers and got ten. An easy, localized daily turn on the House vote was the result.
Cost-cutting shortcuts: Jim often uses the speakerphone interview for out of town sound. Get an
affiliate to lend you a shooter and have the subject look off lens. Pose your questions via speakerphone.
Make sure your shooter knows the screen direction you want the subject to face.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

In a pinch, you can have an out of town victim use a video camera to simply tell his story on tape and
shoot visuals. You get the tape next day via fed ex. Explain the process in your script. Often if you're
looking for video of a phenomenon, you tube will have it.

One More Tip.. .

Improvise. Don't be afraid to look at your story in a different way. McNelly visited the stand of the citrus
dealer and became curious about the orange juice it was selling. According to the label, it was organic.
After tipping regulators, they found he was buying orange juice from someone else, taking the original
label off and putting his on. She put a pdf on her paper's web site of the agency's order to stop selling
juice.
Jim busted a trophy mill selling seemingly prestigious awards and titles to anyone willing to pay. Not
only were the plaques and trophies unearned, but they were not as advertised. An award supposedly
made of birch wood from Finland, turned out to be particleboard.

2009 IRE Conference
Baltimore
Consumer Investigations

How to Tame The
Consumer Beat

The consumer beat is like no other - because it's constant. Everyone is a consumer and there is an
insatiable hunger among your audience, your news directors and editors. In many cases, reporters on
the consumer beat have to juggle the daily demand for stories while producing longer-form consumer
investigations.
Here are a couple of points to help you tame the consumer beat beast, find balance and retain your
sanity.

.

Organize.. Organize . . Organize. .
We can't stress the importance of this. You have to find a system that works for you.
Maintain a system of stories - quick turns and long term. Start the process -filing FOIA's,
gathering interviews on your long term, while you're working your short term.
Always have a "percolating" file - keep stories percolating and pitch them ONLY when they're
ready. Once it's out there, managers have a tendency to want it NOW.
Organize your work so that someone else can help you . . . Those that need research, editing,
writing, etc. If you stay organized and know what you need - it's easy for someone to step in
and lend a hand.
Organize your research/writing days vs. interview days. Once you get a rhythm -you will be
more effective and manage your time better. (Jim adds that shooting a little something each day
you are assigned to be on special will help protect you from getting dragged into the daily mix.
In his shop if they see you researching, they think you're fair game!)

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Planning and Scheduling,
Work stories ahead . . Don't just work a week out - set up a calendar in which you can slot your
stories weeks in advance. It helps your team to get things edited ahead of time and helps show
producers/EPs to know what's coming up.
Biggest Asset - You're not living by the seat of your pants on a daily basis - and it allows you to
have things ready to feed the daily beast - so you can be free to work on your longer investigations.

Help to Manage the Work Flow
If you have a producer - lucky you.

If you don't, r e q ~ ~ eas tcontinuous stream of interns. You will have to train each one, but they can
help make calls, do online research, help write smaller packages, help with undercover. They are a
great asset - use them, teach them and you've got a win , win.
Jim adds one of the best pieces of IRE advice he's ever received: Make your whistleblowers work for
you! Your callers have an agenda. Put them on the job gathering documents, evidence, and more
victims.

Taming those Tips:
At the end of the day, tips are your bloodline on the consumer beat - but they can be overwhelming
to manage. Much of this advice comes courtesy of Jackie:
Tip line -- Have an online tip line vs. a phone number. Online is faster to review and identify stories.
In your online design, ask for contact information and quick summary of what story is about - but
also add mandatory topic buttons that wiIl help you sodmanage those tips later. i.e., car repair, car
sales; contractor, ACkIeating, plumbing, etc.
It can work to your advantage later when you're trying to define patterns for your investigations.
Jim adds that having callers e-mail synopsis is a great first screening process. If they don't come
through with the e-mail, there's a good change they don't have the story or the passion to make a
good character.

Interns - This is a great place that you can use interns - t o call these tipsters back and find out more
information - while you work on other things. Should be handled daily.
Volunteers - This can be a gold mine to help you handle the volume -but it's also sometimes a
challenge to manage. The elderly are a great resource for this. Many are now retired and want to be
involved. Set up an effective team of volunteers:

+ One Chief Volunteer Paid position that coordinates and trains other volunteers.
+ Volunteers - (3 or more unpaid volunteers) Work with local groups like AARP and they can help
-

provide seniors who want to volunteer and get involved.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

o Volunteer team should:
Review complaints
Call consumers back
Get more detailed information. on problems
Contact local agencies/business to help get problems resolved.
Be a resource for the reporter to identify complaints that make good stories

Your volunteers can also be real people. Jim used his volunteers to test oil change places
undercover. He's more comfortable putting volunteers on camera than producers.
Testing.. . Testing.. Testing
Test everything from the water to toy audio levels, test products, etc. It's a good way to expand your
story base. Testing is getting expensive, often universities and start up labs will give you a bargain.
Team Up and Expand Your Reach . . And You're Resources
Expand your investigations by utilizing partnerships with newspapers and other broadcast
stations owned by your company or affiliated with your network. You can expand your
resources, cut down on cost and expand the reach of your story. Jackie used this technique to
expand across the country stories on tasers malfunctioning in huge numbers. Also for grocery
stores returning resold meat to the shelves; hotels that didn't wash glasses and our latest restaurants that advertise low fat menus - but in reality many contain high calories and high fat.
( A fantastic story picked up by GMA, BTW!) Scripps stations were able to hit multiple
locations across the country and create national scope and national change in some cases.

How to Dig Out Good
Stories
and Keep Your Audience
Asking for More

2009 IRE Conference
Baltimore
Consumer Investigations

Through surveys and focus groups, newspapers are learning that consumer issues are hot topics for
readers. But think about it: we are all consumers. The beauty of covering consumer issues is that
your best sources are around you. Talk to your friends, neighbors, relatives and co-workers. Look at
consumer advocate web sites and keep an eye on what's going on in government. But before you get
started consider this:
Consumer advocates and experts: Keep constant communication with these folks including your
local consumer affairs office. These agencies take complaints from consumers and the records will be
useful as you cover stories. Other sources include: attorney general office, consumer services at the
state level, and state agencies, but also your local economics crime division and white-collar crime
investigators.
Regulate the Regulators: A lot of the best consumer protection stories come from taking a hard
look at the government agencies that are supposed to keep us safe (contractor business, foreclosure

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

rescue firms, nail salons, restaurants and dog kennels). Take a look at any public records agencies
keep relating to their investigations, such as inspection records. How often do they find problems?
What is their caseload? Is it so high that they are more likely to overlook violations? In short,
are they doing their jobs?
If it looks gray, move on: Don't waste your time on what it seems to be confusing. If the scam story
is not clear chances are someone is not being honest with you. Sometimes is better to walk away
from what it seems to be a story. There are plenty of stories to go around.
Do your research: The Better Business Bureau might seem like a good resource at times, but be
aware that the BBB is a membership organization. I found that their records are not reliable and that
in many cases consumers think the BBB can help them with their problems. The BBB is not a
government agency. They are a great resource for trends and to find victims, but their value is
limited.

Look through your state's incorporation records and licensing agencies. Check your local or state
licensing rules and databases because almost every business needs a license.
Use Lexis\Nexis, criminal background check, civil lawsuits, divorce files, corporation records of
current business but other businesses your bad guy might have owned. If helshe is out there to make
a buck more than anything else, chances are that other businesses helshe had before went through the
same problems. Also, check association the business belongs to, its competitors, including former
employees and enemies.
Check the FTC website every few days. They will often have a scam busted somewhere in your
market, then call BBB looking for a victim. Jim's used this technique with great success for good,
quick turns.

Databases: Look locally first. The consumer affairs office might keep complaints electronically, but
you should also look at your county electronic records and then move up to the state. Licensing,
inspections, occupational licensing, state corporate records, civil lawsuits and other electronic
records are great resources.
Put the data online: Say no more. Readers love to search inspections on their favorite restaurants,
pet food recall and nail salons. But don't stop there, offer other tools to your readers like studies you
mentioned in a story and you have on a PDF format, why not post it online too. Note: When planning
to post a searching database online, you should keep in mind the data could be dirty and it must be
cleaned. Talk to the online folks to develop more efficient ways to working together on this.
Offer a solution or useful information: When you write the story try to give something to the
readerlviewer whether is what to do if helshe is in a similar situation and where to go for help.
McNelly tries to get a tip box with each story. Sometimes it's dreading, but she's learned to
appreciate this because it helps her to write the story. Concentrate on some areas and leave the other
information for the tip box. Try to give readerslviewers telephone numbers, web sites and
organizations. Best for broadcasters on-line.
No promises: Don't make any promises as you begin delving into an issue. Be honest with the
callerlreader from the beginning. Sometimes you get results, but sometimes you don't. For most of

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

us, our job is to write the story and compel our audience, not to work as a problem-solver or
mediator. Jackie is marketed as a problem eolver, and often airs stories only after she gets results for
her subject.
Looking out for the consumer: Think outside the box. Ask yourself: How can I tell this story
differently? Once you identified what the topiclproblem is, look for a consumer advocacy group.
They are everywhere. More importantly, keep an eye on government agencies because their
regulatory role is crucial on consumer stories. And hold them accountable when government
agencies are not doing their job. That's our job.
PLEASE VISIT THE 1RE.ORG TIPSHEET RESOURCE. YOU CAN HYPER LINK OR
CUT AND PASTE THE URLs LISTED IN THE FOLLOWING 9 PAGES OF USEFUL
CONSUMER WEBSITES. THE MATERIAL IS GLEENED FROM PAST IRE POSTINGS
AND OTHER SOURCES. MC NELLY TORRES COMPILED THE WEB SITE LIST.
MANY THANKS TO MC NELLY FOR HER HARD WORK SPEARHEADING OUR
TIPSHEET, AND TO MATT & CINDY FROM INSIDE EDITION FOR PRINTING AND
LUGGING THIS PROJECT FROM NYC.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

CONSUMER BEAT ---ONLINE RESOURCES
Consumer Grouos:
Consumer Reports
n & w consumerre~orts.org
w consurnersunion orq

~ 4 ~ ~ ~ . ~ 0 1 1 ~ ~ 1 1COIII,
i e r ~which
~ a r ccompiles
l1
product reviews from other publicat~ons

www.consun~erworld.or~

www.bbb.orn
T h ~ sis the main ship for the BBB, you can search a national database of companies, but also tind your local BBB
Col~sumerFederation ol' America, a national advocacy group
\~~w
.~o~isu~ii~rF~'dOlg
-

T h e Center for Scieuce i n t h e Public I n t e r e s t
z w w eDslnet.or9

This coalition works against telemarketing and Internet fraud

' . . r c i ~ ~ r \ a !A w ~ c i a t i o t,~ ! Insurance (:oinlnissioncrs
\ww.naic.org

National Consumer Law Center
c~nsun!r_rlaw\:.~~g

WVH.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

CONSUMER BEAT ---ONLINE RESOURCES (CONT'D)
Government a ~ e n c i e s :

CPSC list all recalls but also collects data on injuries and deaths caused by consumer products. The database known as the National Electronic
Injury Surveillance System (NEISS). which list the number and severity of consumer product-related injuries to persons treated in hospital
emergency departments in the U.S.

You can search the Web page to see if the commission has sued or taken any action against a local company.
F't:tieral C o ~ n t n c ~ n i c a t i o C
r ~osn ~ n ~ i s s i oorn FCC
www.fcc.ro\.

This site has Sovernmenr brochures and information in addition to links to all the federal regulatory agencies
Other sites:
w\vw.crimcs-of-~>ersuasion.com
ww\\~.consumeraffairs.colri

This is a general site with good leads on scams and other infomation.
Online comnlaint sites:

,

.'..s List
, \;k<,i
,-

This is a membershtp online consumer resource list
~\\~\\.an~ieslist.som

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

CONSUMER WEBSITES
www.consu~nerwatchdoz.~~rg
www.co~isumeraction.~ov
www.enn.com
www.fda.eov
www.bbb.org
www. baddeal inps.com
www.ftc.eov
www.consumeraffairs.com
y~~~v.fi~~darti~Ie~.~om
www.cunsumcrworId.og
www.oDenoress.com
~ww.f~~ncrals.orp
www.rccall-wamines.con~
www.highhwilv6l.corn
www.allheadlinenews.con~

www.derrv.lib.nh.us
g-

~vww.bls.nov
www.tirstgov.eov
www.allsearcheneines.co.uk
www.fn~aalcomer.com
www.eoinions.com
www.~cambu~ters.or~
www.dotcomfailures.com
www. badmovers.org
www.movin~scam.corn
www. badbusiriessbureau.com
www.rnovinpadvocateteam.cum
www. 1stl~eadlines.co~n
www.ruidestar.co~
Consumer news and information about the US federal government.
httn:Nwww.tirstpov.~ov/Citizen~Citizen
Gatewav.shtml
JD Power Information Center new
Using consumer satisfaction data collected, this site provides consumers information to help them in their buying decisions.
htt~://www.id~ower.coml
Kids In Danger new
Organization dedicated to protecting children by improving children's product safety.
!>UQLJ~\\~.;.K
i ds l nDan ZCI :&
RateltAll new
A place to find and share reviews of products, people, and travel destinations.
httu:llw\vw.rateitalI.conl/
Ratinzs.net new
Providing consumer driven ratings, reviews, reports and links for products.
h~~~:l~rvww.ratin~!s.11etI

ReviewCentre.com new
UK hosted UK product reviews contributed unfiltered by consumers. Rankings and "best" are based on consumer reviews.
I~tt~://~ww.~~eviewce~itre.coni/

ReviewFinder new
Provides links to large numbers of other consumer review sources for products, and shopping links for purchase
litto:llwww.reviewfinder.com/
Send Me Surveys new
Take part in surveys online. Reviews and lists reputable research companies that conduct surveys, focus groups and product sampling.
htt~:Nl~omroaee.interaccess.com/-algordon/Survevs/
The Frugality Network new
lntemet consumer resources.
htt~://www.fruoalitynetwurk.co~n/consumer.htmI
Thrifty Life Tips new
Advice and links related to shopping for the best prices.
httu:/rfliRIFTY .LIFETIPS.COM/
Timelylnsights.com new
Subscription based service offering consumer articles on on health, consumer protection, product recalls, finance, business, family, travel and
other topics.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

l~tto://www.timelvinsiehts.coni
Tips for shopping online new
TIPSfor buying and paying online safely and information on how to handle online disputes, refunds, security, privacy and scams. Plus
information on child safety while online.
~1lwww.sIioonin~-o~hne-~t~ide.cm
Virtual Reference new
Extensive dalabase on consumer information from Duke University Libraries.
htt~:llwww.lib.di~ke.tdu/refere~ice/virti~allconst~mer.htm

CONSUMER RESOURCES BY TOPIC
Where to Find Consumer Stories
Better Business Bureau
Consumer alerts and news
Consumer Information Center
Contains full text of hundreds of consumer info pamphlets available from the CIC, as well as consumer news and alerts
Consumer Law Page
Created by the Alexander Law Firm of San Jose, CA
Consumer Price Indexes
From the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Product Safety
Product recalls, press releases and a variety of consumer resources
Consumer World
Provides links to over 1.000 consumer related web sites
Federal Trade Commission
A website dedicated to consumer protection and a competitive marketplace - look for your regional oftice
Federal Drug Administration
All things health including medical devices, drugs and veterinarian
Financenter
Calculators in ten subject areas to help consumers make wise financial decisions (Hint: click the "Consumer Site" button)

NH State Library -Consumer Information Resources
An excellent list of links to consumer protection, product reviews, buyer's guides, and shopping websites
Productopia
Search for electronic product reviews on this site
Public Interest Research Group
USPIRG and PIRG state organizations work on a variety of issues including environmental and consumer protection
ALSO:

- AG - and all hislher various bureaus
- Cop>,liaud, bunco. S H I I Ifinanl;~al
~ ~ , crimes and
prevention units
- Local chapters of the ABA, ATLs
- Consumer Credit Counseling Services
- County or State Consumer Affairs Offices
- University Extension Services
- Postal Inspectors
- State Legislators
- State Department of Insurance
- Local AARP
- Local prosecutors office
4consu1ners.com
Meta consumer search engine offering product reviews from leading consllmer web sites
AskAnOwner.com
Real people who can answer questions about products and services.
BestStuff.com
A network of reporters, authors, and industry experts offering reviews of new products.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Cala Creek: Consumer Inlormation
Consumer information on variety of subjects, including home, health. beliefs. products.
Consumer Federation of America
Articles, publications, and news on consumer protection topics such as food and drug safety, internet, energy efficiency, financial services,
transportation, and health care.
Consumer World
Consumer resources, articles and commentary on consumer issues.
ConsumerNow.com
Annotated listings of the best consumer web sites.
Consumers' Checkbook
On may download articles on many of the indexed rated subjects.
Consumerstirstlook.com
Reviews by a group of consumer product testing engineers of products that pass their standards.
Dlrect Marketing Assocmon: Consumers
This site provides information and tips about shopping and rights as a consumer. Provides consumers a way to opt out of telephone, mail and email contact lists.
Epinions
Consumer-generated reviews, buying tips and advice, ratings, price information, and searchable in a variety of ways from price to product type.
FirstGov: Citizen Gateway
Consumer news and information about the US federal government.
JD Power lnformation Center
Using consumer satisifaction data collected, this site provides consumers information to help them in their buying decisions.
LiveManuals
A cost-free service allowing consumers to search through thousands of continuously-updated support files for most any breakable product.
RateltAll
A place to find and share reviews of products, people, and travel destinations.
Katings.net
Providing consumer driven ratings, reviews, reports and links for products.
Virtual Reference
Extensive database on consumer information from Duke University Libraries.

CONSUMER BEAT PHONE LIST
Helpful Phone Numbers For Covering Health, Safety, Environment And Consumer Goods And Services
CONSUMER GROUPS
American Highway Users Alliance www.hirhwavs.com
Council of Better Business Bureaus (BBB'S) 703-276-0100
Center for Environnlental Health 5 10-594-9864
Citizens Against Government Waste 202-467-5300
Consumer Action 4 15-777-9635
Consumer Credlt Counseling Association 7 13-682-1382
Consumer Federation of America (CFA) 202-387-6121
Consumer Health lnformation Research Institute 816-228-4595
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) 301-504-7908
Consumers Union (Consumer Reports) 914-378-2000
CSPI (Center for Science in the Public Interest 2021332-91 10
Environmental Working Group 202-667-6982
National Association of Consumer Advocates 202-332-2500
National Association of Consumer Agency Admin
nacaa62erols.conl 202-347-7395
National Consumer Law Center 202-986-6060
National Consumers League 202-835-3323
USPIRG 202-546-9707
Public Citizen 202-588-1000
U.S. GOVERNMENT
Congress Swtchboard 202-224-3 121
Congress Legislation (Info on Leg.) 202 225-1 772
House RadiolTV Gallery 102-225-5214
Senate RadiomV Gallery 202-224-6421
Census Bureau 30 1-763-7662 Press Otfice 30 1-457-3030
Centers for Dlsease Control Press Oflice 404-639-3286
Consumer Product Safety Commission 301 504-0580

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Drpanrnrnt 01'Labor 202 523-7316
Deposit Insurance Corporation 202 898-3681
Library Of Congress 202-707-5000
National Academy Of Sciences 202-334-2000
National Health Information Center 202-565-4167
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
Press Office 202-366-9550
National Library of Medicine 301 -594-7170
National Institutes of Infectious Diseases 301 496-4000
National Institutes Of Health 301-496-2535
Nat~onal'fransportat~onSafety Board 202-314-6020
Office Thrift Supervision Public Affairs 202 906-6677
Postal Inspectors 202-268-5283
Office Of Management and Budget 202-395-3080
Secret Service Public Afbirs 202-406-5708
Social Security Administration 202-245-6343
Supreme Court Press Info 202-479-321 1
Department Of State 202-647-4000
Department Of Transportation Public Affairs 202-366-4570
U.S. Patent & Trademark Office 703-305-8600
US Post Office 202-636-1205
Veterans Administration 202-535-8300
White House 202-456-2100
FEDERAL INSPECTORS GENERAL
Dept. of Agriculture 202-647-7844
Amtrak 202-906-4600
CIA 703-874-2553
Dept of Commerce 202-482-4661
Consumer Product Safety 30 1-504-0573
Dept of Defense 703-604-8300

-

P - .

- -

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

VERMONT 802-828-3 17 1
VIRGM ISLANDS 809-774-5666
VIRGMlA 804 786-207 1
WASHINGTON 360-753-6200
WASHINGTON DC 202-727-3400
WEST VIRGINIA 304-558-2021
WISCONSTN 608-266-122 1
WYOMING 307-777-7841

PHONE LIST BY ASSOCIATIONS
ASAE American Society of Association Executives 202-626-2723
AUTO
Association of Consumer Vechicle Lesson 5 10-895-1900
AFIP - Assoc of Financing and Insurance Professionals 817-748-2434181 7-428-2434
National Automobile Dealers Association 703-82 1-7041
National Vechicle Leasing Association 516-296-5790
American Financial Services Association 202-296-5544
American Automobile Manufacturers Association 202-326450015539
Auto Service Association 202-543-1440
ASE, National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence
I -877-ASE-TECH
NATEF, National Automotive Technicians Education Foundation
703-713-0100
BANKING
Independent Bankers Association of America 202-659-81 1 1
American Bankers Association 202-663-5473
Consumer Bankers Association 703-276-1750
BEVERAGES
International Bottled Water Association 703-683-52 13
Water Quality Associatioil 630-505-0160
American Water Works Association 303-794-771 1
CARPET
Institute of Inspection, Cleaning and Restoration Certification 423-886-5070
CREDIT
Credit Union National Association 202-218-7748
FOOD
National Food Processors Association 202-637-8060
Food Marketing Institute 202-429-8226
ENERGY
American Council for an Energy-Eflicient Economy
202-429-8873
HEALTH
American Chiropractor Assoc 703-276-8800
American Dietetic Association 202-37 1-0500
INSURANCE
lndependent lnsurance Agents of America 703-706-5448
lnsurance Information Institute 21 2-669-9290
National Association of lnsurance Commissioners 8 16-842-3600
LEGAL
American Bar Association 202-662- 1000
Association of Trial Lawyers of America 202-965-3500
MEDICAL
American Medical Association, Headquarters 312-464-5000
American College of Emergency Physicians 202-728-0610

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

