IRE TIPSHEET

UNDERSTANDING EPA

6/ 12/09

John Sullivan
John Shiilhan
Philadelphia Inquirer

Last year, we tackled a topic we knew nothing about, the EPA. Some tipsllessons:

* Attend the annual legal or technical national conference of experts in the field - for
example, American Bar Association Environment & Energy Conference or the Environmental
Conference of the States Annual Meeting. It's worth the expense. In three days, you'll meet
sources in a relaxed atmosphere and hear overviews on the hottest topics from the top people in
the field (buy previous conference MP3s online).

* Use Lexis-Nexis to access expensive trade press publications for free; take trade press
reporters (the real experts shackled by daily deadlines and strict style rules) to lunch.

* Call all former agency heads and ask them what's changed. They will fi-equently talk with
former colleagues and know what's going on. Calling them all gives you a sense of agency
direction - and gives them comfort as they are more likely to be critical if they lcuow they aren't
the only ones talking.

* Inquirer Editor Bill Marimow advised us to meet with the mentors of those now running
EPA and this proved to be an important part of the story. In this case, a lobbyist close to Karl
Rove who pushed him to name Johnson at EPA told us about it on the record.

* Become a fmture at the most mundane of hearings. It takes a while to build some
credibility, but after the third time you run into someone at a hearing they start thinking you
work there. Show up 15 minutes early, linger and leave 15 minutes late.

* Read the complete record, if possible, of agency decisions, including the text of the
regulation. Regulations.gov is a great site that posts everything from scientific papers to public
comments regarding any proposed regulation.
* Track proposed rules in the federal register. Analyze the administrator's c'justification."
* Virtually every regulation is challenged in court - usually they go directly to the DC Circuit
Court of Appeals. Read the briefs and opinions. Use Excel to create an agency scorecard.
Which side does the agency usually take? Who are the judges? Ask lawyers involved (on both
sides) to help you find the strongest, oddest opinions.

* Talk to all the members of the scientific panels. Ask about studies. Most studies are narrow
by design, especially one sponsored by industry. Many hew to the narrow parameters lobbyists
want. Ask why studies are designed with certain limits.
*Track down study authors. Do they think government interpretationhse of study
accurate/fair?
*Ask virtually everyone you meet if they will help you fact-check your story when you near
publication. It's a great way to bulletproof your work and build sources.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

