IRE TIPSHEET: ENVIRONMENT

IRE 2009
Blake Morrison
USA TODAY

PITCHING THE IDEA:
* Begin the pitch with a clear question whose answer is
newsworthy. It will keep you focused and help focus the stories
-- and your bosses -- on what really matters.

* Consider a Q-and-A as part of the pitch. It enables you to
direct the discussion and address concerns before others raise
them, especially on technical issues.

* Look outside your newsroom for help. Researchers at top
universities across the nation often have insights and skills that
we lack. Look for ways they might be willing to help.
USING GOVERNMENT DATA:
* Look for multiple data sources - and groups o r
individuals who might already have acquired them.

* Address problems when you find them. Find potential
critics before they find you, and let them weigh in on your
methodology. Knowing the EPA's objections, for instance,
enabled us to consider ways to address those issues and avert
headaches later.

* Admit your limitations, and be prepared to update and
revise. There's simply no way to publish a database of 128,000
schools -- all based on reports the schools file with the
government -- without a couple of locations being off. We heard
from about a dozen schools that said they weren't located where
the federal data said they were. Some had moved since the data

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

were collected. We updated the data accordingly.

* Be creative. Your data might be limited, but don't let them
be limiting. Think of ways to supplement what the government
offers -- or ways to use it that the government hasn't considered.

* Don't try to prove the impossible. We focused on exposure
rather than disease, knowing that looking for cancer clusters
would like end inconclusively and give critics more fodder.
Exposure to toxic chemicals was something we could prove.
CHECKING WHAT YOU'VE FOUND
* Rely on experts to do what you cannot, but question them
as you would any source. During our discussions with Johns
Hopkins about the results of our monitoring, we asked the same
sort of questions we might ask a source who wanted us to report
on what he or she found.

* Be forthright. Explain to readers what you've found, what
you know and what you don't. Be transparent. We published
our methodology online but have still heard from regulators
across the country looking for more information about our
research. Decide up front how much you're willing to share with
them. We shared what we published and continue to explain in
greater detail whatever remains unclear.

* Be available. After the first two days of the series were
published, we did online chats, posted a Q-and-A and set up an
email address to handle questions, comments and concerns. We
were inundated with inquiries. We should have created a blog.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

