1.) Environmental Protection Agency 6(a)2 Pesticide Incident Data
System
WHERE IS IT?
It's available at the Center for Public Integrity web page at:
http:llwww.~ublicinte~ty
.org/investigations/pesticides/
WHAT IS IT?
Environmental Protection Agency's Pesticide Incident Data System. The
data system aggregates information concerning more than 90,000 specific
pesticide exposures from 1992 through 2007 and was obtained through a
Freedom of Information Act request. The vast majority of the pesticide
incident information is provided by pesticide manufacturers. These
companies, however, are only required by law to report to the EPA the
incidents they learn of, such as through media reports, a call to a company
hotline, or legal action.
HOWTOUSEIT?
The Center's online pesticides data search allows anyone to determine
what kinds of reactions the pesticides and chemicals they use at home and
at work have caused across the country. Searches can be made by product
name or chemical name and one or all of the following: city, state, or type
of exposure. The search h c t i o n does not allow for a search by both
product name and chemical name, as many products have multiple
chemicals and therefore the results would include multiple instances of the
same incident.
For the best results, begin with broad searches using only one or two
criteria and then narrow the analysis with additional criteria. The searches
by chemical and product name will find some records that are not spelled
exactly the way the search was entered. For example, a search for the
chemical pyrethrin will also return those records with the spelling
pyrethrins or pyrethrin. But some records may contain misspelled words.
Experimenting with different spellings may find those records.
Searching by city is possible, but about 33 percent of records do not
include the name of the city. This is because people exposed to pesticides
do not always provide the name of the city.
It is also possible to search for incidents that involve only human
exposures, only domestic animal exposures, only wildlife exposures, or
only water contaminations.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

DATA PROBLEMS
The incident data system is not a comprehensive list of every pesticide
exposure that occurred in the United States or even every exposure that
resulted in a trip to a medical facility. As some companies make more of
an effort to learn about incidents than others and most exposures go
unreported, according to pesticide data experts, definitively stating that a
specific product causes more incidents than all others is problematic. For
the most part the data also do not capture information concerning longterm health consequences, as attributing chronic effects to specific
pesticide exposures is difficult. The vast majority of incidents in the
system involve immediate health reactions to pesticide exposure.
The incident reports that are relayed to the EPA are not verified and often
do not come fiom medical experts, but fiom members of the public who
have been exposed to a pesticide or have a friend or family member who
has been exposed to a pesticide. Incidents may not be reported correctly.
In 98 percent of all cases, the EPA described the certainty that the reported
pesticide caused the described symptoms as unknown.

2.) National Institute of Occupational Safety SENSOR Pesticides
Database
WHERE IS IT?
htt~://www2.cdc.gov/niosh-sensor-pesticides/search.asp.
WHAT IS IT?
SENSOR contains data on 2,753 acute poisonings gathered from nine
states starting in 1998 and ending in 2002. The data is geared toward
occupational exposures such as agricultural workers and exterminators.
WHAT INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE
Information on gender, race, location by state, year, status (likelihood the
exposure was called by the pesticide in question.), age group of victim,
activity at time of exposure, target surface for application, hospital stay in
days, industry category, agricultural category, occupation category,
severity, type of exposure, pesticide functional class, and insecticide
functional class.
WHAT FORMAT ARE THE DATA AVAILAEILE?
Via the NIOSH website the data is available on screen, in a comma
delimited file, or a pdf.
PROBLEMS WITH THE DATA
It's old, it only has information fiom nine states, and there are only 2,753
incidents, which is only a fiaction of total exposures during that five year
period according to poison control data experts.
POSSIBLE SOLUTION
By contacting NIOSH it's possible to obtain up-to-date data for specific
chemicals by contacting NIOSH at 5 13-533-8328.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Extoxnet contains information gathered by several universities about
pesticides including regulations, toxicity, manufacturers, and ecological
effects. http://pmep.cce.cornell.edu/profiles/extoxnet./
For information on pesticide regulations direct fiom the EPA visit:
http://www.epa.go v/opppmsd 1/PPISdata/index.html
The National Pesticide Information Retrieval System contains product and
chemical information. Search for a product and determine what chemicals
it contains or search for a chemical and find out what products it is
included in. http://ppis.ceris.purdue.edu/
The Pesticide Action Network advocates for pesticide regulations, but
despite its partisan stance the organization provides information on
regulations, air and water quality tests, and pesticide use reports.
httv:l/~esticideinfo.orn/
4.) Tips

1.) EPA union officials often can provide background and off the record remarks that
provide can point reporters in the right direction. They can identify previously
unknown data sources and prepare a specific and airtight Freedom of Information
Request to obtain that data. Names are easily found online.
2.) File freedom of information requests for freedom of information requests filed by
other parties concerning your chemical of interest. This is a way to identify
lawyers with cases involving the pesticide under investigation.
3.) Thoroughly background all sources including university researchers as many
researchers receive direct funding from chemical companies.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

