Making the most of FOIA
Ames Alexander
The Charlotte Observer
(704) 358-5060
aalexander@charlotteobserver.com

*Before you file your request: Determine whether you can get what you need without resorting
to a time-consuming FOIA. The documents may already be available through the agency’s
website or its online FOIA reading room. If a formal request is required, do your homework to
determine what’s gettable. It helps to cultivate “trail guides,” current or former agency
employees who can tell you what documents and databases the agency keeps.
*When you file: Request emails, databases and other relevant electronic records in addition to
paper documents. you may get far more information – and save money in the process – by
agreeing to accept electronic records whenever they’re available. Ask the agency to waive fees
because the information you’re seeking is “primarily benefiting the public.” Also ask FOIA
officers to expedite the review of your request. When filing federal requests, note that the agency
should reply within 20 business days. Consult your state’s public records law for the allowable
time periods and copying fees.
*After you file: Contact FOIA officers if the required time period passes without a reply. When
juggling multiple requests, keep a log to track what you’ve requested, what you have and haven’t
received from each request, and when you need to follow up with FOIA officers. When you
receive documents, check to make sure you got everything you requested. If the agency denies
part or all of your request, ask FOIA experts or your publication’s lawyers whether the denial
appears to be justified. (See list below for experts.) If the denial appears questionable, appeal.
Write stories when agencies deny access to information that ought to be public.

Other reporters share their wisdom:
Debbie Cenziper, Washington Post:
“Before I submit a FOIA, I always try to do an initial round of reporting to find out exactly what
information is available, and in what format. I talk to budget directors, database experts and
program chiefs. Then, I try to use their language when wording the request, with specific names
of databases, reports, audits, etc. It makes me appear more knowledgeable, and can help speed up
the response time.”
John Hechinger, Wall Street Journal:
“Use FOIA as your last resort. The federal government, in particular, can take ages to respond to
requests. See if you can get the information through informal channels, rather than invoking the
bureaucracy of the law. If time is short, it’s also worth finding out whether some kind of industry
research firm already routinely collects this information and will make it available to you.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Do as much reporting as you can about what you are looking for before making the request. If
you can find someone inside an agency to give you detailed information about what documents
exist, their titles, form numbers, etc., you make it more likely your request will be fulfilled. Be as
specific as possible.
If you are looking for a document, such as a regulatory report, make sure to ask for related
correspondence, including emails, since they are often especially revealing.
If you are making a request for large amounts of data, try to get the underlying database rather
than the results of a query. That way, you can do your own analysis. In theory, at least, it should
also take less time on the part of the agency.”
**
Stella Hopkins, Charlotte Observer:
Get to know a senior FOIA officer where you're seeking documents. They often want to tell you
how difficult and time-consuming their job is - so let them whine. They can be very helpful at
expediting requests, explaining how best to word your request and what you can reasonably
expect. They are sometimes surprisingly eager to help, going so far as to tell you what to appeal
– and how to make the appeal stick.

Other resources:
*The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press provides advice, resources and
assistance to journalists seeking access to public records and meetings. On the committee’s web
site, you’ll find a “FOIA letter generator” to help you draft requests and appeals. www.rcfp.org
*The Freedom of Information Center also seeks to protect the public’s right to open
government. The web site provides sample letters, a media law guide and links to the various
state FOI laws. www.nfoic.org/foi-center
*The Marion Brechner Citizen Access Project also provides a wealth of state-specific
resources and information, including contacts for the many open government coalitions and press
organizations nationwide. www.citizenaccess.org

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

