Scouring syllabi: Basic ways to check if colleges and universities are teaching
successfully (or if they’re teaching at all).
Ryan Gabrielson, East Valley Tribune; 480.898.5630; rgabrielson@evtrib.com
I) Degrees of completion: Looking up graduation rates is step one in assessing a fouryear university’s performance. This is becoming easier to do, thanks in part to the muchmaligned U.S. News & World Report university rankings, which has prompted many
institutions to post documents titled “Common Data Set” on their web sites. The data sets
(there should be one for each school year) offer an array of demographic and other
information about who attends the university, their financial aid packages and whether
they’re leaving with a degree. Generally, they allow you to make apple-to-apple
comparisons between institutions. The data sets detail how many students in a freshman
cohort graduated in four, five or six years; the published rates show how many earned a
degree within six years of enrolling. If graduation rates appear low, check “retention
rates” to see what percentage of students make it to their sophomore year. From there,
find out if the university conducts student surveys, the results of which can provide clues
as to what is causing students to drop out.
For examples or more information:
Arizona State University’s Common Data Set for 2008-09;
http://uoia.asu.edu/files/common/Common_Data_Set_2008-2009.pdf
II) One test after another: The testing revolution that has reshaped K-12 has overtaken
the ivory tower as well. However, higher education focuses on questions beyond whether
students are properly digesting a body of knowledge. Tests like the Collegiate Learning
Assessment are designed to find out if a university’s students are improving critical
thinking ability during their college careers. A growing number of universities are using
the CLA and some even post the results on their web sites. Also ask the university if it
conducts its own, internal assessment and (if they institution is taxpayer funded) file
public records requests for the results of all such exams.
For examples or more information:
The Collegiate Learning Assessment’s web site;
http://www.collegiatelearningassessment.org/
III) Investigate the curriculum: Obviously, reporters aren’t able to audit courses and
review hundreds of syllabi to track what exactly professors are teaching in class. But it’s
worthwhile to carve out time each semester to hang out on campus and chat with students
about what they are learning, particularly in their upper-level classes. Also, check
enrollment by program and, if the numbers for a department stand out, enrollment by
class and even course section. Request data on pass rates by class and, if it’s available,
how many scholarship athletes are enrolled in particular courses. Sometimes, the best
way to learn is to simply show up for the class.
For examples or more information:
“Grand Sham”; An East Valley Tribune investigation of athletic coaching classes at the
Maricopa Community Colleges;
http://www.eastvalleytribune.com/page/grandsham_story?sty=91226

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

