Staying On the Air, Staying Relevant aka Becoming Indispensible
‐BECOME A FRANCHISE
‐Regular time slot
‐Once a day or once a week
‐Like HealthBeat, Consumer Corner
‐Promoted segment
‐BECOME A FIXTURE
‐In the newsroom
‐On the air
‐On the web; web exclusives
‐On social networks
‐BECOME A CONTENT LEADER
‐Know the daily assignments
‐Offer info from players, sources
‐ Breaking news: don’t wait to be called
June 10 The Dark Side‐Guantanamo prison through the eyes of noted Chicago defense lawyer who reps terror
suspects and has made 6 trips to GITMO. Exclusive interview, details of Obama GITMO team.
June 3 BIG Spenders‐with layoffs and doomsday budget forecast, tipster points us to millions in state budget for
redecorating legislative offices, landscaping and a shooting range.
May 27 Stale Charges‐late day check of court file turns up defense filing in 30‐year old case against accused
Chicago police torturer. He’ll claim charges are too old.
May 20 The New Mob Order‐Tipster tells of death of mob consilgliere. No one else has it. We stake out wake. Tell
story of Chicago Outfit’s reorganization.
May 13 The Chicago Transit Audacity‐emailer says hundreds of Chicago public transit agency cars are illegally
parked around headquarters building and never ticketed, while regular motorists car are cited. CTA issues orders
and discipline to violators once they learn of our story.
May 6 The Airborne Identity‐what if it wasn’t just the flu? Chicago and 30 other U.S. cities are supposed to have
airborne germ detectors in place and elaborate system to stop a bioattack in early stages. The post 9/11 plan is far
from where it should be.
April 29 Journalist or Spy‐story behind the story of Medill grad Roxana Saberi and what the spy evidence was
against her in Iranian court.
April 22 The Safe Site‐During trial of deputy U.S. marshal on charges he leaked secrets to mob bosses, there was
first‐ever mention of a government “safe site” in Chicago where protected witnesses were housed. We provide
details of the safe site (sans address) and criticism of the way program is run.

Follow me http://twitter.com/ChuckGoudie
Find me http://www.facebook.com/ChuckGoudie

Chuck Goudie Investigative Reporter
190 N. State St., Chicago, Il 60601 (312) 750-7101
abc7chicago.com

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

