Using data to police the police
Joe Mahr, investigative reporter/ editor
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
joe.mahr@post-dispatch.com
(314) 340-8101

2009 IRE National Conference
Baltimore, MD
“On the Beat: Covering cops and courts”

The initial tip: The daughter of a big city police chief was driving around cars that had been
impounded by her father’s department.
The investigation: We started off with traditional paper record searches to prove the daughter
was getting use of the cars. But we suspected more. The impounded cars went to a privately run
tow lot. What was in it for them? If the relationship was so cozy, what else was going on? If you
were Joe Schmo, and not related to police heads, was this tow lot ripping you off? Did the rip-off
extend to taxpayers who, by contract, were supposed to share in fees collected? To go deeper, we
would either need to pull and analyze every paper tow report and check sent by the tow lot, or
we’d need data to crunch.
Our findings: After a long battle, we eventually obtained data that was key evidence in
confirming accounts that the tow lot and police used questionable methods to take and keep cars
from people, helping enrich the lot. But the data’s big coup was in helping prove that the tow lot
cheated taxpayers out of their share of tow fees collected.

Tips for getting/ using data in law enforcement stories:
1) Expect a battle. Cast a wide net.
Electronic police records can be notoriously hard to get because of state and court secrecy laws
on giving out bulk data (usually dealing with criminal history exemptions). The good news is
that often that these records are maintained by a host of agencies, for different reasons, and
journalists can negotiate with them to get the data. In this case, the city police said they didn’t
keep any individual data on towed vehicles, and they refused to force the private tow lot to give
up their database to the department (so we could get it). But we discovered data of vehicles
towed was kept by a little-known public agency that oversees area police databases. We
convinced this agency to provide it.
2) Push for field layouts
For paper records, often we know the type of records we want. We request the report, or the
memos, emails, etc. But with electronic records, often all we know is that they keep them. We
don’t know where, how, or what specifically they keep. Luckily, IT folks have an easy way for
us to figure it out. They keep field layouts (sometimes called schemas) to describe every field of
data for every database. Consider it the bible of IT, so they know how to write programs to
extract data for certain reports their bosses order. Request the field layouts, and you’ll know
what data they keep and how they keep it. Then you can negotiate over what fields you want, and
what fields are public. In our case, once we got field layouts, we knew what they kept, so it
moved along negotiations.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

3) Try to IT folks directly
Granted, many are skittish and leery of giving up their data. But these people are the ones who
know exactly what they’ve got and what they can do. Often the bureaucrats above them, or PIOs,
will act like it’s brain surgery to extract and provide data. They’ll hide behind their ignorance to
deny requests or claim it will cost you a kidney or two. But the IT folks know what it takes, and
often it doesn’t take too much. Sometimes they’ll even brag about the ease of your data request,
eager to show off skills. Best case: They’ll be so happy somebody is interested in their data that
they’ll bend over backwards to get it to you, and suggest other helpful info. In our case, a helpful
IT person casually mentioned an easier way we could get the data, which was to…
4) Consider archive data, versus live data
Most IT folks will regularly store back-ups of their databases – basically snapshots of the
database at a particular time, so if something crazy happens to the system, they don’t lose
everything. It may be easier for them to retrieve that data. In other cases, when they’re done
using data, they may take it out of the live database, but not really delete the data. They’ll put it
in a “purge” database – kind of a purgatory for data, where it may sit for days, weeks, months,
years before it’s officially deep-sixed. In our case, every impound record to this private lot was
“purged” from the live system within days of the car going back to the owner or being sold. But,
a helpful IT person (see tip #3) told us the data simply moved to the Purge file, which they kept
for two years after the tow. (Go figure.) So we got a copy of that purge file, which became the
lynchpin of the fraud investigation.
5) Sweet-talk, or embarrass, agencies into admitting they’ve got data
As cliché as it sounds, keep pushing for electronic records, even if agencies claim at first they
don’t keep it electronically. The key is this: Does somebody type it in to a computer? If so, it’s
almost always stored electronically. Sometimes it’s easier to fish around with agencies and ask
them how, in general, they can keep such good tabs on things. They’ll boast they copiously study
reports run by their IT folks of all this data they collect. Bingo. Other times, you have to
embarrass agencies into admitting they have data. In our case, the police department initially said
it didn’t keep data on checks this tow lot had sent the city every month for the city’s share of
towing fees collected. We asked how a big-city police department could effectively plan and
keep tabs on a budget without typing in amounts of money from checks it received. Did it use
paper and pencil? An abacus? Stone and chisel? We told them the story could become not only
that they were defrauded, but also that they lacked the very basics of 1980s accounting
technology to keep track of money collected. Then they discovered that they, in fact, did have
this payment data.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

