Reporter’s fact sheet on new IRS nonprofit Form 990

What: The IRS has launched the first major revision of the Form
990 in 30 years.
When: The new 990s will be filed in 2009, for operations in the
year 2008. The new forms should be arriving in large numbers
starting this November. It includes a new section on corporate
governance, and new disclosures about dealings with insiders.
For a two-year transitional period, nonprofit may file a 990-EZ,
which is much like the old form. This is for organizations that
take in under $1 million.
What:

The first major revision of the 990 form since 1979,

Why: The new form follows a series of scandals about abuse of
nonprofits by politicians and insiders.
--------------------The form requires details on compensations to top employees,
directors and contractors, present and padt.
The form pointedly asks whether the nonprofit have a fair
procedure for executive pay, notably including review of
comparative pay.
It also asks whether an organization has a conflict of interest
policy, a “whistleblower policy,” whether it posts its 990 on
its website, and much more.

Much of the best findings will be found in the various extra
Schedules attached to the report. There are 16 possible
schedules. Many have been completely revised, and the ones in
bold are brand new.
Here are the 16:
Schedule A:
Schedule B:
Schedule C:
Schedule D:

Public support
Schedule of contributors
Political activity and lobbying
Supplemental financial info, esp. easements

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Schedule E:
Schedule F:
Schedule G:
Schedule H:

Private school info
Activity outside US
Fundraising info
Hospitals

Schedule I:
Schedule J:
Schedule K:
Schedule L:

Grants to others within US
Compensation information. Detail for people paid over $150,000
Tax exempt bonds
Transactions with Interested Persons.

Schedule M:
Schedule N:
Schedule O:
Schedule P:
Schedule R:

Non-cash contributions/easements, art work
Shutdown info
New activities since last 990. Pay policies.
There is no schedule P
Related organizations and unrelated partnerships

----------------------------------

Craig R. McCoy
staff writer
The Philadelphia Inquirer

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

