COVERING INVISIBLE POPULATIONS
IRE 2009
Ruth Teichroeb
Investigative Reporter
Rteich9@gmail.com
Investigating stories about marginalized individuals and groups takes extra sensitivity and effort.
Here are a few tips I’ve gleaned while writing about issues such as the mistreatment of female
prisoners, abuse of students at state schools for the deaf and unsolved murders of young children.
1. Build in time to find sources and develop trust: People on the fringes of society will be
harder to find and interview than mainstream sources. They don’t show up in Google searches or
have stable addresses. Advocacy groups are rarely helpful because they are protective of clients’
confidentiality. You’ll have to track them down by using court records to identify their attorneys,
through relatives, by posting a notice on Craig’s List or by hanging out where they do. Many
have good reasons why they don’t trust the media. Be prepared to spend time up front getting to
know them, answering their questions and building rapport. It will be worth it.
2. Informed consent is critical: Explain what your story is about, how you work and what role
the source will play in your article. That includes clarifying terms like “off the record” and “on
background” and describing what type of story it will be (e.g. front-page profile, major
investigative series.) If you want to interview children or vulnerable adults, meet first with
parents or guardians to get permission. Use age-appropriate language with children or
developmentally disabled adults to describe the interview process and how the story will be
published or broadcast. Ask them to repeat what you’ve told them to be sure they understand.
Don’t sugarcoat things that may be difficult. For example, explain to a rape victim that part of the
reporting process will include contacting the assailant for comment.
3. Be clear about whether/how sources will be identified: At the outset, agree on how you will
identify sources in print and photographs. Sometimes this means agreeing not to identify them. Or
agreeing to limited identification. This can be renegotiated later if all parties agree. But part of
building trust is being transparent from the start.
4. Give your sources more control: You want to turn the classic reporter-official interview
model upside down when dealing with people who have been traumatized. Let the person choose
where and when to be interviewed, who will be there or what translator will be used. Keep them
informed as you report the story. Read back quotes or the entire story to double-check facts and
prepare them for what will be published. Negotiate sensitive issues such as information they
might not want included in the story.
5. Use public disclosure laws to obtain documents that deepen your story: The most powerful
stories use documents to back up what sources are saying. Get to know your state’s law and use
it. The most productive request is not just a fishing expedition, but is focused on information you
actually need. Interview government officials or experts (on background if necessary) about how
and where information is located. Then file requests for relevant documents. Don’t ask for too
much or it will take forever. But don’t let yourself be talked into too little either. Put the onus on
state authorities to refuse to release key documents and make them tell you why. Even the
smallest pieces of information can be useful, so you are better off getting redacted documents
than none at all.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

6. Ask for documents simultaneously from different government authorities: A police report
and a prosecutor’s file will often provide very different perspectives on the same case. A state
agency or institution can provide another set of documents that can establish a pattern. Don’t
forget to ask the federal government for documents states might have filed to receive funding.

7. Strive for a gentle approach with sources who have suffered trauma -- while staying firm
about the need to document facts: Mute your hard-boiled reporter and allow yourself to
empathize. Be prepared for strong emotions during an interview – from the source and yourself –
and expect to offer emotional support when dealing with painful topics. Then look for documents
that can verify what the source tells you.
8. Set boundaries that you are comfortable with: Setting limits is inevitable when working
with sources over an extended period, especially those who are impoverished, emotionally needy
or in risky circumstances. How will you handle requests for money and other help? Phone calls
at 3 a.m.? Invitations to socialize? Think about where to draw the line and stick to it. You are not
their best friend or social worker but a journalist.
9. Talk to your editors and keep them informed: Share struggles about ethical issues or
conflicts of interest that arise. Seek their help in balancing your role as a journalist with
responding compassionately. Even veteran reporters can lose perspective. Discuss the pros and
cons of allowing reader comments on sensitive stories. Sometimes it’s not worth exposing the
sources to the nasty fallout that results.
10. Let sources know a story is about to run and follow up after publication: Seeing their
story on the front page or TV is often very difficult. Warn them it’s coming and check in
afterwards. Let them know what kind of response you are getting. Forward appreciative emails.
Tell them if the story results in reforms or positive changes.
Here are a few links to my investigative work at the Seattle Post-Intelligencer:
1. Imprisoned, Unprotected: Mistreatment of female prisoners in federal detention:
http://www.seattlepi.com/local/329130_prison27.html
2. Voiceless and Abused: Rape of a severely disabled women by her caregiver:
http://www.seattlepi.com/local/387252_rape11.html
3. Badge of Dishonor: Police who get away with abusing their partners:
http://www.seattlepi.com/police/
Resources for covering trauma: Dart Center on Journalism and Trauma and Dart Society:
http://dartcenter.org/

2
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

