Heather Vogell
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
hvogell@ajc.com
404-526-7113
Turning schools data into scoops
Schools data – especially state schools data – is a rich source of stories. State education agencies
collect mountains of data but often don’t do much with it beyond the basic mandatory
reporting. State, district and school officials often don’t know what’s in the data.

Where to start:
Visit the DataQualityCampaign.org. This Gates Foundation-supported group is pushing states
to develop longitudinal data systems – student tracking systems that follow students from
school to school and year to year. This type of data system is the gold standard for student
information. The group rates each state on 10 critical data elements. Check out yours – you
will get story ideas.
Find out what data the state collects from schools and when. Anything they report a statistic
on will be in a database somewhere – from No Child Left Behind mandates to discipline data
to the free and reduced lunch program
Get student-level data. School- and district-level data is helpful, but the more you can drill down
and slice the database different ways the more you’ll get out of it. To do this, student-level
data is best.
Set up a schedule to regularly request databases the state processes. Find out when they
collect the information from districts and how long it will take for them to get it ready for
you.
Three places to go for help: Find people who can either do the analysis or slice the data in a way
that makes it more manageable for you.
1) People with CAR skills in your newsroom, obviously.
2) State and districts’ IT people. They can slice the data to make it more manageable.
3) NICAR listserv and data library. For a small fee, IRE will do some analysis
Develop CAR skills however you can. You can do some analysis with Excel and Access, but I
find MySQL best for working with these big databases. MySQL is a free, open source
program you can download. SPSS is great if you want to get into statistical analysis. Take
classes, read books or learn from your newsroom CAR person.
***Remember data can be used two ways***
1) To look-up individual cases and drill down for details on a school or district, such as how
many bullying incidents took place.
2) To look for trends or patterns over time, such as test score irregularities.
The first is easier but still adds depth to your reporting. So don’t be discouraged just because you
can’t do a full-blown statistical study.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Now what? What to do once you have the data
Test scores and student achievement
Four ways to compare test scores and look for irregularities.
You’ll need someone who knows SPSS or a similar statistical problem to look for extreme
outliers (“miracles”). Using scale scores to calculate a school’s percentile rank among schools
is one way to sidestep differences in tests between years or grades. Scale scores are more
precise than passing rates. Watch cut scores.
1) Compare each grade’s performance year to year.
2) Compare each cohort’s performance year to year (ie, compare seventh-graders’
performance to eighth-graders’ performance).
3) Compare failing kids’ performance on a first try with their performance on a second-try
retest.(We did this, see: http://tinyurl.com/6a29pb)
4) Holly Hacker and other folks at the Dallas Morning News analyzed actual answer sheets.
They’ve done a ton on test score irregularities.
Grade inflation. If you have end of course tests, compare grades in the class to scores on the
standardized test. Are some schools giving lots of A’s to kids who can’t pass the state test?
Is high-stakes testing really high stakes? Are kids supposed to be held back if they fail certain
tests? If so, are they? We found not. http://tinyurl.com/3opan7.
College remediation – by high school. How well are your local high schools preparing kids for
college? Do lots of grads need remediation? Does your state have a merit-based scholarship
and track how many students who qualified for it but still needed extra help in college? Your
university system or education department might keep stats by high school. We compared
grade inflation data with college remediation data and found inflating high schools produced
lots of graduates needing college remediation. (http://tinyurl.com/cgxqna)

Discipline and school safety
Look not only at the federal Unsafe Schools Choice Option data reported, but also at your
state’s district/school discipline database. It should have more detail on less serious
incidents – as well as serious ones - and will also tell you the punishment.
See how your state has defined a “persistently dangerous” school for the feds: Is it so narrow
that no school ever qualifies? Does the state discipline data still show thousands of serious
incidents? Our story: http://tinyurl/mfq9rv.
Compare police reports to USCO or discipline data: Are all serious incidents being reported?

Teaching and NCLB
Turnover: The state’s database on certified and classified personnel can show who is quitting,
where, why and how much experience they have.
Salaries for teachers, principals and other staff: Who is paid how much?

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Licensing boards may have details of investigations into teachers and administrators in a
database. We have one with the name, system and school, along with basic details of the
investigation - what the breach was, what the punishment was. Are some of the worst
offenders moving around and still teaching?
Where are the more experienced teachers teaching - are they clustered in wealthy schools
while the more needy schools end up with the young, inexperienced teachers? You can also
see whether they have National Board Certification, and what type of degrees they have
(bachelor’s v. master’s).
We’ve been unable to get data showing how certain teachers’ classes did on standardized
tests and in grades, but it is worth going after.
You can get a database with all the details on how schools made adequate yearly progress. It
can help you see how many made it only because of safe harbor or confidence intervals.

Other valuable documents:
Superintendent contracts and payment records: Put the perks in a spreadsheet and add them
up. What is the so-called “hidden costs” in the contract?
State, federal and private audits are often great for a quick scoop.
State and federal inspector general reports. If your state or district is having trouble with
something, chances are someone else is, too.
Internal complaints/investigations by districts. Ours are public and have lots of juicy detail.
Tutoring: State supplemental educational services reviews. The state inspects and licenses
private tutors that get public money to help kids at failing schools. We found a controversial
group with ties to Scientology state-approved and tutoring for public dollars.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

