Writing the Investigative Story
T. Christian Miller, ProPublica
IRE 2009

Step 1: Digitize
I can't emphasize this enough. These days, I try to store every single piece of a story—
notes, photos, audio, video, documents, whatever—on my computer. That involves some work,
obviously. You've got to scan in paper files to become searchable .pdfs. Transcribe your
notebooks. Boring, time consuming stuff. Why? Two key reasons:

1. Organization.
Once digitized, Google Desktop becomes your best friend. If you aren't familiar with it,
you can download it here: http://desktop.google.com/features.html

Google Desktop indexes and searches your computer. Can't remember where that city
councilman's mobile phone number is? Google Desktop. Think you've heard that
company's name before? Google Desktop. Digitizing makes your memory better than the
decaying web of gelatinous goo it actually is!
Best of all, the longer you work as an investigative reporter—and I know that's wishful
thinking these days—the better your "memory" will become. I've kept all emails, all
notes, all documents since around the late 1990s. The attorneys hate this. The computer
tech guys hate this. But I've got instant access to maybe 70% of all the information I have
gathered during the past decade—195 gigabytes worth, or, according to our friends at
Yahoo!, a couple of library floors' worth of data. You'd be surprised how often Google
Desktop will link together things you thought were unrelated.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Two other organization tips. First, I use Excel spreadsheet for almost everything. You
don't have to have a computer database project to use Excel. It comes in handy for
creating, sorting and organizing even tiny lists of information. For instance, for a story
that I did about civilian contractors who were injured in Iraq, there were just too many
cases to keep in my head all at once. So I built a little spreadsheet of the 30 or so cases
that I was focused on, and added in bits of data. You'll find the story here:
http://tinyurl.com/mqf9oz

Second, if it's a truly long project, you might consider buying special organizing software
like Microsoft's OneNote. It's designed specifically to work with Office, of course, and
allow you to paste in web pages, keep track of source information and organize your data.
It also has one amazing feature. If installed on a tablet laptop, you can take notes by hand
while simultaneously recording the interview. You can then search your handscrawl
(more or less accurately) and tap on the note to bring up the recording at the exact minute
you were writing. Obviously more useful on deadline than on an investigative project, but
a nice feature nonetheless.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

2. Presentation.
It's all gonna be on the web some day. So why not make it easier on yourself and your
web colleagues? The sooner you start turning your notes, pictures, documents into digital
form, the easier it is to turn them into presentations on the web.

Step 2: The Timeline
No matter what shape your investigative story will take, long or short, narrative or
thematic, there is always going to be a chronology. The first thing I do when I sit down to write
is create a timeline. Here is one particularly crazed example: http://tinyurl.com/ny428c which I
used in writing a story on the bombing of a village in northern Colombia called Santo Domingo.
It was 11 pages long. But it really helped me see how the operation unfolded. You'll find the
story here: http://tinyurl.com/mqf9oz Three benefits:
•
•
•

It helps you see relations you might otherwise miss
It helps you quickly be able to refer to events
You can include the source in your timeline so that you remember where a particular
piece of information came from.

Step 3: The Quotes
Now we're getting down to business. When taking notes, or talking to someone, I
always try to put a couple of asterisks near the quotes that sound good. Then, when I review my

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

notes, I search for the asterisks to create a file just of quotes. I then go through that file and figure
out what are the best 10, 15, 20 quotes that I have. Again, two reasons:
•
•

Step 4:

It helps you organize your story. You can begin to imagine transition paragraphs, kicker
quotes, opening quotes that will help shape the story.
You make sure you're getting the best bang for your buck. You're really looking for
information said in a pithy, punchy way, sifting through everything that was said to get
down to the very best.

The Bang

This is the really hard part. You've got to figure out how to tell the story. The good
news, however, is that in doing steps one through three, you should have an inkling of what to
do.
My always favorite is the chronology. If you can unspool a story in more or less
chronological order, it helps the reader understand what's happening, it makes clear how one
event is linked to another, and it makes for easier reading.
Generally, I'll try to write a top to summarize the story and the main points. I usually try
to find a quick, compelling scene to which I will return later, or do a simple hard news lede.
Then I'll write the nut graphs, some key findings, and a quick set of responses to the findings.
That all should take up about 10 to 15 paragraphs. By then, the reader will have figured out
whether it's worth spending his time to dive in. After the top, I hit the brakes, and the story
unwinds more or less along the timeline.
My second choice is thematic. In other words, I'll break the story into chunks that explain the
issue. But even here, I generally try to use anecdotes within the topic areas to develop the story
along a timeline. I call this the Mixed Bag approach. My most recent effort at this were the
stories I did with ABC News and the LA Times on injured contractors. They can be found here:
http://tinyurl.com/mqf9oz

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

