Health Care Survival Guide
Investigating America's Hospitals
Michael J. Berens - The Seattle Times
Baltimore IRE 2009

Few beats are more diverse or story rich. But the hurdles can be high, whether its HIPPA
regulations, which are often misused, or restrictive state laws, which serve to protect health
institutions from public disclosure. Here's some steps to crack open the story and how to locate
sources and people - the lifeblood of all good stories.
Here are my three first steps - the three Fs:

* Follow the paper - You can't ask for something unless you know it exists. Deconstruct events
(a fatal medical error; sexual misconduct; infection outbreaks) and learn how such events are
handled, where information is filed and to whom. File a public records request for manuals and
protocols that govern public records.
* Find the expert - You can't pick a topic that somebody, somewhere, hasn't devoted their life
to it. Recruit them to explain "the system." Request documents to help craft better public record
requests (regulatory agencies often adopt unique, sometimes nonsensical, document names) Here
are four from my files:
Consumers Union (hospital errors and infections)
http://www.consumersunion.org/health.html
Lisa McGiffert - 512-477-4431 ext. 115 (cell phone: 512-415-5405)
Quackwatch (practitioners; devices; therapies)
http://www.guackwatch.org/index.html
Dr. Stephen Barrett - 610-437-1795
ECRt Institute (medical devices)
https://www.ecri.org/Pages/default.aspx
Mark Bruley (forensic investigator) 610-825-6000
The Defense Health Board - Armed Forces Epidemiological Board (military medicine)
http://www.health.mil/dhb/calendar.cfm
Cdr. Edmond Feeks -703-681-8448

* Ferret out the research - Health professionals love to write about the things that happen to
them or their institutions, such as medical errors or infection outbreaks. Often, these reports
provide a public blueprint to confidential events.
Search free at National Institutes of Health's (National Library of Medicine) Pub Med database:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
For general health topics, be sure to search the Government Accounting Office, a research arm of
Congress (public reports are chocked full of source citations; a great way to learn the paper trail:
www.gao.gov

1
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Basic public records
Federal survey reports - Hospitals undergo periodic inspections by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). Surveys range
from a few pages to dozens. Surveys document health and safety violations and provide mininarratives of violations. Make sure to also ask for the "plan for correction;" this is the hospital
response to the citation and usually details how they plan to fix the problem.
The feds also offer a web-based research tool for some very basic procedure and cost
comparisons: wv.'W.hospitalcompare.hhs.gov/
Here's one for nursing homes: www.medicare.govINHCompare/
State survey reports - These are virtually the same as the federal surveys, but state regulators
tend to inspect more often, such as once every 18 months. Many states have laws dictating the
how often surveys must be done.
Complaint reports - Ask for copies of complaints filed and investigated involving hospitals.
These records are a snapshot of patient experiences, though they tend to be heavily redacted
(complainant name and medical info). Complaints also reveal whether state or federal regulators
conducted an aggressive or superficial investigation.
TRICK OF THE TRADE: Federal inspection reports are typically conducted by state health
departments under contract to help the federal government. That means a copy of the federal
report is on file with the state agency. That means you can get it infinitely quicker than asking the
feds for it. Don't let state officials tell you otherwise. You're allowed to have it. Period.
Medicaid cost reports - Hospitals and nursing homes are required to file financial snapshots - in
the form of spreadsheets - with state and federal agencies. These public documents yield a wealth
of information from tracking levels of charity care to profits, drug markups to which area of the
hospital drives profits. For nursing homes, the reports reveal owners, their salaries and subsidiary
holdings as well.
Practitioner disciplinary records - Most states licenses and discipline health practitioners.
These cases have been the grist of many investigative and enterprise stories. Many states allow
ac.cess to the "investigative file," which details the narrative behind the final charge and
disposition. You might be surprised at the level of detail about hospital practices that are often
embedded in these files. In your request, make sure to ask for accompanying exhibits - which
may include hospital manuals, internal reports or pictures.
Lawsuits - It's amazing how often reporters sidestep this essential tool. Hospitals are frequent
targets of malpractice suits. Case files yield the rich veins of information, from internal hospital
documents to sworn depositions. Attorneys are seldom bashful about sharing how a good case
unfolded.
TRICK OF THE TRADE: Don't have access or the dollars for LexislNexis or other fee-based
search engines? Ask an attorney. Malpractice attorneys routinely run full lawsuit history checks
on institutions; ask if they'll share it. University students often qualify for free accounts. Ask an
IRE colleague who has access to help you out; we do it all the time - within reason, of course.

2
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Basic (and free) databases
Excluded Individuals Database - This powerful and free search by the Office of Inspector
General reveals health practitioners banned from receiving federal funds, such as Medicaid. You
can download the raw data as well. How many practitioners in your city have been banned for
fraud, felony convictions, etc. - the stories are endless: httQ://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/
Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) - This mouthful is a wonderful
and complex array of FDA data that has hundreds of uses. On one level it tracks reports of
possible or suspected problems with medical devices, bed rails to pacemakers, infusion pumps to
surgical saws. It also contains many reports of human error, such as when nurses improperly used
an infusion pump. Search on the web or download raw data. Need help? Call ECRl Institute from
the experts: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrhlcfdocs/cfMAUDE/search.CFM
U.S. Government Research Grants - This searchable data reveals who's doing what with how
much taxpayer dollars. http://www07.grants.gov/searchibasic.do
FDA Warning Letters - Find out who is in hot soup with the FDA from devices to drugs. These
letters provide rich background on health-related companies and individuals. behind most of these
warning letters is found a rich paper trail of investigative files:
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/wlcfmlsearchwl new.cfm
Medical Device Recalls - Just what it says. Search on the FDA web site:
www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrhlcfdocs/cfRES/res.cfm
Adverse Event Reporting System - This FDA database of drug-related adverse events is one of
the most known and popular datasets among hardcore health journalists. It's also tricky and
cumbersome. Get help from the experts, or download the data and play with it yourself:
http://www.fda.govlDrugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatorylnforrnation/Surveillance/AdverseDru
gEffects/ucm082193.htm
There are dozens ofother useful databases. Figure out exactly what you want to do. Don't
overlook communications staff at state and federal agencies. Some of my best "finds" were
developed after talking to agency spokespeople; they often have critical hints on how to frame a
public records request.
Some journalists believe in absolute stealth. I seldom do. Don't be afraid to tell a government
agency exactly what you're looking for. For instance, you might ask a state health department for
a list of all practitioners charged with sexual misconduct of patients. If the agency claims they
don't have the statistic, demand to know why they don't think it's important enough to track. I
did. The result was an award winning series:
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/news/local/licensetoharmlindex.html
TRICK OF THE TRADE: Scour state and federal agency annual reports. When you seen a statistic
that interests you, call the agency and demand to know how they derived the result and the data
source if it's not obvious. You'll often discover new records or databases.

3
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

·
"

Real World Advice

* Ifpossible, pick up public records at the source location at least one, particularly when it's a
government agency.
One, I get to meet the FOrA contact in person. I can't tell you how many times I've forged a
professional tie to a mid-level, often forgotten clerk who is more than happy to explain the
intricacies and pitfalls of their documents.
Two, I often get to see or tour the offices of the agency. I like to examine the workspace, check
out the bulletin boards, pick up employee or union newsletters from the common areas. More
than once I've received calls from state employees who saw me walking through their offices.
* Save money by bringing your laptop with a flatbed scanner to copy public documents.
Sure, it raises some eyebrows but it's legal- and it's efficient. I like flatbeds (a good one costs
$100 or less) because you can still scan stapled documents; some agencies (particularly courts)
refuse to alter a file in any way. Take your digital copies back to work and run them off a printer.
if you're lucky, the paper will bJlY a scanner. It pays for itself very quickly.

* When conducting interviews at hospitals, go early and observe the surroundings.
Without fail, I have observed infection control violations at every hospital I've visited.
Surgeons have worn scrubs to sit outside on the grass before reentering the surgical arenas; nurses
failed to wash hands when traveling from one patient room to another; ill patients - some with
infectious diseases - allowed to roam the hallways unrestricted.
Observational reporting makes for great moments during interviews, and often yields power
paragraphs in stories.

* Communication staff can be your best friends
Don't assume that agency "flaks" are the enemy. Sure, some will never thaw out. But they have
a job to represent their employer's position - you should understand that. Many communication
professionals are eager to guide your reporting. Develop a professional relationship with
spokespeople in key agencies. Let them get to know you. You can be harsh and fair. The good
spokespeople respect that. Let them know when you got records quickly - and tell them thanks.
Dividends can be great.

* Balance the bad with the good
Investigative stories about broken systems become even stronger when counterbalanced with
examples of how the system should work. My recent series on how hospitals failed to thwart
MRSA included hospitals that had done a good job: http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/mrsa/

* Lose the attitude - stealth is seldom good.
Too many gung-ho reporters believe that subjects of stories should discover a newspaper's
investigation on the newsstand. This is shortsighted, at best. I share all findings - especially·
database driven results - with government agencies and sources at least two weeks before
publication. I need time to present additional evidence - or redraft my story - in case a substantial
challenge occurs. In fact, I promise every contact that there will be no surprises. Does this risk
competitive scoops? Yes. But my stories become better and fairer by sharing - and it serves to
diffuse counterattacks before publication.

4
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

