"Partnerships: The Promise and the Pitfalls"
Investigative Collaborations Tip Sheet
IRE 2009

1) Pick properly. Balance need for help from outside news outlets versus giving up your rights to an
exclusive idea.
2) If it's a larger project, find an initial primary partner you trust with whom to bounce ideas and
develop a list of potential other partners. Establish division of duties if necessary from the
beginning. Don't limit yourself to the usual suspects; partnerships may cross ownership and
network ties.
3) Whether or not you use a primary partner, establish and contact each station with whom you
wish to work from the beginning. It's difficult to add an extra reporter or producer late in the
game. If the story takes a turn that requires bringing in another market (for example, a
necessary confrontation), consider pooling resources to send someone already on board. If
absolutely necessary, make sure you directly brief both the reporter and photographer you’re
sending. Send any specific questions before shoot dates. Don’t leave anything to chance.
4) Make sure you discuss and set any budget for data work from the outset. All stations need to
sign contracts for any such contractor work hired, inorder to protect everyone's rights. Allow
time for any legal consultation.
5) Coordinate a timetable for your story, including a target air date, shoot dates, and time frame
for research. It will be difficult to schedule everyone to do his or her portion of the story on the
same day. Remember to leave ample time for trading of video and logistics. Make sure you
know ahead of time tape formats etc. Some stations can't work ftp files; others can't handle
certain tape formats. Some may require tape to be shipped overnight. Others may need extra
time to write/edit.
6) Discuss video logistics early, beyond tape formats to video quality and framing of shots, etc. All
photographers need to know to shoot the subject without the reporter in the shot, for use by
other stations. This is particularly important for confrontations.
7) Designate one person to be the gatekeeper for your information. This person can coordinate
research being done in each market and marry it together. If possible, send out daily updates
after research and shooting days to keep all participants on the same page.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

8) Air on the same day if at all possible. Our story was repeated in newspapers and on wires in
several states. You don’t want the story breaking before all of your partners get a chance to air
theirs!
9) Check your ego at the door. You're dealing with other investigative reporters. Styles and
personalities will differ widely.

Jodie Fleischer

Hagit Limor

WSB‐TV

WCPO‐TV

jodie.fleischer@wsbtv.com

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

hlimor@wpco.com

