Hidden crimes: UCR data, and what’s not there
IRE TIPSHEET BALTIMORE 2009
Mark Fazlollah
Philadelphia Inquirer reporter
215-854-5831
mfazlollah@phillynews.com
The FBI’s Uniform Crime Report provides a wealth of information about crimes, but it is only as
good as the agencies that report data. Police in Philadelphia, Baltimore, Atlanta and St. Louis
have been caught hiding crimes to make the cities look safer than they really were. There are
ways to spot problems is crime stats. The basic assumption should be that if it looks too good to
be true, reporters should ask questions, and then re-analyze data to see if the police
explanations make sense.
Starting point: http://www.fbi.gov/research.htm:
City-by-city FBI data for the nation are easily accessible.
The FBI cautions that comparing per capita rankings of crime from city to city can “lead
to simplistic and/or incomplete analyses that often create misleading perceptions.”
Translation: Be smart, and ask questions.
The agency’s web site provides a good city-by-city breakdown of the seven major
crimes in an Excel spreadsheet. Slice and dice the data in a million ways and you’ll
have lots of questions, some that local police can answer, and some that will take more
digging. Here are some sample questions that crime stats might raise:
Why does New Orleans report murder rates ten times the national average but rape
rates that are lower than the suburbs. Is it because of its extraordinary number of
murder or because rapes are hidden by police, or both? Hint: It puts about 60 percent
of its sex crimes cases in a non-crime code called “Signal 21,” not a code use by the
FBI, hidden from public view.
You may also want to know the year-by-year trends for your city.
The FBI site can give city-by-city crime numbers for several years. To get long-term
trends, get the old paper copies of the FBI’s annual Crime in the United States report
and go back a decade or a two. Many libraries keep reports. You can also get the
information from the FBI's Criminal Justice Information Services Division via e-mail at
cjis_comm@leo.gov or by telephone at (304) 625-4995. Those folks can provide lots of
additional help.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Take a test drive
Because the IRE’s 2009 conference was in Baltimore, I did a quick review of that city’s
crime numbers. By comparing crime rates with other cities, the rape number looked
unusual.
Baltimore is one of the few major cities in America in which the number of murders is
much higher than rapes. Just as in New Orleans, its per capita murder rate was sky
high but it had a very low rape rate. According to the Baltimore police department, there
were just 137 rapes in that city in 2008.
But look at the historic patterns and something clearly has changed. In the 1970s,
1980s and early 1990s, Baltimore averaged about 550 rapes a year. In 1995, it was up
to 683 rapes. Then the city began reporting far fewer rapes each year. By 2000, it was
down 366 – a cut of 46 percent from five years early. From 2000 to 2008, it was down
63 percent.
That reduction in rapes too place in a city was still terribly violent. There were 197
murders in 1978 and 234 three decades later, giving the city the dubious distinction of
having the worst murder rate of any major city in 2008. Clearly there was reason to
question the Baltimore department’s insistence the rape numbers were good, especially
in light of past scandals in Philadelphia and St Louis -- where the police were caught
hiding rapes.
Advanced searches require getting FBI help or spending money on data.
IRE sells a user-friendly version for the FBI’s annual release ofs data from thousands of
police agencies. This is the information that the FBI uses to produce its annual report
“Crime in United States” It contains details on the number of crimes that police
reported, the number they declared to be “unfounded,” how many were declared to be
“cleared” by police, how many arrests that were made and lots more. There’s a limited
breakdown of the race and age of people arrested for crimes ranging from murder to
disorderly conduct and curfew violations.
A cheaper way is to get help from the FBI Criminal Justice Information Services.
The Baltimore Sun did that, asking for the number of rapes that police said were
“unfounded” – cases that police determined were not really rapes. The city for years had
been declaring high numbers of unfounded rapes, removing them from the official crime
count that appears in the FBI’s annual reports.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

If the numbers look cooked, people within the criminal justice system sometimes
can tell you the secret recipe.
In 2008, New Orleans police reported 72 rapes, down from 114 a year earlier.
Meanwhile, LSU Public Hospital said 168 women sexual assault victims had come to
the hospital for rape examinations in 2008.
In July 2009, the Times-Picayune quoted a former prosecutor who was concerned that
New Orleans police had ignored some sexual assault cases. The cases had been
shelved in the meaningless category of "Signal 21." As many as 60 percent of the sex
crimes cases were dumped there. It’s similar to the practices that were uncovered in
Philadelphia and St. Louis.
The Times-Picayune wanted to get copies of the “Signal 21” reports, but police told the
paper that it would have to pay big bucks for officers to redact reports before they could
be released. Instead, the newspaper simply reported the position of the police and what
it knew about Signal 21.
Some readers called for the chief’s firing. Others said it the police were correct because
most women lied when it came to rape.
That’s a familiar debate. But the story got people talking about a topic that was secret
for too many years.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

