Teri Sforza
The Orange County Register
tsforza@ocregistser.com
IRE 2009 Baltimore

Quick-hit watchdog stories:
Where to find them
Greetings, fellow members of the Fourth Estate! We are gathered here today to recommit ourselves to journalism’s core
mission: Being watchdogs. Barking. Keeping an eye on those holding the public trust and how they’re spending our money.
Everyone has more to do now and less time to do it, but if you regularly ask your city councils/school boards/special
districts/local nonprofits for these records, you’ll find that you have more meaty stories than your editors can handle. Plus,
they’ll be the kind of stories that make readers sit up straighter and yell, “Hey, Martha! Did you hear this one?” Local
papers can provide detailed, important, local news in a way that no other organizations can. IMHO, this will have to
become our trademark if we’re to survive in this leaner, meaner media landscape.
So! Pulling back the veil on the mysterious machinations of local government is great fun. Here are some things to ask for:
•

CLAIMS. When someone has a beef a public agency, they must file a claim with the city before they can file a
lawsuit. Ask for these every two weeks or so, and you’ll get a wealth of info.

•

SETTLEMENTS. The city will, sometimes, pay out on those claims. Find out what they’re dishing monthly.

•

EXPENSES. Every month or so, the council/board of directors, city managers, department heads et al submit
their expenses so they’ll be reimbursed. Hotel bills, airfare, monthly high-speed internet access at their homes
(charged to the public). Be sure to ask to see the receipts as well as the report. Always great fun.

•

CREDIT CARD STATEMENTS & CELL PHONE BILLS. This stuff may or may not be on the monthly
expense sheets. If the city/district issues bigwigs credit cards and pays the cell phone bills directly, these things
will NOT show up on the expense statements. Good to check monthly. Great fun here too!

•

CITY COUNCIL/BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING PAY LOGS. Every council member and board
member gets paid for each meeting he/she attends. This can range from $100 to around $200 per meeting, and can
really add up. They submit monthly “logs” of what meetings they’ve attended, and how much they expect to be
paid. You’ll see some members charging meeting pay for talking on the phone with the city manager; you’ll see
some who hardly charge for anything. Check monthly. Always a hoot to ask folks why.

•

MONTHLY CHECK REGISTER. A delightful inventory of all checks written by the city. Who’s getting paid
what, and for what?

•

REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS. What sorts of major things is your city buying that it can’t provide itself?
Someone to manage its computer systems? To clean its sewers? Ask monthly to see all RFPs issued. Companies
will respond with bids, and generally, the lowest bid gets the contract. Ask to see those bids as well.

•

CONTRACTS LET BY THE CITY. You may find that the lowest bidder is *not* the one who gets the contract,
and it’s always good to ask why. Ask the city monthly for copies of contracts it has entered into with vendors for
$75,000 or more, or some other figure to your liking. Fun then to see if any of those vendors are also campaign
contributors. Also, ask what the city’s biggest contracts already in effect are, and get copies of those – the city
manager’s, the chief engineer’s, the database operator, etc.

•

HEALTH INSPECTION REPORTS. Most everyone knows this already, but the restaurants closed down by the
Orange County inspectors are listed at www.ochealthinfo.com. These are popular bucket items, but you might
want to also put this info into a spreadsheet every month, so that after six months or so you can look at it and see

some trends. That McDonald’s has a sewage backup every month! That Millie’s has been closed for rodent
infestations 20 times!
•

RECORDS REQUESTS. Yes, you’re asking for records – and so is the LA Times, and the guy pissed off about
how often the sewer is backing up into his bathroom. Get the city clerk’s log of who is asking for what, and you
may find some other very good stories. Monthly.

•

SALARIES. This is a fun thing to do every six months or year or so. Get a list of all the jobs in the city and what
they are currently being paid. Officials usually strip names off this list and include only job titles – but it’s very
easy to tell who is who.

•

BUILDING RECORDS. Check into the building permits issued by your city every month or so. Ask for figures
from the years prior, so you can get a sense of how your city is developing. It may be boom, it may be bust. You
can also tell how much buildings cost from these records. Environmental Impact Reports are also here, and have
a wealth of info.

•

CORRESPONDENCE. Letters and emails between public employees, and sent to public employees, are public
record. You may want to ask for copies of correspondence between the City Manager and Council (and target
projects in the news lately, be it the maintenance director, the head of the building department, etc.). I’d do the city
mgr/council request every couple of months or so, and others as needed.

•

CAMPAIGN FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES. Filed during election season. See who’s pouring money into the
races – the trash company? The unions? Check the names of donors against those holding big city contracts.

•

STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC INTEREST. Form 700 must be filed annually by council and board
members, police chiefs, top officials, even some committee members. They show each person’s financial holdings,
the value of gifts they’ve accepted, etc. Filed every March.

•

AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.. This gives you a much better picture of your city’s overall financial
health than what you’ll find in operating budgets. You’ll see how much is held in reserve as a cushion for hard
times, you’ll see how much infrastructure is worth (buildings, pipes, etc), and lots of other fun stuff. Annually.

•

ANNUAL BUDGET. These are policy statements – just with numbers instead of words! Don’t settle for the
summary. Get the line-item budgets for each department. Annually.

•

NONPROFIT REPORTS. You can find most of the big charities in your community by going to
www.guidestar.org, clicking on “advanced search” and then putting in the name of the city (and state) you’re
interested in. I tried San Clemente just for fun, and got 292 organizations. Many have their tax returns (990s) on
the site, so you can really do some reporting. Check the finances of the local museums, hospitals, Boys and Girls
Clubs, Little Leagues, Boy Scouts, etc. – folks who often wind up in feature stories, but whose money
management skills we rarely look at. How much is the head of the Boys & Girls Club being paid? Are they losing
money on fundraisers? Are they spending more than they take in? Is membership down? You can also find some
very weird non-profits in here that can be fun features – with the added bonus of having actual financial
information about the organization. We should ALWAYS, ALWAYS, ALWAYS ask to see Form 990 (the IRS
tax return for non-profits) EVERY TIME we write about charities. If they’re too small to file 990s – which means,
they take in less than $25,000 a year – ask them to provide PROOF of their nonprofit status in the form of a letter
from the IRS, *and* the California Attorney General, *and* to provide an accounting of their finances for
publication. We should never, ever write about a supposed charity unless we know it’s a charity, and we know
that they manage their money sufficiently. Writing about a charity in the newspaper lends it great credibility, and
we’ve gotten burned in the past after finding out that the charity we profiled, er, doesn’t exist. Oops.

•

COMMITTEE AGENDAS & REPORTS. Easy to overlook these things, but you can often find great stuff there
before it rises to council level for action. Monitor regularly.

