Teri Sforza
The Orange County Register
tsforza@ocregister.com
IRE 2009 Baltimore

Quick hit watchdog stories:
No-nonsense nonprofit reporting
How much money does the executive make? How much is spent on fundraising? How much is spent on the core mission?
It’s a matter of public trust. Follow the well-meaning money.
START AT WWW.GUIDESTAR.ORG.
Charities that earn more than $25,000 in annual revenue are supposed to file an annual information return, Form 990, with
the IRS. Form 990 is a public gold mine for reporters. And GuideStar has 990s for hundreds of thousands of charities. Just register –
it’s free – and you can look up the three most recent annual 990s for any charity in the land. (Warning: If the most recent 990 is not
posted on guidestar yet, call the charity and ask for a copy. You are legally entitled to see it upon demand. You can also ask for audits.
HOW CAN I TELL IF IT’S DOING A GOOD JOB?
Just look at the very first page of the 990. For operating charities (as opposed to private foundations), you’re interested in just a
handful of lines:
• No. 12 (total revenue)
• No. 17 (total expenses)
Do expenses exceed revenues (i.e., is line 17 bigger than line 12)? If so, it’s time to start asking questions about why.
Then look more closely at the breakdown of expenses. That’s lines:
• No. 13 (how much is spent on program services – the MOST IMPORTANT NUMBER on the sheet)
• No. 14 (how much is spent on management)
• No. 15 (how much is spent on fundraising).
Now do some simple math!
• Divide the number on line 13 by the number on line 17 (i.e., divide what’s spent on programs by total expenses). That will
tell you what percentage of spending goes to programs. THIS SHOULD ALWAYS BE AT LEAST 65 PERCENT. Ideally,
it is more like 75 to 85 percent.
• Divide the number on line 14 by the number on line 17. This is the percent spent on management/overhead. You don’t want
to see this exceed 15 percent.
• Divide the number on line 15 by the number on line 17. This is the percent spent on fundraising. You don’t want to see this
exceed 10 percent.
Repeat this for three years’ worth of 990s, and you’ll see trends. Is revenue down dramatically? Has spending on programs tanked
while fundraising costs skyrocketed? You’ll have a story.
Also:
•

•

Check and see how much the executive and big wigs make. Part V-A is what you’re looking for; it’s often attached to the
back of the form as a separate sheet of paper. The average executive nonprofit pay in America is about $150,000. If they
make more, it’s not necessarily a big deal – the head of one of our nonprofit hospitals earns more than $1 million, for
example – but it’s certainly time to ask a few questions.
Check net assets. That’s the bottom number on the front page of the 990; see how much of it is in cash and investments. If
it’s an operating charity (which does good works itself, as opposed to a foundation, which funds the good works of others)
and there’s a huge amount of money sitting around unspent, it’s time to start asking why, and what the plans are for that
money.

ALSO CHECK WWW.CHARITYNAVIGATOR.ORG
They do these breakdowns for many (but certainly not all) charities. They also put out “Top 10” lists of the good, bad and ugly; check
these to see if any charities in your coverage are show up.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

