TIPSHEET: CREDIT AND DEBT INVESTIGATIONS
Lessons from BusinessWeek’s “Prisoners of Debt” series
by Brian Grow, Robert Berner, Keith Epstein and Geri Smith
BANKRUPTCY DEBT
Credible Sources – In the complex and murky business of bankruptcy proceedings, credible
experts are key to explaining how decisions are made and debts assessed. Bankruptcy judges,
Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 trustees, and of course, bankruptcy attorneys representing creditors
and debtors are the best. You’ll be surprised how willing even judges and trustees are to talk.
Debt Data – Understanding the secondary market, in which old accounts are bought and sold for
pennies on the dollar, is vital. Debt-collector and debt-buying associations can help. For raw data
on portfolios, visit debt-trading Web sites such as www.debtconnection.com/portfoliosforsale.asp,
and www.worldwidedebtexchange.com. The data is fascinating!
Learn the Laws -- The laws governing debt-collection and debt-buying are complex and
outdated. Two federal statutes: The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, governing debt collectors,
and the Fair Credit Reporting Act, governing credit reporting. Both are enforced by the Federal
Trade Commission, where officials are often quite willing to talk.
MEDICAL FINANCE
Understanding Medical Debt – For any patient, understanding medical bills is a daunting task. It
becomes more difficult when reporting on the uninsured and underinsured because of the
complexities of hospital pricing, insurance discounts, charity care, and medical debts sales.
Recommendations: obtain medical bills and have them analyzed by patient advocates.
Finding Patients – Because of HIPAA rules and general reluctance to talk about medical
problems, patients who will talk about medical debt can be hard to find. Valuable sources include:
Mark Rukavina, The Access Project; Enrique Balaguer, Real Benefits Inc, and Nancy DavenportEnnis, The Patient Advocate Foundation.
Deciphering Financial Terms – Even the most fair-sounding medical finance program can have
hidden traps or questionable terms. Ask: how does this make money for the finance firm?
Example: a medical credit card offered 0% interest. But the hospital charged uninsured patients
the full rate, whereas insured patients receive big discounts. Higher charges = bigger balances
MICROFINANCE
Elusive Sourcing – Mainstream banks and investment houses don’t have microfinance
expertise. Seek out specialists: www.microfinancegateway.org has a searchable database of
organizations, consultants and industry news around the world. Also, The Consultative Group to
Assist the Poor, www.cgap.org, a think tank housed at The World Bank.
Obtain Documents – With millions of small loans whirring through the system, documents are
crucial. This means: Training materials, prospectuses, paperwork borrowers must sign. On two
occasions, involving a lender illustrating methods for luring customers, and a debt collector
describing his methods, we were shown computer files containing loans terms and names.
Spend time on the Street -- As always, don’t simply rely on documents, executives, and
academics. Visit the intended beneficiaries in local settings. Speak with local organizers and
microfinance employees. The size and condition of the home, household goods, state of the small
business, and general mood of borrowers can tell another part of the story!

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

