Investigative
Writing the ^ Story
IRE 2009
Laura Frank
I‐News, the Rocky Mountain Investigative News Network
Laura.R.Frank@gmail.com
When you're writing the investigative story, it helps to try to stay focused on your main job: Telling the story.
But let's face it, investigative pieces are often complex. And sometimes they drag on, or take unexpected turns.
And, of course, you did half a dozen daily stories at the same time you were reporting your investigative piece.
So how do you actually sit down and write the story?
Here are some tips:
Plan:
Think about how a movie tells a story. From the very beginning of your reporting, try to figure out what some
of the "scenes" in your story will be. Readers really remember scenes, which help keep the reader moving through
often complicated facts.
While you're thinking about scenes, ask yourself what do you need to answer the burning questions and make
the story complete?
Don't wait until the end of the process to start writing. It will be much easier if you've written chunks as you
go along. Some of the chunks will be scenes, others will be facts or chronology.
Organize:
Get your information in order. Each reporter will develop different techniques. Try some of these:
Keep separate files of: the best quotes, the most important facts, great "scenes", important documents. You
might need to create a chronology, or a social network tree. These can be electronic or paper files.
I tend to create an index of quotes and facts, so I can see all the information I have when I sit down to write.
Prepare to fact check:
No amount of good writing can overcome a mistake. If you put a fact in your story, add a footnote about
where it came from. This will save you time when you fact‐check your story. It will also help when you post your
story to the web and want to add hyperlinks.
Before you write:
Starting with a story outline helps organize your thoughts and create a story with flow that makes sense. Look
at the tools you've already created: your quotes file or quotes index, your scenes, your major points and major
facts. Craft an outline first: It's less intimidating than starting to write and it will help make the writing process
smoother.
Lead with your lede:
That saying about making a first impression applies to your stories, too. How are you going to grab the reader?
There are several kinds of ledes. Your story might work with more than one.
Do you have:
A smoking gun?
A compelling anecdote?
An outrageous fact?
Try each kind of lede out and see which fits best. For example, don't bury an amazing hard‐news lede beneath
a so‐so anecdote.
From here, just follow your outline, effortlessly use the facts and quotes you have at the ready, and enjoy the
process!
©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

