Getting the Most out of the Census Web site
IRE Ethnic Media Workshop
Jennifer LaFleur
ProPublica
jlafleur@propublica.org

From redlining in the mortgage industry to medical care, Census data plays a critical role in any story that examines
populations. Even the most basic analyses often need census population figures to allow you to compare rates of crime,
foreclosures ‐‐ even stimulus money.
You can get population information from a few different surveys that the Census Bureau conducts:
1. Decennial Census – every 10 years of the whole population, plus a survey that goes to a very large sample of
households
2. American Community Survey – an annual population survey with many of the same questions that are in the 10‐
year census. This will replace the census “long form” in the 2010 Census. Right now, this data is available only
cities and towns with at least 20,000 people and other larger geographies.
3. Current population survey. This is the annual basic county of the population. If you just need population
numbers, this is the best place to get them.
The Census Bureau’s tool for getting to all this data is called
Factfinder. It’s online at factfinder.census.gov. Let’s walk
through some examples.
For quick information, Factfinder has a couple of tools for
getting summary data.
First, the FACT SHEET feature at the top of Factfinder will
give you a profile for a particular geography. What you get
will include current ACS data, if it’s available for that geography, otherwise, you’ll get Census 2000 data.

You’ll get a profile of that area. Here’s an example for
Boston:

Although it may seem like statistical mumbo‐jumbo – the
column called Margin of Error is very important to any
analysis. Because the ACS data is from a survey, it could
mean that there’s some wiggle room in your data. For
example, it may mean that in a ranking of cities by
median income, the top one isn’t necessarily the top,
once you take the margin of error into consideration.

You also can get a profile by address.

You’ll get prompted to fill in the address and pick the survey you want to use:

You’ll get a list of all the geographies covered by that survey. Select one of the geographies to get profile information.
You also can map it if you want.
GETTING TO THE DETAILS
If you want to pull out specific details from census data, you need to
use Factfinder’s data tools. To get there, click on DATA SETS in the
left directory, then choose the survey you want to use:

How do you pick which survey to use? Your geography usually will
tell you. You should choose the most current for the size geography
you’re using. So, if you want to choose the city of Boston, use the
American Community Survey. If you want information for a census
track in a city, you’re stuck with the Decenniel Census for now.

Let’s say we want to get a breakdown of home ownership rates in Boston.
Go to DATA SETS | AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY

Let’s use the 2007 ACS. Click the bubble for the 2007 ACS, then click DETAILED TABLES:

The first thing you need to do is choose the level of geography you want.
In nerdy Census language, cities are called “places.”
Next, choose the state:

Click on the city you want and click ADD.

It will pop the city name into the box below. Then click NEXT:

The window prompts you to pick the variables you
want to see. Scrolling through the giant list can be a
big pain, so it’s best to check by subject or to search
(see the tabs at the top).
Click on the SUBJECT tab and let’s take a look:

If you scroll through the list, you’ll see “Tenure”
under Housing Characteristics. That is the nerdy
census word for homeownership status.
Click on TENURE and click SEARCH. Still lots of
tables, but as you scroll through, you should see
one that just says TENURE (Table B25003). Let’s pick
that one.

Click ADD, to pop that table into the box below. Then click Show Result.

You should see your results, with lots of explanation.

Let’s say we want to get this same information for every city in Massachusetts.
Click on the link at the top that says “geography.”

Pick the geography like you did before, but this time, choose ALL PLACES.

Then click ADD. Then SHOW RESULT.

The output is kind of yucky (another technical term) if we want to do any more with it. So we need
to bring it into Excel. To do that click on the PRINT/DOWNLOAD button at the top, and choose
DOWNLOAD.
If you want your data, so that each city is its own row, with the values in columns, choose the zipped
Excel format. You get a zip file that contains several files: your data, a spreadsheet with geography explainers and two
text files explaining the data. (Never ding the Census Bureau for not providing explanations…whew!)
Once it’s in a spreadsheet, you can sort it and do your own calculations.

BEYOND POPULATION
Keep in mind that the Census doesn’t just count the population, it conducts dozens of surveys including studies of
business, agriculture, construction and many other topics. Go here for a list of Census bureau publications:
http://www.census.gov/prod/www/titles.html
The Census Bureau press office is usually really good at hooking reporters up with experts on various topics or helping
folks understand data. For more information, go to the online press room: http://www.census.gov/pubinfo/www/news/
It includes a cool feature that provides information on specific ethnic/race groups:
http://www.census.gov/pubinfo/www/hotlinks.html
MORE TIPS
As always, check out the IRE resource center at www.ire.org for more tip sheets and story examples.

Jlafleur, 9/8/09

