Washington, DC • Oct. 17, 2009

Fighting and winning open records battles
James V. Grimaldi
Investigative Reporter; The Washington Post
grimaldij@washpost.com; 202‐334‐4459

BEFORE YOU START
Do your homework.
Have a general idea of what you are looking for. Find out how documents are kept, where they are kept
and why they are kept. Get blank copies of forms that are regularly filled out. Make sure you have
exhausted other avenues to obtain records.
Look for it. Ask for it.
Check web sites. Don’t FOIA something you can get by making a phone call or that is already online.
Sometimes, the quickest way to get something is just to ask for it ‐‐ without filing a FOIA.

THREE STRATEGIES FOR YOUR FOIAS
Ask for exactly what you want
Through reading the law, policies, web sites and interviews, you find out exactly how the system works.
What forms do they keep? What reports do they regularly file? Sources can guide you to the reports to
request. Key advantage: Reduces turn‐around.
Ask for everything
If you make a very broad request, you can then negotiate to scale it back. After all, if you knew what
document you wanted and what it said, then why would you have to file a FOIA? You would have it
already. Be sure to ask for records as they become available. Then, ask the FOIA officer to deliver the
records in bundles. IE, “Provide XYZ documents first, then I’ll see if I need more.”
Make regular requests.
If you are a beat reporter, you should regularly file FOIA requests on your beat. Ask for key documents,
calendars, e‐mails, correspondence, inspection reports, audits, budgets, etc.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

WRITING YOUR FOIA
The easiest way is to use one of many standard forms found on FOIA sites listed below. But the most
basic says, "Under FOIA, I am seeking....." and then ask for what documents you seek, being as specific
as you possibly can.

A.

B.

C.

D.

E.
F.

Bells and whistles to include in the letter
Cite the President and the Attorney General. When Barack Obama took office, he issued two
powerful statements about transparency
(http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/TransparencyandOpenGovernment/) and a
second about FOIA (http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/FreedomofInformationAct/).
Attorney General Eric Holder implemented these directives in this memo:
http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/foia‐memo‐march2009.pdf These documents can be quoted and
cited in your FOIA.
Ask the agency not to redact. Obama said that if the agency has any doubt about whether an
item is exempt from disclosure under FOIA, then release it. Obama’s quote: “In the face of
doubt, openness prevails." Further, if the request is denied in whole or in part, ask that the
officials justify all deletions by reference to specific exemptions of FOIA, and that you provide all
non‐exempt portions that are reasonably separated out. Holder said, “Agencies should always
be mindful that the FOIA requires them to take reasonable steps to segregate and release
nonexempt information.”
Ask that the request be expedited. Note that you are a journalist who disseminates information
and then explain why the public has an urgent need for the information. For example, the need
may involve an impending decision to which informed members of the public might contribute
through contacts with public officials and in these instances delay would deprive the public of its
ability to make known its informed views in a timely manner. Another need could be that
possible questions exist about the government’s integrity which could affect public confidence.
Ask for a fee waiver. Describe your media organization and say that the records disclosed will be
used in the preparation of news articles for dissemination to the public. Point out that the
furnishing of information sought by the request is likely to contribute significantly to public
understanding of the operations or activities of government and is not primarily in your
commercial interest.
Set a time limit. FOIA requires a response within the twenty (20) working days. Don’t hold your
breath, but it doesn’t hurt to mention it.
Include your contact information and how you want to be contacted.

Send the FOIA.
Use email or fax, if possible. In the post‐anthrax attack world, electronic means are more reliable. Call
and make sure it got there. Follow up.

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

MANAGING YOUR FOIA
The work has just begun after the FOIA has been mailed, faxed or e‐mailed. Records will not magically
appear. You have to follow up, be prepared to negotiate, write an appeal, or, in extreme cases, file a
lawsuit.
Always call the FOIA officer.
If you know exactly what you want, the FOIA officer might provide some guidance (how long it will take;
how to modify the request; whether it is online) to get it faster. They might know if someone has
previously made a similar request. This can reduce turn‐around time.
After you have made your request, contact the FOIA officer to discuss it. If it is limited in nature, point
out that fulfilling it will not take much time. Call at least weekly and ask how the request is going.
Be reasonable.
Consider the point of view of FOIA officers. They want to follow the law, but find the most expedient
way to dispose of your request. If they say “you can find that online,” ask them to show you. They will ‐‐
because it means saving them time. Congress requires reports on the number of requests and how
many are filled each year. So if you show them they can quickly dispose of your request, you might get
bumped to the head of the line. Know the law and cite it.
Cut a deal.
FOIA officers might ask you to narrow your request. Counter by negotiating for an index to documents,
such as a correspondence log or a FOIA log (list of FOIAs requested by others) to see what already has
been released. Say that when you receive it you will see if you can narrow your request. You get a really
quick turnaround because you're not jumping out of line ‐‐ you're just narrowing. And the logs are really
valuable.
But don’t back down.
Get know the FOIA officers – they are just doing a job. Be cordial and understanding. But don’t back
down. Be reasonable and make strategic concessions (especially things you don’t really need), but don’t
allow them to exclude what must be released under the law. Make them justify denials.
Always appeal
Whenever appropriate under the circumstances, file an appeal ‐‐ even if the story has run. There might
be material for a follow. (Don't appeal if your case really has no merit, so as not to jeopardize your
organization's long‐term credibility.)
Demand media fee waivers
You are engaged in journalism, so you qualify for a fee waiver. Watch for tricks designed to make you go
away. One agency has asked Post reporters for extraordinary proof to grant fee waivers commonly given
to media. Challenge those fee requests vigorously. Ask for the agency’s fee schedule and examples of
charges to other media. Ask to review – and not copy – records; there should be no charge for that.
Track your FOIA
Keep a file or record of your contacts with the FOIA officer. Some people call the FOIA officer once a
week, once a month. Sarah Cohen of the Post always sends her FOIA a “birthday card” on the

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

anniversary. (The National Security Archive three years ago celebrated the 17th birthday of a FOIA:
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB182/press.htm)
File a Lawsuit
Lawsuits do not necessarily have to be expensive. Ask a nonprofit organization if they’d be willing to
provide legal help pro bono. Consider recruiting other plaintiffs to sue for public records. The
Washington Post teamed up with news organizations ‐‐ CBS News and others ‐‐ to fund a lawsuit to
open up sealed r0ecords related to faulty Firestone tires.

SELECTED LINKS: FOIA RESOURCES ONLINE
•
•
•
•
•

•

IRE’s FOI page: http://www.ire.org/foi/
National Freedom of Information Coalition http://www.nfoic.org/
Reporter’s Committee on Freedom of the Press is a rich legal resource on free speech issues,
trends, developments in the law. http://www.rcfp.org/
Public Citizen’s FOIA page http://www.citizen.org/litigation/briefs/FOIAGovtSec/
National Security Archives at George Washington University collects and publishes declassified
documents acquired through the Freedom of Information Act. Includes “The Torture Archive” of
more than 83,000 pages of documents (and thousands more to come) related to the
interrogation of detainees from the wars Iraq and Afghanistan. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
The Justice Department has compiled an excellent list of legal references, FOIA guides and
publications ‐‐ inside and outside of the government.
http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/basicreferences.htm

SELECTED GOVERNMENT WEB SITES
Almost every government agency posts online its FOIA handbook, which is a valuable resource for
negotiating with FOIA officers. “Your own handbook says... ’’ Here are a few:
• Department of Justice list of principal FOIA contacts across agencies
http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/index.html
• Defense Department’s FOIA site, including the DOD FOIA handbook and list of the different
contacts within DOD (Army, Navy, etc.) http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs/foi/
• Department of State http://foia.state.gov/ Department of Treasury
http://www.ustreas.gov/foia/
• Department of Interior http://www.doi.gov/foia/
• Department of Commerce http://www.osec.doc.gov/oebam/FOIAWebsite.htm
• Department of Agriculture
http://www.usda.gov/news/foia/main.htm
FOIA ELECTRONIC READING ROOMS
Reading rooms list frequently released documents. For some items of special interest, agencies will
create topic‐specific reading rooms. After the Columbia shuttle disaster, NASA created a consolidated
FOIA web page and posted all documents online. http://www.nasa.gov/columbia/foia/index.html The
Commerce Department’s FOIA electronic reading room on Enron: http://www.ustreas.gov/foia/reading‐
room/docs/enron‐index.html

©2009 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

