Worker Injuries and Disease
Loretta Tofani – 2008 IRE Conference, Miami
The background: my series, called "American Imports, Chinese Deaths," documented that
millions of Chinese workers get fatal occupational diseases or limb or finger amputations while
making products for the U.S., a result of the lack of enforcement of China's worker safety laws ‐
‐ and the complicity (in some cases unwitting) of U.S. companies that import from those
factories. The series raised moral and policy questions (Is it fair to allow Chinese workers to kill
themselves while making products for the U.S. when we as a society have decided that U.S.
workers must be protected from fatal diseases and limb amputations?). I interviewed Chinese
workers with fatal occupational diseases, Chinese factory managers, U.S. company officials who
purchase from China, U.S. consumers, etc. I also obtained Chinese workers' medical records and
shipping records that linked specific Chinese factories to U.S. companies buying specific
products. You can read the series at http://extras.sltrib.com/china/
Tips:
1. The best place to find overseas workers with fatal occupational diseases is in foreign
hospitals. It's best to take a friend from that country with you when you enter the hospitals;
otherwise the risk of getting thrown out is extremely high. In China and other police state
countries, it's not possible to interview patients if you announce to hospital staff that you're a
reporter. ( In some democratic countries that don't care as much about patient confidentiality
as the U.S., it might be possible.) But I always immediately explained to hospital patients that I
was a reporter writing about fatal occupational diseases and limb amputations. Of course,
there are other ways of finding patients: you can go through non‐government organizations or
lawyers. But the workers they recommend tend to be those whose injuries/fatal diseases that
were discovered years ago. If you want current patients, go to the hospitals. China has
occupational disease hospitals, so that makes it easy to find the right places.
2. The workers have access to their medical records; ask them to give them to you. The records
are invaluable in substantiating that the worker has a fatal disease and that the cause of the
disease was occupational.
3. U.S. Customs records are not public info, not available from FOIA. I obtained mine from
sources ‐‐ shipping clerks and customs brokers. After I wrote the series, I learned there was an
easier but much more expensive way: a company called PIERS sells those records, but it
requires a multi‐month subscription of thousands of dollars each month. You can find the
company on the web.
4. Get the country's occupational disease law. When I first visited factories in China and saw
the conditions, I thought perhaps China didn't have a good OSHA law. Then I obtained a copy
of the law from a medical journal article and saw that it was as strict ‐‐ in most cases ‐‐ as the
law in the U.S. The problem, it turned out, was lack of enforcement.

©2008 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

5. To compare overseas occupational health and safety regulations with those in the U.S., look
up www.osha.gov and type in the disease or industry that interests you.
6. Medical and scientific journal articles are invaluable sources of info on fatal occupational
diseases, their causes, their prevalence in the U.S. and abroad, the researchers in the U.S and
abroad who have studied them, etc. My favorite journals were the International Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Health, the Journal of Regulatory Toxicology and
Pharmacology, and the Journal of Environmental Health Perspectives. You can view the
abstracts of articles for free on the web by using Science Direct. But Science Direct charges $40
per article, so I took printouts of the abstracts to local hospital libraries and found the journal
articles ‐‐ for free ‐‐ at the libraries.
7. The language of occupational health and safety is technical and full of jargon. After reading
articles or looking up OSHA standards on the Web, I discussed the meaning of it all with
occupational health professionals. You can find those professionals through these
organizations: the American Society of Safety Engineers, the American Industrial Hygiene
Association, the American Conference of Industrial Hygienists. They all have contact phone
numbers on their websites, and seem happy to help reporters; they feel their field has been
given inadequate attention in the press.
8. feel free to contact me if I can be of more help: Tofani.Loretta@gmail.com

©2008 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

