2010 CAR Conference (Phoenix, Arizona)
Watchdogging Government Spending
By Rob O’Dell
Arizona Daily Star
1) The spending documents are there: this is government after all; they have to be there. The key
question is figuring out what you want, what’s important and how to get it.
2) Think about what documents are key to your particular government’s spending. Figure out not just
how money is spent on a macro level (the budget), but also figure out how dollars flow through the
organization on an individual transaction level and how money is actually spent.
Requests those documents in person or by FOIA. Also think about asking for these records:
a) chart of accounts from accounting to see what funds it spends money from.
b) a hard copy of the budget
c) a hard copy of the latest Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR). This will give you
detailed information on the city’s individual funds, plus it will give you the auditor’s notes
about the government’s financial position.
d) Familiarize yourself with the procurement department, find out at what dollar amount the
city must go out bid for. Look at contracts for over and under that amount. Also fund out
what level its needs to go to the City Council or Supervisors as well.
e) Ask for banks where the city has lines of credit and accounts. Request records for those
accounts.
f) Ask for the monthly balance of all the government’s funds (also request smaller sub‐funds)
for the past year.
g) FOIA the credit card or procurement card accounts for politicians and top city officials.
h) Ask for an excel download of accounting transactions for problematic or politically
important accounts.
i) Regularly search claims against the city and look through court records for lawsuits.
j) FOIA salaries for city officials. Ask for BOTH salaries and total compensation, which can
differ dramatically.
k) FOIA the city’s check registers or a master list of all checks cut citywide or by department.
l) Also FOIA information on permits, fines, taxes, over time
m) FOIA the email accounts of important people in finance, budget and accounting and make
sure to ask for the attachments. Those attachments the top finance and budget people are
working on are often the most important financial documents in an organization.
n) Find a source to help you to navigate and find different records in the city’s financial
system, and try to find someone who can translate financial/procurement documents to
help you.
3) FOIA early and often. Get bureaucrats on your beat used to the fact that you’ll be asking them for
information and they need to be getting it for you. Also, they’re less apt to squawk about your
important requests if it’s seen as something you do all the time.
4) There’s often no eureka! document. In most cases, your strongest cases from public records
(especially those about government spending) will come from layering documents together to spot the
trends over time or illuminate the bigger issues. Exceptions to this rule can include really descriptive
emails or credit card receipts that are particularly compelling.
5) Make it clear to government officials/bureaucrats that it’s easier to give you the information than
to prevent you from obtaining.

2010 CAR Conference (Phoenix, Arizona)
a) This is my number one strategy for getting public records. Wear them down by being
persistent and bothering them to the point where its easier for them to give you what you
want than to have you in their office five days a week requesting records.
6) Know your state FOIA laws. Many public officials don’t know the FOIA law, so how can you
challenge them if you don’t know what’s public and what is not. For example, many governments will
say you can’t look at documents until you pay for them, when FOIA laws allow you to look at them
before you pay. Also, many HR departments will contend all employee records are privileged, when in
fact most of an employee’s personnel file is NOT privileged and is public info.
7) Don’t forget to mix sources with data and documents.
a) Oftentimes I think people segregate sources and documents when it’s important to mix the
two. There’s no way that you can know what every number or bureaucratic phrase in city
documents means. Oftentimes, you’ll need a source to point it out to you or let you know
what it means. Also, sometimes sources who know information can’t be quoted, but could
point you towards a document that will say the same thing as they are telling you off the
record. Make sure to try to integrate sources and documents.
8) Learn to use basic functions of Microsoft Excel, Access or other spreadsheet program. This is
helpful to do both basic and more complex calculations that can help give meaning to your reporting.
Also, it will be helpful to learn the basic concepts of financing and accounting so you will be able to
speak the language and have a basic core knowledge of what you are reporting.
9) Use the government data to compile your own records.
a) Many times government will provide you with data but won’t give it to you in a format that
is useful. Do not be afraid to use the information the government provides to create your
own record of what the government is doing.
b) There is nothing more infuriating to the government you cover than to use the information
they provided you to create your own reports about what’s happening inside the
government. There is also nothing that gets the government to give up the document you
really wanted – and the one they said they didn’t have – than to be confronted with
calculations/records from the newspaper. I have gotten records in hours that I’ve been told
weren’t available for months this way.
c) Make sure to have someone who is an expert in the field check over your
databases/calculations so when it is published it is not the first time your document or
database has been examined critically. Also, give it to the government to look over so they
can challenge your reporting BEFORE the story goes to print or on the web, This causes a lot
of annoying back and forth but it is worth it in the end. Oftentimes, the government is less
concerned with the numbers than how you “categorized” or defined different types of
spending.
10) Don’t be intimidated by the people who are “experts.”
a) I can’t tell you how many times I’ve done a story challenging a city or government’s policy,
record or plans and been confronted by the government or businesses’ so‐called experts
who challenged my credentials for understanding accounting or economics. Oftentimes,
these people are hired guns whose job is to use their “expert” status to shoot down your
reporting. Other times, the “experts” can be the from the same circle of people who tell the
same story to each other so “everyone” ends up believing it. Think about what the experts
where saying about credit‐default swaps, collateralized debt‐obligations or the idea that we
would never have a national housing market downturn because we never had one before.

2010 CAR Conference (Phoenix, Arizona)
This isn’t advising you not to bulletproof your investigations; it’s just that you shouldn’t be
intimidated out of it by “experts” once you have.
11) It takes hard work and you’ll have to put up with a lot of people’s crap. Getting information from
the government is getting harder and harder. Governments are saying more and more information is
restricted, and there’s little money for the news business to hire lawyers to fight them other than for
the most important stories (and often not then either). Most of the digging done in the business in the
future is going to be reporter‐driven because of financial constraints. It’s up to you to get this
information and get these stories done. But it’s worth the effort.

