Data State of Mind
NICAR Conference 2010
MaryJo Webster, St. Paul Pioneer Press, mwebster@pioneerpress.com
Brant Houston, University of Illinois, brant.houston@gmail.com
What is a “Data state of mind?”
Approaching story ideas with the mindset that you are going to “measure” or quantify something, rather
than simply getting the facts, getting all sides of the story and a few quotes. See the forest and not just
the trees, as Steve Doig says. Do rankings, find outliers, find the typical.
How do you develop this mindset?
1) Think of data as people too. The database you get from a public agency is just like a human source. It
can answer questions, raise questions, point you in the right direction, or even mislead you if you’re not
careful in not only how you ask the question, but also in how you interpret the answer.
It can be a tipster or it could be the key source in your story or it could just offer some background or
context.
2) Define your stories as questions rather than statements. Instead of saying, I want to do a story about
unsafe bridges…say I want to find out what percentage of bridges in the state are unsafe?
This frames your story into something that is quantifiable. That sets you up to take the next step:
figuring out what data you need to answer your question.
3) Tune your radar to pick up on opportunities to quantify. Examples include:
--trend stories that vaguely say something has changed over time or is bigger or different here versus
there
-- When you find yourself asking a source to give you summary numbers for a story, stop and think
whether it would be better to get the data that those numbers are based on. For example, if you are
writing a story about how overtime has caused the police department’s budget to go through the roof…
instead of asking the city to give you total figures on overtime this year versus last year (or some other
breakdown), ask yourself if you’d get a better story if you had data showing how much overtime each
employee got?
--a local government (city, county, state, etc) created a program to do something last year.. Can we find
a way to measure whether it has succeeded?
--a breaking news story. How often has this occurred in the past?
-- IRE’s Extra Extra to find ideas that others have done
--Look at your own past stories and look for missed opportunities – could you go back and do a deeper
or broader look at the topic using data
4) Build your own data library so you have data at your fingertips that you can tap when something pops
up, particularly data on your beat and events (car crashes, tornadoes, other routine events).

