2010 CAR Conference (Phoenix, Arizona)

TWITTER 101 for Journalists
CAR conference | Phoenix | 2010
Doug Haddix, IRE and NICAR | doug@ire.org

WHY TWEET?: Do people really care what I had for breakfast? (No.)
¾ Much of Twitter is filled with garbage from people known as “meformers.” It’s all about me: what I’m
doing right now, random thoughts, catty comments, mindless updates of the mundane. A smaller but
more valuable chunk of Twitter is used by people known as “informers.” Be an “informer” and follow
“informers” to use Twitter effectively for work.
¾ Announcements.
¾ Breaking news.
¾ Links to interesting stories, documents, data.
¾ Questions: What are the best new I‐phone apps for reporters? Have you had problems with
acceleration on your Toyota? Do you know someone who was hospitalized because of H1N1? What
should I ask the mayor this afternoon during my interview?
¾ Stay on top of your beat, the news biz, social media, etc., in one easy feed with links for details.

GETTING STARTED: Resources to set up a Twitter account and tweak your settings
¾ 30 Essential Twitter Tutorials for Newbies and Experts: http://bit.ly/arVZKR
¾ Twitteroid’s Guide to Mastering Twitter in 10 Minutes… Or Less: http://bit.ly/bAfpBi
¾ Twitter Resources on the SPJ Journalist’s Toolbox page:
http://www.journaliststoolbox.org/archive/twitter‐resources/
¾ Twitter Guide for Newbies and Skeptics: http://sreetips.tumblr.com/post/87435969/twitter by Sree
Sreenivasan at Columbia University
¾ There are several apps (e.g. UberTwitter) for Twitter on smart phones. If you don’t have a smart
phone, you can set up Twitter to send text messages to your phone. But FIRST BE CLEAR on your
texting plan so you don’t rack up extra charges.

2010 CAR Conference (Phoenix, Arizona)
THE TWITTER INTERFACE: Navigating around Twitter without getting lost.
¾ Your Profile is Public. Put a little effort into your short BIO because people may decide to follow you
based on key words.
¾ Your Home page is Hidden. This is like your News Feed in Facebook.
¾ Following | These are individuals, groups or businesses that you are following. That means their
tweets show up in your news feed. You can follow someone for awhile to see if they’re interesting, and
unfollow them later. Use the “Find People” feature in the bar across the top of the screen to search.
Use the “Browse Suggestions” box to search by category. Once you find someone you want to follow,
click the FOLLOW button on the right. Poach from people, organizations and businesses that interest
you – see whom they’re following for other ideas of whom you should follow.
¾ Followers | These are individuals, groups or businesses following you. Any time you send out a tweet,
they get it on their home page.
¾ Listed | These are lists that Twitter users have created that include you.
¾ @username | This is where messages sent to you will appear (see below for more details).
¾ Direct Messages | If a Twitter user sends you a (semi‐private) Direct Message, this is where it appears.
You can only Direct Message someone whom you follow and who follows you on Twitter – must be a
two‐way street. People who have that kind of two‐way street relationship on Twitter with you and the
person sending you a DM can read those messages, so they’re not really private. So, if you and I follow
each other on Twitter and I send you a DM, anyone who follows both of us (and we both follow back)
can see the direct message.
¾ Favorites | If you click on the star in the upper right hand of a tweet, it will be saved in your favorites.
This is like bookmarking a tweet.
¾ Retweets | Click this link to find Retweets by Others, Retweets by You, and Your Tweets, Retweeted.
It’s a way of tracking who’s forwarding your tweets and what people on Twitter find interesting
enough to share.
¾ Trending |You can see what’s popular right now on Twitter worldwide (or change to a specific
country). Trending topics appear below. Clicking on the key word will run a search of it on Twitter.
¾ Lists | If you are following any lists or create lists, they will appear on this link.

TWITTER LINGO: Understanding the foreign language of the Twitterverse.
¾ Tweets can be no more than 140 characters (limit of a phone text message). That’s why every
character is critical and why people use services to shorten long Web links (e.g. bit.ly or ow.ly).
¾ # | The hashtag is used to run a quick search on a key word or phrase. A hash tag makes the word
instantly searchable and indexes it. For example, we’re asking people who tweet about the CAR

2010 CAR Conference (Phoenix, Arizona)
conference to use the #NICAR2010 hashtag so that it’ll be easier for everyone to find the tweets
quickly.
¾ RT | This means to ReTweet a message. It’s comparable to forwarding an e‐mail.
¾ @ as the first character in a tweet | When you put the @ symbol at the beginning of a tweet, your
message goes to that person’s “Inbox” (which is visible to everyone if they search by @username). If
you want to publicly message me on Twitter, you would tweet: “@DougHaddix I think I’m getting the
hang of tweeting.”
¾ @ anywhere else in a tweet | This is how you publicly respond to someone so that all of your
followers see your note. If you want everyone who’s following you on Twitter to see your note to me,
you’d write something like: “Hey @DougHaddix, your Twitter presentation was awful.”
¾ d | Put this character at the beginning of a message to Direct Message someone (e.g. “d DougHaddix
you lost me during your talk about sending direct messages on Twitter.”)

STORY IDEAS AND SOURCES: Using Twitter searches to connect in real time.
¾ Trending topics will tell you what the Twitterverse is tweeting about today.
¾ Search.Twitter.com | Use the advanced search to find tweets by geography, date range, attitude, etc.
For instance, you can look for tweets about H1N1 or swine flu within a 25‐mile radius of your city.
¾ Twitter TrendsMap (look at your region) at http://trendsmap.com/.

MANAGING TWITTER: Using technology to save time and be more efficient with social media.
¾ TweetDeck or HootSuite for easy organization; posting to multiple accounts on Twitter, Facebook and
LinkedIn; URL shortening; scheduling tweets; monitoring saved searches; etc. I prefer HootSuite
because it’s Web‐based and you don’t have to download any software (a consideration if your
newsroom prohibits that). Plus, with HootsSuite, you can sign in from any computer with a Web
connection.
¾ You can feed your blog or anything else with RSS to your Twitter account.
¾ Twellow is the Twitter Yellow Pages, a good place to register your account once you’ve polished your
page. Also a great place to look for sources to follow on Twitter.
¾ OneForty has Twitter apps.
¾ MrTweet can make recommendations on whom to follow based on your followers and whom you’re
already following.
¾ TwitterGrader to see how you rank on Twitter.

