Tipsheet #3342

Terri Langford
Reporter, Enterprise Desk/Houston Chronicle
terri.langford@chron.com
twitter: tlangford
713.362.7276
NICAR/Phoenix 2010
Winning Open Records Battles
Consider government records a sort of medical chart regarding an agency's fiscal and program
health. Public records in your story provide context and a benchmark for the public about a
governmental program or entity.
However, obtaining public records can test your patience quickly.
And agencies want you to lose your temper and walk away.
But, if you keep a professional, firm approach, invest in a little Google-prep before you start that
shows you know something about their office/entity/program and its history, you’ll win nearly
every time without calling an attorney.
When possible, find a spirit guide. Check your contacts. Do you have a source who knows
something about the records you're looking for and who could save you time by guiding you to
the right place?
Know your state’s open records law, particularly about deadlines and the denial appeals
process. Nothing slays like confidence. So know the law, like your life depends on it. Recordkeepers have laser-sharp ignorance detectors. If they feel you don’t know what you’re talking
about, they will begin stalling for time.
Ask first. Write later. Try asking for the information first. You’d be surprised how many people
will give you things if you just ask and don’t paper them with written requests, threatening them
with the law. But don’t lose time waiting. Follow up with a written request quickly after they say
no.
Focus. Do not ask for everything and anything. Ask yourself what you want from the records,
what answers you want them to provide.
Get to know the record-keepers and their data. Offer to look at the system they’re using.
Understand how they maintain their data.
Know what the record looks like. Ask for a copy of blank forms/applications when considering
a specific set of records so you know exactly what type of information will be included and what
type of information an agency might try to exclude.

Tipsheet #3342

Know the “records flow” (Who touches the record?) If you’re turned down by one
department/agency, try to find out who else has to keep that record.
Be flexible, negotiate. So they want to charge you $1,400 for copies of 100 paper files. Do you
really need everything? Could you view some of it beforehand? Is there any type of docket sheet
or index for each file so you could better choose what you need? Can you bring a scanner to their
office? Ask who else has obtained the information and use that info to reduce your costs.
Learn to “elevate." When you hit an impasse, go to the supervisor or the general counsel,
quickly.
Make record-keepers prove their math/logic. If your request is denied, make them prove up
their argument. Make them point to the exemption in the law.
Pick up your records. Even if you don’t need them, pick them up. If you don’t, you’ve ticked
off the agency and it’ll be hell when you or another reporter deals with them the next time.
Remember, embarrassment is a handy investigative tool. So they won’t give up public
records? Make it part of the story.

