2010 NICAR Phoenix: Cracking the justice System
The Philadelphia Inquirer
Justice: Delayed, Dismissed, Denied
Craig R. McCoy at cmccoy@phillynews.com
Dylan Purcell at dpurcell@phillynews.com
Tip Sheet: Criminal Court Data Analysis

In December 2009 The Inquirer published a four-part series on
the failures of the criminal court system in Philadelphia. The
newspaper used extensive computer-assisted reporting to study three
years of Philadelphia criminal court cases. In all, the paper
analyzed 31,000 criminal cases involving more than 250,000 individual
charges.
It found a justice system with the nation’s worst felony conviction
rate, violent crime rates far above the national average, widespread
witness intimidation, a billion dollars in uncollected bail and
thousands of fugitives at large.
This was possible because the paper received data tables
covering all key components of the courts: defendants, cases,
charges, fugitive status, outcome by charge and sentencing.
That information made it possible to follow any case from start to
finish. The problem was, the data from the courts was designed for
individual case management. Our challenge was to restructure their
records to permit us to grade the entire judicial system in
Philadelphia. What we did can be replicated for any court system in
America.
The series focused on the FBI’s big four violent crime cases,
murder, rape, robbery and aggravated assault. Each was studied with
and without handguns. Simple handgun possession cases were also
examined. It was an ambitious approach that took more than a year to
produce, but court data has many stories to tell, including some that
can be produced quickly.
For example, it took us less than a week to order and receive a
subset of court data that revealed that one in three Philadelphia
defendants skipped out on at least one court hearing while their case
was pending.
We chose violent crimes, but this same methodology can be used to
analyze any crime trend from property crimes to drug cases to drunken
driving.

Different courts, same data
Every court in America keeps track of their cases in a database. Your
task is to obtain it and mine it for news.
To be sure, different court systems will present unique challenges.
In Philadelphia, a big hurdle was that the same cases were handled
differently by the lower Municipal Court and the higher Common Pleas
Court. Thus, we had to normalize the two systems to produce overall
results.
In every court system, however, there are likely to be certain
basic elements: names of defendants, case numbers, dates of arrest,
names of arresting officers, defense lawyers, prosecutors and judges,
pending charges per case, charge outcomes, case outcomes, fugitive
status (if applicable) and punishment details.
In many cases, the overall court system database will be simply too
vast for you to deal with or analyze. So you need to be selective in
what you seek.
In our case, we requested and received all cases that originated or
concluded in 2006, 2007, 2008 and into early 2009. For the heart of
our analysis, we tracked cases created in 2006 and 2007, following
them through early 2009. We put aside 2008 cases because not enough
of them had been adjudicated one way or another.
In Philadelphia, we received information in five tables containing
more than 5.7 million records. While data structures and linkages
will differ court to court, all systems should be amenable to
analysis.

Label it and score it
Think about what a dockets are, and how when people are arrested,
they face a constellation of charges. That means you will need to
develop a scheme for labeling each case. In other words, is a case a
murder case, a rape, a robbery, and so on.
And once you label cases by type, you must next create a scheme for
“scoring” all outcomes. In other words, what was the outcome – a
conviction, an acquittal, a dismissal, a defendant on the run, and so
on.
Finally, you may wish to develop a scoring system for punishments –
so you can aggregate the guilty into categories, such as those given
only probation, those serving under five years, and so on.
“Highest charge”

As for labeling, we modeled our data after the FBI schema for
counting the “highest charge.” For violent crimes, the hierarchy is
murder, rape, robbery and assault, with each crime outranking the
other.
This approach mirrors that used by the Bureau of Justice Statistics
in their studies.
If a person’s docket has the defendant facing rape and assault
charges, that case is a rape case. If a defendant faces murder and
rape charges, we label it a murder case.
One resource available is the Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook
available from the FBI. It provides numerous narrative examples of
how to label cases, including non-violent crimes.
Because Philadelphia has an especially virulent gun culture, we also
flagged all gun charges as a subset within each major crime category.
This enabled us to measure the impact the use of a firearm had on
convictions and sentencing. To our surprise, in Philadelphia it made
no difference in the conviction rate.
While we chose to emphasize gun crime, you may choose to flag other
subsets – such as drug charges.
How prosecutors fared
Once we had all cases labeled, we developed a way to count outcomes,
analyzing and totaling results in several different ways.
Our first and most “generous” measure was that we deemed a case as a
“win” for prosecutors as long as any charge on a docket ended in
conviction, no matter how minor. Even with this relaxed standard, in
Philadelphia, we found that defendants were beating all charges in
nearly two thirds of violent crime cases.
Again, because this method mirrored the Justice Department’s longheld formula, it was largely bulletproof.
To dig deeper, we next “scored” cases by two more rigorous standards
– the percent found guilty of the highest charge; and the percent
found guilty of at least one felony.
In Philadelphia, we learned, for instance, that only four out of
every 10 defendants were convicted of a felony. This was sharply
beneath the national rate of nearly 7 out of 10.
A caution
As you work on your analysis, be sure you run your methodology by
court administrators, academics, lawyers and other experts. Be alert
to the mines that can damage your work if you don’t defuse them. For

example, we had to be alert for “refiles” - cases where defendants
walked, but then were rearrested for the same charges without a
double jeopardy violation. We took pains to make sure we only counted
such rearrests once.
We also removed from our count certain crimes of violence that had
been dismissed by city judges merely because they were to be
“adopted” for action by federal prosecutors. Furthermore, we
presented our findings to the courts and district attorney weeks in
advance of publication.

Key data sources
Your court system
Request the data from local or state court administrators. In our
case, we bought it for less than $1,000 from the Administrative
Office of the Pennsylvania Courts, an arm of the state Supreme Court.
Federal Data
Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2004
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=891
Published every two years, with historical versions dating back to
1988, this report uses sampling techniques to examine the nation’s 75
largest counties. It contains a myriad of statistics related to
felony defendants. Among other data, it gives breakdowns for counties
on conviction rates, fugitive rates, sentencing severity, time-totrial, types of bail imposed.
Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2004 Statistical Tables
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=906
A related resource to the above study. Not to be missed, it provides
Excel spreadsheets that underpin the various findings of the study.
Pretrial Release of Felony Defendants in State Courts
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=834
Offers key information on how defendants are treated as they await
trial.
FBI data
FBI Uniform Crime Reports, Most Recent Year, Entire US
http://data.nicar.org/node/36
For data on crime rates, the main source is the FBI’s Uniform Crime
Reporting program, whose reports are available at the FBI’s web site.
They also can also be obtained from NICAR’s database library.
You may also wish to dig into a lesser known UCR table known as the
Return A Supplement, also available from NICAR. It provides a host of
additional information on crime. We mined it to establish the level
of gun use in robbery and assault.
Edited version, 3/17/10
-------------------------------

