Juggling and managing CAR work - How to cover a beat and still produce investigative, CAR-based stories.
How to manage your day. How reporters and managers can collaborate better to get it all done.
MaryJo Webster, St. Paul Pioneer Press, mwebster@pioneerpress.com
David Heath, Huffington Post Investigative Fund, dheath@huffpostfund.org
FINDING SHORTCUTS
1) Use other people’s data or find other organizations to help with the heavy lifting.
2) Leverage your resources. Example: recruit interns from nearby university to help with a big project
or do team projects where several people all contribute.
3) Ask for help. Look for experts on your topic, reach out to other journalists who have tackled same
topic, etc.
4) Reducing the scope of your story. Can you look at a sample of the data, instead of looking at all the
records?
MAKING YOURSELF MORE EFFICIENT
1) Figure out where you’re wasting time. If you’re not sure, try documenting your time every day for a
week and then looking at it to see where you’re wasting time and/or how you could rearrange your
day to free up an hour or two to work on CAR or a specific story.
2) Organize. If you feel like you’re frequently spinning your wheels trying to find an old email or a
document or piece of data, step back and assess your organizational system (for both electronic and
paper information) and come up with something better that works for you.
3) Lists. Make lists of things you need to do in the next day, or the next week, even longer term. Have
that at your fingertips so that when you have a free minute you can do something off your list.
4) Collect string on bigger ideas as you’re working on daily stories. When interviewing a source, ask
some other questions that might lend insight into a future story. Keep files on specific topics that
you might come back to later.
CAR SPECIFIC SUGGESTIONS
1) Learn what databases exist on your beat, much the same way you learn which human sources to
have in your rolodex. Then spend some time getting to know what’s included, what’s missing, etc.,
so that if a story comes up where you could use the data you’ll be ready to go. Find out what’s in
the data, who keeps it, how easily accessible is it, what format it’s in (a mainframe database? An
Oracle database? An Excel file?). What does the keeper of the data do with it? Do they analyze it for
reports they generate? Or is it just an indexing system for their paper files? Trying to learn a new
database on deadline is like running with scissors – it’s asking for trouble.
2) Request important databases on a regular basis so you have them at your fingertips. For example, if
you cover city hall, request a database of city employee salaries each year (including titles, date of
hire, overtime amounts, union affiliation and work phone number if possible).
3) Take notes. When you’re working on a CAR story that is likely to be something you’ll work on
gradually over the course of several weeks, or maybe months, be diligent about taking notes on
your work. Keep a text file or a Wiki page or something like that where you can jot down your latest
discovery — steps you took in an anlysis and what you found; phone calls you made to the keeper of
the data, etc. You’ll need this so that when you do have time to go back to the story, you won’t have
to spend a ton of time trying to figure out where you left off. As part of this, keep a running list of
the next steps that need to be done.
4) Find ways to automate things you do routinely -- like importing the same database over and over;
cleaning data.
WORKING WITH YOUR EDITOR
1) If you’re new to CAR, look for some quick, yet powerful stories that you can produce to show you’ve
got the CAR chops and build up some brownie points with your editor. He/She will be more likely to
free you up for a bigger story idea if you’ve proven that you can produce.
2) Pitching ideas to your editor – it’s more important on CAR stories than on other types of stories to
do some pre-reporting to figure out what might be possible, whether data is available, etc. You want
to be able to go to your editor and feel fairly confident that you can produce what you’re pitching.
Just make sure you don’t oversell.
3) Work with your editor to carve out time. This is going to vary greatly depending on your editor’s
approach, your position at the news organization and your relationship with that editor. Maybe you
can take one day a week where the first hour of the morning is spent on some data analysis or other
tasks related to a CAR story. Maybe you can even do this from home to avoid getting sucked into
the daily grind (or start an hour earlier than the rest of the newsroom so you’re not disturbed)

