THE YEAR IN CAR

Doug Haddix and Mark Horvit, IRE and NICAR

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Data: Reporters spent months reviewing thousands of pages of court files, police
reports and bureau reports, as well as medical examiners' reports for every child who
died in Milwaukee County from 2004 to 2008.
Findings: At least 22 Milwaukee County children died from 2004 to 2008 despite
clear warning signs to the state-run Bureau of Milwaukee Child Welfare that they were
at risk. Workers who make fatal mistakes are reassigned rather than fired. Parents
who have mistreated their children for years start with a clean slate virtually every time
a new complaint comes in. A culture of secrecy persists despite promises of more
transparency.

Post and Courier in Charleston, SC
Data: Records and reports kept by each
university for each football game
Findings: The use of painkiller injections
is little discussed in college football and
almost completely unmonitored by the
NCAA. The organization admits it is
unaware of the type and amount of
painkillers injected into players each week.
Studies on painkiller prescription abuse
among college football players are nonexistent, despite a warning from NCAAapproved addiction counselor Marcus
Amos that the problem is “rampant.”South
Carolina administered 169 Toradol
injections to players on game days over
the 13 games of the 2008 season.

Chicago Tribune
Data: Created online database with data
for crime, inspections/fines and other
records.
Findings: More than any other state, Illinois
relies heavily on nursing homes to house
mentally ill patients. But a Tribune
investigation found that government, law
enforcement and the industry have failed to
adequately manage the resulting influx of
younger residents who shuttle into nursing
facilities from jail cells, shelters and
psychiatric wards. The number of residents
convicted of serious felonies has increased
to 3,000. Among them are 82 convicted
murderers, 179 sex offenders and 185
armed robbers.

Gannett New Jersey
Data: Property tax data and census data
Findings: New Jersey has the highest
property taxes in the nation. Gannett New
Jersey takes a hard look at why property
taxes are so high — and what can be done
to fix them. Includes interactive graphics
showing tax burden by community, salaries
of public employees.,

USA Today
Data: Using the most recent records from the U.S. Department of Transportation,
USA TODAY compared nearly $10 billion in stimulus-funded roadwork to a ranking
of rough roads in counties across the country.
Findings: Nearly $10 billion in stimulus aid to repair the nation's tattered highways
has largely bypassed dozens of metropolitan areas where roads are in the worst
shape, a USA TODAY analysis shows. Half of the nation's worst roads are in
counties that will only get about 20% of the stimulus money allocated by state and
federal officials for street repairs. Although the worst roads are in just a handful of
counties, they account for 11,000 miles of pavement so rough the government has
branded them as unacceptable.

Sun Sentinal (Fort Lauderdale, FL)
Data: The newspaper obtained screening databases from two state agencies and
Broward County, and performed analyses that government officials had never
conducted to determine how many exemptions have been granted, who obtained
them and for what crimes. The paper also compiled inspection reports from multiple
government sources and created databases that allow readers themselves to check
out their day care center, nursing home or assisted living facility.
Findings: Disturbing flaws allow people with records for crimes including child abuse,
assault and murder to work in day care centers, assisted living facilities and homes for
the elderly and disabled. Employees are routinely hired before background checks are
made.

New England Center for
Investigative Reporting
Data: State mortgage
broker/lender complaint
database, state regulator
files.
Findings: As the
subprime mortgage crisis
has exploded over the
past two-and-a-half
years, wreaking havoc on
families and tearing
through urban
neighborhoods,
Massachusetts banking
regulators took serious
punitive actions against
only a tiny fraction of the
brokers and lenders it
licenses.

Center for Investigative Reporting /
California Watch
Data: Reporters examined thousands of
pages of documents from 160 monitoring
reports written by state homeland security
officials who visited cities and counties
across California to inspect equipment and
grant records for compliance with federal
guidelines.
Findings: Under the state’s open-records
laws, California Watch found scores of
instances of wasteful spending, purchasing
violations, error-prone accounting and
shoddy oversight involving Homeland
Security grants at agencies across the
state during the years immediately
following 9/11.

Hearst newspaper and TV stations
Data: Adverse event data from state health depts.,hospital patient safety indicator
data, hospital associations, patient safety organizations.
Findings: Every year approximately 200,000 Americans die from preventable
medical errors and healthcare-associated infections as tools to fight these needless
deaths go unused at many hospitals.

ProPublica and The Sunlight Foundation
Data: For the first time, Foreign Agents
Registration Act records have been digitized
into a searchable database that allows
users to easily follow the money and
connect the dots. Anyone can quickly learn
what governments are lobbying whom, how
often and about what.
Findings: More than 280 lobbying firms
collected $87 million in fees for representing
340 foreign clients, including governments,
government-controlled organizations,
political parties, separatist groups and a
handful of for-profit firms. Several prominent
former lawmakers have signed on to
represent foreign countries, among them
ex-Senate leader Bob Dole (Taiwan and
Montenegro) and former House
Appropriations Chairman Robert Livingston
(Turkey and others).

Herald Tribune (Sarasota, FL)
Data: The newspaper reviewed more
than 19 million Florida real estate
transactions to determine how much of
the real-estate bust had its root in
housing fraud.
Findings: The year-long investigation
found that more than 50,000 Florida
properties flipped under suspicious
circumstances from 2000 through
2008. Those flips artificially drove up
housing prices and tax bills and
contributed to the crush of foreclosures
that has gutted the real estate market.
All over the state, professional property
flippers made billions in profits on the
back of concocted land deals.

Morning Call (Allentown, PA)
Data: The newspaper examined contracts, e-mails, fee schedules and bills
associated with the Bethlehem Area School District's bond and swap transactions
since 2003. In addition, reporters also examined court records and campaign finance
reports.
Findings: No school district in Pennsylvania engaged in more swap transactions
than Bethlehem, which did 17. The district's use of derivatives, which business guru
Warren Buffet once called "financial weapons of mass destruction," has cost
taxpayers tens of millions of dollars in payments and fees to investment banks,
financial advisers and lawyers.

Everyblock
Data: Hyper-local information including police reports,
restaurant inspections, building permits, photos, reader
“news” and announcements, business reviews, concert
reviews, property sales, street closures, liquor license permits,
etc.

The Denver Post
Data: Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. records
Findings: The practices at New Frontier Bank in Greeley not only flew in the face of
banking standards, they rose to the level of potential fraud. The maneuvers, including
the masking of loan losses and insider dealing, were missed or went unpunished by
state and federal regulators for years leading up to the $1 billion bank failure — the
costliest in Colorado history.
Reviews of bank documents, audits and oversight reports, along with interviews of
former New Frontier board members, consultants, bank examiners and former
regulators, expose factors contributing to the bank's collapse.

Center for Public Integrity
Data: The center surveyed on-campus and off-campus crisis clinics and programs
at four-year public universities. Of the 260 clinics and programs in the sample, 152
completed the survey. To compare their answers to official numbers, the Center
analyzed Education Department university crime data, which campuses are
required to report under the Clery Act.
Findings: A thick blanket of secrecy envelops cases involving allegations of sexual
assault on campus. Many victims don’t report at all, and those who do come
forward can encounter secret disciplinary proceedings, closed-mouthed school
administrations, and off-the-record negotiations. At times, school policies and
practices can lead students to drop complaints, or submit to gag orders — a
practice deemed illegal.

The Buffalo News
Data: Buffalo Economic Renaissance Corp. records
Findings: Four Jefferson Avenue barbershops and a salon received $287,499 from
BERC during Mayor Byron Brown's first term. The money is part of the $1.3 million in
grants BERC has awarded to help revive Jefferson Avenue's business district, which
received 71 percent of BERC grants since 2006. Two-thirds of the nearly $2 million in
grant money went to businesses in the Council's Masten District, where most of
Jefferson Avenue is located and where Brown previously served as district
councilman. Businesses in the Fillmore, Niagara and North districts — districts as
poor or poorer than Masten — received a combined 2 percent of the grants.

The News Journal (Wilmington, Del.)
Data: Social Security Administration data
for administrative law judges nationally
Findings: The newspaper analyzed four
years of decisions by administrative
law judges in every state, more than
1.7 million records that show a huge
disparity in how Social Security
disability cases are decided by hearing
office and region. The paper also filed a
Freedom of Information Act request for
the number or nature of any complaints
about the judges but SSA refused to
release the records.

CBS4 in Miami, Fla.
Data: U.S. Department of Agriculture federal farm subsidy data. Working with help from
the Environmental Working Group’s database experts, the CBS4 I-Team matched
Federal Farm Bill recipients with people, birth dates, addresses and Social Security
numbers on the SSA death index.
Findings: At least 234 dead people in South Florida received $9.5 million in federal
farm aid. Statewide, nearly 2,400 dead farmers received nearly $89 million in aid. Old
rules actually allow dead farmers and their heirs to get farm aid for up to two years
after the farmer dies. Even accounting for those old rules, the I-Team uncovered 1,399
statewide in Florida who have been dead three years or more who received $55
million in aid. Some have been dead as long as 8 years.

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Data: Federal stimulus grants processed by the Wisconsin Office of Recovery and
Reinvestment.
Findings: A stimulus job report that says more than 10,000 jobs were saved or
created in Wisconsin is rife with errors, double counting and inflated numbers based
more on satisfying federal formulas than creating real jobs. In one case, five jobs
were mistakenly listed as 50 - and then counted twice. In another, pay raises to
workers were listed as saving more than 100 jobs. The problems mirror those
surfacing around the country, as the federal numbers claiming 640,000 jobs created
or saved by stimulus money are being scrutinized.

The Charlotte Observer
Data: Database compiled by Guidestar.org
Findings: On paper, federal law prohibits
charities from awarding excessive
compensation to their leaders.
But in practice, loopholes and understaffed
regulators allow nonprofits to pay almost
any salary. More than 200 charities across
the nation pay CEOs over $1 million a
year. And more than 80 nonprofit leaders in
the Carolinas have collected compensation
exceeding $500,000.

ProPublica and the Los Angeles
Times
Data: Disciplinary records, California
Board of Registered Nurses
Findings: The Board of Registered
Nursing took more than three
years, on average, to investigate
and discipline errant nurses. It
failed to act against nurses whose
misconduct already had been
thoroughly documented and
sanctioned by others. And the
board gave probation to hundreds
of nurses, then failed to crack down
as many landed in trouble again
and again.

Wisconsin Center for
Investigative Journalism
Data: Accidents reported
to the Wisconsin
Department of Natural
Resources and the U.S.
Coast Guard.
Findings: Eight of the 20
people who died last
year were in nonmotorized boats, most of
which capsized. Of the
17 who drowned, 15
weren’t wearing life
jackets. And the
percentage of boating
accidents in which
alcohol was involved
declined sharply last
year, accounting for just
one in five accidents.

The New York Times
Data: The newspaper compiled and
analyzed millions of records from water
systems and regulators around the nation,
as part of a series of articles about
worsening pollution in American waters,
and regulators’ response. An analysis of
E.P.A. data shows that Safe Drinking Water
Act violations have occurred in parts of
every state.
Findings: More than 20 percent of water
treatment systems have violated key
provisions of the Safe Drinking Water Act.
The 35-year-old federal law regulating tap
water is so out of date that the water
Americans drink can pose what scientists
say are serious health risks — and still be
legal. In the past five years, companies
and workplaces have violated pollution
laws more than 500,000 times. But the vast
majority of polluters have escaped
punishment.

The Washington Post
Data: The newspaper analyzed spending, services and finances of every specialized
AIDS organization funded by D.C.'s HIV/AIDS Administration from 2004-2008, an
estimated 90 groups, building a database from tax returns, audits, lawsuits, real estate
records, D.C. Council records, and corporate and police reports.
Findings: The D.C. Health Department paid millions to nonprofit groups that delivered
substandard services or failed to account for any work at all, even as sick people
searched for care or died waiting. The agency awarded $25 million to nonprofit
agencies marked by questionable spending, a lack of clients, or lapses in recordkeeping and care.

The Arizona Republic
Data: IRS 990 forms, property records,
business incorporation records,
Combined Federal Campaign reports,
Government Accountability Office
reports, and computer searches of
various Web sites.
Findings: The newspaper found that
most of the 22 charities with ties to a
Phoenix televangelism ministry
performed controversial transactions
with supplies that helped inflate their
finances. The charities took credit on
tax returns for donating millions of
dollars' worth of goods on paper that
they did not physically collect, store or
distribute. Then each charity took
credit on its tax returns for most or all
of the value of the goods, booking
them as incoming revenue and
outgoing donations.

Minneapolis Star Tribune
Data: Death certificates, state health department records
Findings: More than 1,000 Minnesota deaths were related to falls in nursing homes
from 2002 through 2008, but few were fully investigated. The state found neglect in
17 cases statewide since 2004 where residents were seriously injured or died after
falling out of lifts. It has issued citations for errors in only three cases.
Minnesota's nursing home investigators issue far fewer citations in complaint
investigations of all types compared to five other Midwestern states. Wisconsin,
Illinois, Michigan, Indiana and Ohio cite nursing homes at a rate three times higher.

KING-5 TV -- Seattle
Data: State firefighting
databases, Washington
Department of Natural
Resources
Findings: The station found
234 fires across Washington
in the past decade attributed
to the railroads. A third of
them, 63 fires, were sparked
in western Washington. Most
did little damage, but 42
fires, scorched two acres or
more. One man was killed
and various homes
destroyed.

KHOU-TV Houston
Data: Internal Revenue Service 990
forms

Law Enforcement Education Program

Findings: The station found that the
vast majority of national badge
charities spend a high percentage of
donations on professional
fundraisers, rather than on services
directly benefiting the charitable
mission. In one year alone, $83
million was donated to so-called
badge charities— law enforcement
causes raising money in Texas: from
retired cops, to narcotics cops, cop
alliances, cop associations, cop
coalitions, even a cop museum. The
state Attorney General has
jurisdiction over all 70,000
organizations in Texas – with a staff
of 7 dedicated to charities.

USA Today
Data: EPA Toxic Release Inventory data, U.S. Department of Education’s Common Core
of Data
Findings: Using the government's most up-to-date model for tracking toxic chemicals,
USA TODAY spent eight months examining the impact of industrial pollution on the air
outside schools across the nation. The result: a ranking of 127,800 public, private and
parochial schools based on the concentrations and health hazards of chemicals likely to
be in the air outside.

National Public Radio’s
Robert Benincasa analyzed
data from the National
Highway Traffic Safety
Administration and
discovered that unintended
acceleration has been a
problem for many auto
manufacturers in addition
to Toyota, and that Toyota’s
problems go back farther
than the year that the
automaker’s recall began.

This site allows users to track the economic status of individual states
over time through an interactive display. It crunches various
government data sources to gauge the health of the local economy.

Ron Nixon and Jo Becker
of The New York Times
analyzed data from the
Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) , as
well as company Web
sites, news clips and other
reports, to show how
many companies that do
business with Iran also
win contracts from the
U.S. government.

Tisha Thompson of Fox 5 examined the injury claims against Washington, D.C.
and discovered the large number of cases that are settled, and the long waits
that those who are injured must endure before finding out if they will receive any
compensation.

CBS-4 in Miami
Data: More than 7,000 paper inspection reports.
Findings: Many day-care centers in metropolitan South Florida have operated for years
without complying with state safety standards. IRE/NICAR’s Database Library staff
assisted the Channel 4 I-Team with analysis of the reports, which were entered into a
computer database, and the creation of an interactive map and search tool.

Las Vegas Sun
Data: Drug Enforcement Administration reports on the state-by-state distribution of
controlled substances to pharmacies and health care practitioners.
Findings: Nevadans consume about twice the national average of several prescription
painkillers, making us among the most narcotic-addled populations in the United States,
a Sun analysis has found. The consequences are deadly. More people in Clark County die
of prescription narcotics overdoses than of overdoses of illicit drugs or from vehicle
accidents.

This interactive map allows readers to map homicides in a number of
different ways, from location to race or sex of the victim or perpetrator.

This is a tool that the New York Times has used for a few projects in
the past year. It analyzes text and looks for the most commonly
occuring words, then displays them. Words that occur most often are
larger and/or bolder. The idea is to portray themes in a speech or
statement.

National Public Radio
Data: NPR combined the FAA's wildlife-strike reports with airport activity figures to
calculate airport "strike rates," an industry measure that is not publicly available and
that standardizes bird strikes according to the amount of traffic at an airport.
Findings: Since 2000, 28 aircraft have been destroyed by wildlife strikes, killing five
people and injuring 93. Includes an interactive map with information at the nation’s
49 busiest airports.

Center for Public Integrity
Data: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA); included more than 350 million mortgage
applications covering 1994 through 2007. The top 25 high-interest lender list is based
on data for the years 2005 through 2007.
Findings: The top subprime lenders whose loans are largely blamed for triggering the
global economic meltdown were owned or backed by giant banks now collecting billions
of dollars in bailout money — including several that have paid huge fines to settle
predatory lending charges. The banks that funded the subprime industry were not
victims of an unforeseen financial collapse, as they have sometimes portrayed
themselves, but enablers that bankrolled lending threatening the financial system.

The Columbus Dispatch
Data: Records produced or withheld
through public-records requests for
athletics-related documents to all 119
colleges in the Football Bowl Subdivision
(formerly Division I-A). The requests sought
airplane flight manifests for football-team
travel to road games; lists of people
designated to receive athletes'
complimentary admission to football
games; football players' summeremployment documents; and reports of
NCAA violations.
Findings: Across the country, many majorcollege athletic departments keep their
NCAA troubles secret. They censor
information in the name of student privacy,
invoking a 35-year-old federal law whose
author says it has been twisted and
misused by the universities.

WHAT WILL YOU DO IN THE COMING YEAR?
 Get inspired
 Get story ideas
 Get hands-on training
 Get involved with the IRE community

