BACKGROUNDING PEOPLE AND BUSINESSES ON THE WEB
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE
Phoenix CAR 2010

First things first
 Develop a strategy
 Know what you’re after.
 Know what is available.
 Know when enough is enough.
 Be a smarter searcher; don’t waste your time.
 Be skeptical – treat each online source just as you would any other.
 Think about your own life – practice backgrounding yourself.
 For businesses, find a guide to help you.

The Basics: Questions to ask and steps to follow:
 Who is he/she?
 Google, yes, Google
 Also check at least one other search engine: (Yahoo, Clusty, etc.)
 Zoominfo
 Where has he/she lived?
 Zabasearch
 Find neighbors with Whitepages.com (Do a reverse lookup to find the address, then
select the person’s name and finally click on “neighbors.”) When looking for neighbors,
don’t list apartment numbers; it’s been my experience that they limit the search.
 Does the person still live there? Do they own?
 Property records. Get to know your local assessor’s and recorder of deeds office. An
example: City of St. Louis Assessor’s Office
 BRB Publications – links to public records databases by state and county. Awesome.
 Court records? Criminal information?
 Arizona courts – If you don’t know whether your courts have information online, check
out the BRB site. Not all courts have online searches.
 Federal courts (Pacer is still a pay site, sorry. But, there are some other links on this page
that might be helpful.)
 Sex offender registry
 Inmates: Arizona
 Criminalsearches (Please note, this is not complete, but can be helpful. Make sure you
always verify your information.)

 Deep Web searches:
 Facebook
 Pipl
 123people
 Whostalkin
 Samepoint
 Icerocket

Other stuff to think about:
 How much do government employees make? (Note: this page links to news and other sites that
have listed public employee salary databases. It probably isn’t inclusive, but it’s a start.)
 Check campaign contributions – did the person donate any money to candidates? Don’t forget
to look at local elections as well: Missouri and Illinois are a couple examples.
 If a person is an elected official, make sure you check out their personal financial disclosure
form. Sorry, this may not be online.

Investigating politicians:






Salaries, travel: www.legistorm.com
Personal financial disclosure: http://www.opensecrets.org/pfds/
State financial disclosure: http://www.publicintegrity.org/StateDisclosure/
Cash and votes: www.maplight.org
From the source: www.fec.gov

To background a business:
(Check out other tipsheets in the IRE Resource Center for more information.)
 Company’s own Web site
 Think licenses and business filings:
 Corporate records- Arizona Corporation Commission
 Liquor licenses
 City business license
 Fictitious business names
 Professional licenses – Look up your state at BRB
 Look for lawsuits and court records
 SEC filings
 UCC and liens:
 AZ UCC







Form 990s for nonprofit organizations
Trademarks and patents
Lobbying and lobbyists
Federal tax court
Think about other data that might be relevant
 OSHA inspections
 Federal contracts
 SBA

