The Art of Access
Strategies for Acquiring Data
Computer-Assisted Reporting 2010 Conference
Phoenix, Ariz.
9 a.m. Saturday, March 13

David Cuillier, Ph.D.
Freedom of Information Committee chairman
Society of Professional Journalists
Assistant professor
School of Journalism
University of Arizona
Tucson, Ariz., 85721
520-626-9694
cuillier@email.arizona.edu

David Cuillier is a former CAR reporter and editor and now teaches CAR at the
University of Arizona, along with access to public records and public affairs reporting.
The following handouts cover tips for planning your data request, writing a public
records request letter, handling denials and using people skills to increase the chance
you’ll get the documents without having to go to court. Some of these training materials
were developed by Charles Davis of the University of Missouri at Columbia, Joel
Campbell at Brigham Young University and myself for use in the Society of Professional
Journalists newsroom training program. For more tips see the book, The Art of Access:
Strategies for Acquiring Public Records, by David Cuillier and Charles Davis, and check
out the blog: www.theartofaccess.com.
Contents:
Planning your data request
Overcoming data denials
Soft tactics and principled negotiation
Hard tactics
FOI resources

2
4
7
8
11

1

Planning Your Data Request
•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

Avoid fishing. Try to limit your request to what you really want. If you
simply ask for "all data relating to" a particular subject, you may give the
agency an excuse to delay its response, and you risk needlessly running
up search and programming costs. Do your homework.
Get specific. Cite relevant newspaper clips, articles, congressional
reports, etc. Check the agency’s FOI logs to find out if the data have
already been released, then let the agency know the date, release
number, and name of the original requester. Talk with the techies ahead of
time to know exactly what data you are requesting and in what format.
Tour the agency office and ask about what they are working on and
specific databases they maintain.
Prioritize. Let the agency know if you'd like to receive information in a
particular order. Materials could be reviewed and released to you in
chronological or geographical order - or you may simply not want to wait
for all the databases to be reviewed before any are released.
Check the record layout. Find out exactly what fields are in the data,
how far back the data are kept, and other basic information before you
submit a request. That way you’ll have a better idea of what to ask for, and
know when they leave things out.
Know the law. Know the statutes and case law better than the officials
and lawyers. If you know the law and you are entitled to the data then
remind yourself that you don’t have to prove you have a right to the
information; they have to prove you can’t have it. Remembering that tends
to give you more confidence and feel less apprehensive and more
empowered. Read through your state’s public record law at
www.rcfp.org/ogg.
Be polite but persistent. The people on the other side of the counter
don’t come to work with horns and cloven hooves. They are people too,
and they are more likely to get you what you want faster if you are nice
about it, especially at the beginning. Some will blow you off, requiring you
to get tough but that doesn’t mean to be rude.
Ask verbally. In most cases, first ask for the data verbally. If you are
denied or blown off, then submit your request in writing.
Submit a request. If you anticipate balking, bluffing, or being passed
around or put off, simply submit a public records request letter, which
starts the clock ticking and requires them to act and stop delaying. You
might have form letters in your organization or state press association.
Others are available online at www.rcfp.org (state and federal FOIA
requests) and at www.splc.org. Make sure the right person gets the letter.
Also, when asking for data, it’s important to be more specific than usual:
ask for specific fields, suggest specific formats and copy mediums (e.g.,
“tab-delimited text file on a CD”). It doesn’t hurt to offer to help with the
copy and transfer process, offering multiple ways of transferring the data.

2

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Cite the law. In a written records request it helps if you label it “PUBLIC
RECORDS REQUEST” in all caps at the top so the person who receives it
understands the importance of it. Also, in the request, cite your state
public records law statute and list any relevant case law (or federal FOIA if
you are dealing with a federal agency – make sure to cite the right laws or
they will scoff at your ignorance). Show that you are serious. If you are
prepared to sue you might remind them of the penalties for
noncompliance, depending on the situation.
Get the code sheets. Always ask for the code sheets when you request
data, so you can understand it. Also ask for a printout of some of the
records in order to compare to the data to make sure things were copied
over correctly.
Go to the top. Sometimes going straight to the agency’s lawyers or top
officials speeds things up. Clerks sometimes deny requests or stall as they
try to make sure they don’t release something that will get them in trouble.
Once the agency attorneys look at it and see it should be released, it often
is.
Keep forms handy. If you deal with an agency frequently that has its own
public records request form, keep copies with you ready to fill out and
hand over.
Choose your tone. Consider whether the wording may create
defensiveness or hostile undermining of your request (e.g., delays).
Sometimes it’s better to attract flies with honey than vinegar. But at other
times, coming in strongly and quoting the law can demonstrate you are
serious and know what you are talking about. Research shows that an
authoritative letter is most effective at getting a response, getting faster
compliance, and cheaper copy fees. But use the right letter for the right
situation.
Follow through. After you submit a request, always follow it through to
the end, especially if they provide the data, even months after you need it.
Also, if denied initially don’t skulk away cowed. If you have a legal right to
the information keep at it. How you treat requests and denials will affect
how agencies treat requests in the future. Educate officials and get them
in the habit of providing information to you and the public. It’s part of their
job.
Keep records of records. Keep track of every step of your different
requests. Keep dates, contact names, phone numbers and try to
correspond by email so you can have written records of what was said to
whom. Some requests can last years, so keeping track of details can help.

3

Overcoming Data Denials
IF THE AGENCY SAYS…
"YOUR DESCRIPTION OF THE DATABASE IS INADEQUATE"
This means you probably did not give enough specific identifying
information. Give the agency the benefit of the doubt and rewrite your
request. You can try to call or make an appointment with the official
processing your request to get more help.
"THE DATABASE DOES NOT EXIST"
If you are reasonably certain the records you've requested do exist, and if
your request letter was clear and informative, you should try to do more
research. Are there news reports, congressional hearings or court records
that describe the information you want more clearly?
Rewrite your request, giving the agency more guidelines and clues for
where they might find it. Try to be as patient and understanding as you
can; some agencies are short staffed or have disorganized data systems.
"OUR PROPRIETARY SOFTWARE DOESN’T ALLOW US TO COPY DATA"
I don’t know of any software that can’t copy or export data. Maybe it
exists, but it must be rare. Usually the person saying that is unfamiliar with
the software and needs to confer with the agency computer technicians. If,
after talking to their techies, they still stick to that story, find out the
software maker and call them up. No doubt the company will want
everyone to know how useful and versatile the software is and explain
how to copy the data.
"COPYING THE DATA WITH FIELDS REDACTED WOULD CREATE A NEW
RECORD, AND WE ARE NOT REQUIRED BY LAW TO DO THAT"
It is true that most laws do not require government agencies to create new
records, only let you see or copy existing records. But you aren’t asking
for a new record – just a copy of their existing records with some
information redacted. It’s no different from getting a copy of a paper file
with some information (fields) redacted with a black pen. Just because
they blot out a name on a piece of paper doesn’t mean it’s a new record.
Same theory applies to data. Copying data with some fields redacted, or

4

even combining fields from different databases, is not creating a new
record. It’s copying existing data.
"SOME OF THE FIELDS ARE EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE, SO WE WON’T
GIVE YOU ANY OF THE DATA"
The agency can't withhold an entire document or file because some
portion(s) of it is exempt from disclosure. The agency must release any
non-exempt material that can be reasonably extracted from the exempt
portion(s). It’s not that difficult to redact fields. It becomes more difficult for
an agency to have to read through memo fields that might include some
exempt material. But that information often isn’t crucial for data analysis
and you might be able to get away with redacting the whole field. Then, if
you find a particular record that interests you, ask for that one record with
the memo field.
"WE CAN’T GIVE IT TO YOU BECAUSE AN EXEMPTION SAYS WE HAVE
TO KEEP IT SECRET"
FOIA exemptions are generally discretionary, not mandatory – an agency
is not required to withhold all information. Agency officials can choose to
waive the exemptions and release the material, unless another statute
specifically restricts that disclosure. One exception is FERPA, but note
that FERPA doesn’t cover everything and they can release the records if
identifying information of a student is blotted out.
"WE JUST DON’T WANT TO GIVE IT TO YOU"
The agency must explain its reasons for determining that an exemption
applies to any particular information.
•
•

•
•

•

•

You have the right to contest any exemption claim.
You can file an administrative appeal to a higher agency official.
And if this fails, you can file a lawsuit. The federal court must
conduct a full judicial review of the agency's claims and it is up to
the agency to justify its denial of your request.
The exemptions must be narrowly applied, since the FOIA was
created to maximize public access to agency records
Even if the agency releases substantial portions of the material
you've requested, you can appeal the decision to "sanitize" the rest.
You can also request a detailed justification for each deletion.
While you are haggling with the agency, try to get the information
from another agency. Some records are kept by multiple agencies
(for example, boating accident data is kept by state agencies and
the Coast Guard).
Use principled negotiation and hard tactics (pages 7-10).

5

"OK, OK. HERE IS YOUR DATABASE. THAT WILL BE $1 MILLION,
PLEASE."
Make them justify the expenses with a line-by-line explanation. You might
be able to narrow your request to get simpler databases that would still
serve your purposes. Arm yourself with what other agencies charge for
copies, including for computer programming time. If many other agencies
charge nothing or very little, then make that known, including by writing a
story about it.
Look at the agency’s FOI logs to find out if others have been receiving the
same data. Ask for an extra copy. Ask for a backup copy of their data if
they make backups. Get an outside expert to scrutinize their programming
time estimates. The estimates are usually inflated and unreasonable.
"WE ONLY PROVIDE THIS INFORMATION TO RESEARCHERS. YOU CAN
HAVE IT IF YOU SIGN THIS CONTRACT WITH US."
Some agencies give information to researchers provided they sign a
contract with use restrictions, such as prohibiting identification of
individuals in the records. Few reporters are willing to sign such
agreements. The problem is you might want to use the information for
something else later and won’t be able to. Also, fundamentally it
designates journalists as above average citizens with special access, and
it creates a new category of “public information.” Either it’s public or not.
Some journalists advise only considering such agreements when the
information is clearly not public but the agency is willing to release it for
your story. For discussion on this topic, see Uplink, March/April 2003, p. 1.
"WE DON’T KNOW WHY YOU WANT IT OR HOW YOU MIGHT USE IT. YOU
MIGHT USE IT IN A WAY WE DON’T LIKE.”
Tough noogies. In most states a records request cannot be denied based
on who the requestor is or how the information will be used (except in the
case of commercial mailing lists). If they ask why you want the information
you can tell them: “I wouldn’t want to determine the story before I have all
my facts. I’m just doing my job at gathering information.” If you request
records routinely from an agency (weekly), then it will be no big deal and
they are less likely to question you.
"WE DON’T CARE WHAT YOU SAY, EVEN IF THE LAW SAYS WE HAVE TO
GIVE IT OVER. YOU AREN’T GETTING IT."
Get help from access experts in the state and nationally. Team up with
other journalists or groups who would have a need for the information.
Apply the tactics on the next several pages. Sue.

6

Soft Tactics and Principled Negotiation
Access laws are essential, but sometimes officials thumb their noses at them and suing
is the only answer. But if you can get the records by persuasion, even better. Below are
tips for getting sources to comply with requests, based on the theories and application
of “principled negotiation.” These techniques are advocated by such experts as William
Ury, co-founder of the Harvard’s Program on Negotiation and author of “Getting to Yes.”
I suggest reporters always approach their sources in this frame of mind. With enough
practice you’ll get a lot of agencies to comply without threats of litigation or hard tactics.
Argue interests, not positions
Argue for your interest (I wish to analyze ambulance response times to find
trouble spots), not positions (I want your database). If the agency understands why you
want the information they are more likely to be cooperative. Of course, you are not
obligated by law to explain that and you might not want to tip them off. But in reality they
can figure it out most of the time so being up front is a good option. Then, they can
argue their interest (we don’t want to invade anyone’s privacy). You can work out a
solution when you understand interests. Positions cause both sides to dig in.
Allow face saving
If you box an official into a corner early on they might feel like they have to stick
to their guns no matter the cost, especially if they denied the information in front of their
superiors and subordinates. Talking with the person informally first, before they commit
to an action, gives the person more leeway to agree to your request. Or, suggest the
legal department examine the issue and let them make the decision – that will relieve
the official of the shame of changing his or her mind (e.g., “sorry folks, I had to say yes
because the attorneys said I had to release it.”)
Use people skills
Allow officials to vent. Listen first, then repeat what you heard (whether you
agree with it or not). Use “I” statements, not “You” statements. Talk to people informally
side-by-side, not facing across a counter, creating psychological “opposition.” You want
to look like the good, reasonable person. Let them look like the jerks.
Apply negotiation jujitsu
Bend like the willow, don’t break like the oak. Invite criticism and advice for how
to analyze the data. If they say the database is a waste of time then ask what data
would be a better use of time. They might tell you of a better database that would be
more helpful. Use questions instead of statements. Use silence after an unreasonable
attack. Invent different options and alternatives, and end conversations with a
compliment. Ultimately, if you find yourself getting angry or are denied, calmly write
down what is said, thank the person, and say you need to do some more research.
Leave and figure it out, then come back and discuss further.

7

Hard Tactics
Sometimes you apply the techniques of principled negotiation but an agency just
doesn’t want to play ball, or purposely chooses not to play fair. Then it’s open season
and time to apply hard tactics. Below are tips for getting sources to comply with
requests, based on the six elements of persuasion by Robert Cialdini of Arizona State
University. Also, other strategies are provided for pressuring an agency to release data.
Do not use these techniques for evil. Only good.
1. Reciprocation
• Rejection-then-retreat: Ask for a lot, then cut it in half. “Can I see all your
expenses in database format for the past 20 years? OK, how about starting
with just the expense reports for the past five years?” The clerk will appreciate
you for simplifying the request and may reciprocate by working faster and
being more helpful. Request information that you can give up later, such as
social security numbers. If it lands in court a judge might want you to concede
something anyway. When it appears you are giving them something then they
are more likely to reciprocate.
• Give and take: Don’t ignore newsworthy positive stories. Occasionally
government actually does something right. One of the benefits is that when
you ask for public records they are more likely to comply. When you do
something positive to someone, psychologically they feel obligated to
reciprocate and help you out. But don’t make up stories or get buddy-buddy.
Readers come first. It’s often useful to do a harmless newsworthy data project
first to get to know people and build trust (e.g., analyze pet license data for a
feature on most popular dog breeds/names), then work from there.
• Be a helper: Check in frequently after the request is filed and offer to help to
make their jobs easier. Offer to help copy data or provide the CDs for
copying. They might not take you up on it but they might appreciate the
gesture and move it faster.
1. Commitment and Consistency
• Everyone happy: Ask, “How are you doing today?” When the person says
fine, then he or she is more likely to help you. People don’t want to appear
stingy when they are fine and you are not.
• Commitment: Once commitment is made, people try to stick to it. Get
commitment verbally: “Do we have an agreement?”
• Ratcheting (low-balling): Get a commitment for something small, then it
opens the door for getting a yes on something bigger. This is the opposite of
the reciprocation techniques. “How about if I could see a copy of what a
police report looks like. OK, do you have what a case file would look like?
What does it look like in your computer system? Any chance I could just get
an electronic copy of your reports in Excel for the past year?”

8

2. Social Proof
• Peer pressure: We follow what we see everyone else doing (e.g., canned
laughter). This is most effective when people are uncertain and when the
reporter is similar to the person. “Boy, all the other towns in the county
provide this information. I wonder why it isn’t open here?”
• Patriotism: Focus on the importance of what they have to offer to the
community. That it’s their duty as an American to keep government open and
transparent, and the community will appreciate it.
3. Liking
• Looks: As much as we hate to admit, people often make decisions based on
how a requestor looks. Dressing well helps; looking shady usually raises
suspicions and increases denials.
• Similarity: Dress like your sources. Act like your sources. Talk about similar
interests.
• Compliments that are sincere help.
• Association: Disassociate yourself with negative media and people who use
information irresponsibly (spammers, identity thieves). Go to lunch with
people for a positive association with you and food.
4. Authority
• Bigger gets better responses. Journalists from bigger media have more
“authority” and tend to get calls returned faster. If you work for a smaller
organization, consider teaming up with reporters from other organizations.
Cooperative requests can increase pressure for release and serve everyone’s
interests.
• Titles have authority. Have the request letter co-signed by the managing
editor or, depending on the importance of the information, the publisher. Or
have the organization’s attorney send it.
• Government allies. Get people in government on your side to back you up.
Get to know the state attorney general, your state records ombudsman, or
others who might be respected in government.
• Shallow but effective. Symbols of authority are effective: titles, clothing,
automobiles. Even height conveys authority.
• Cite the law. The law is authoritative, particularly if it has penalties for
noncompliance. Include the citations in your requests and e-mails when you
want to exert authority.
5. Scarcity
• For a limited time only. What you are offering is limited. “I don’t have time to
wait until next week for you to check with the attorneys on this. My deadline is
in six hours. Either I get the information or I’m going to have to write a story
for tomorrow morning’s paper explaining that your agency is withholding it. I
would hate for you all to look like you are hiding something and are bad
officials when I know you aren’t. The public will appreciate it.”

9

6. Pound them into submission
• Go to the top. Go to the elected officials and ask them why the agency is
hiding information. Sometimes elected officials, especially during an election
year, would rather avoid a public battle with journalists.
• Write about it. Some journalists say it’s inside baseball but that’s hooey.
When an agency says “no” to you, they aren’t saying “no” to you. They are
saying “no” to the thousands or millions of people in your community. Tell
those people. Quote access experts and show why the agency is breaking
the law. You would write a story if the agency broke other laws, right?
• Wave the flag. Use patriotism as leverage. Communists and Nazis favor
secrecy, not god-fearing Americans. Are your officials pinkos and hate
America, or are they good citizens?
• Expose the deviant. Get the same data from other agencies then ask the
secretive officials why they are deviant. Nobody wants to be an outlier.
• Rally allies. Find people and groups who would want the information public
and go tell them about the secrecy. It’s even better if they are influential
business owners, contributors, or active citizens. When officials see it isn’t a
media issue, and they fear the wrath of constituents, they yield.
• Heads on pikes. Put together a list of all the other agencies in your state or
elsewhere that lost public records battles and had to pay tens of thousands of
dollars in lawyer fees (including the requesters’ fees). Show them the news
articles that made the agencies look bad. When officials see the very real
drawbacks of secrecy (heads on pikes), they might wave the white flag.
• Bury them. If they deny your valid request and are being stubborn, flood
them with more requests. Make it much more work to deny you records than
to comply.
• Release the hounds (lawyers). Have your attorney write a terse letter citing
the relevant law. The letter, while perhaps unbudgeted, can demonstrate you
are serious and will pay off down the road with more data.
• Sue. Sometimes all it takes is filing a lawsuit and an agency will cough up the
information. In many situations you can recoup your attorney fees, even if you
don’t go to court. Check out the new NFOIC litigation fund
(http://www.nfoic.org/) that will cover litigation to fight for records and
databases.

10

FOI Resources
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
http://www.rcfp.org/
This group explains how to use the national Freedom of Information Act, as well as a
great explanation of the public records law in each state (www.rcfp.org/ogg) and a great
guide to electronic records for each state, http://www.rcfp.org/elecaccess/.
Investigative Reporters and Editors
www.ire.org
This group has an online resource center (for members) that includes a searchable
database of more than 20,000 investigative stories and a searchable database of 2,000
tip sheets. Also check out the Extra! Extra! daily stories: http://www.ire.org/extraextra/
Society of Professional Journalists
http://www.spj.org/foi.asp?
This group provides information about freedom of information, including a blog and
resources. The “Open Doors” publication has tons of document-based story ideas.
Student Press Law Center
http://www.splc.org
The best place to find information about access to public records in universities. You
can find information about access, records ideas, and a request letter generator.
National Freedom of Information Coalition
www.nfoic.org
Find coalitions in your state (go to this site and look in the “members” section). Also,
check out the new $2 million litigation fund to fight for records.
Citizen Access Project
www.citizenaccess.org
This Web site out of the University of Florida provides information about access laws in
each state, including a rating for whether different aspects are good or bad.
Society of Environmental Journalists
www.sej.org
Environmental story archive that provides great ideas for data and FOIA requests.
Center for Investigative Reporting
Story blog with great ideas

http://centerforinvestigativereporting.org

iDig Answers
http://www.idiganswers.com
“Hit records” provides hundreds of document ideas for stories
The Art of Access blog
http://www.theartofaccess.com
The blog provides more tips and story ideas on accessing public records, as well as
resources for requesters and teaching FOI in college journalism courses.
Google News Alerts
http://news.google.com
Go to Google News, click on “News Alerts”, then set up alerts with keywords such as
“public records request” and “freedom of information” and Google will send you links to
stories that contain those keywords.

11

