The Web as an investigative tool
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE
Phoenix CAR 2010

First things first
 Develop a strategy
 Know what you’re after
 Know what is available
 Know when enough is enough
 Learn how to be a smarter searcher with advanced search, deep web tricks, etc.
 Be skeptical – treat each online source just as you would any other
 Think about your own life

Get the most you can from a search engine (also, use more than one)
 Advanced search – actually read a search engine’s guide to searching and advanced searches;
it’s worth the read.
 Search for phrases
 Use Boolean logic
 By domain or site
 By file type
 Words in URL
 Search engines to check out: Google, Bing, Yahoo, Ask, Clusty, jux2, Twingine

Reference and public record portals
 Wikipedia (for links, sources only)
 Census (esp. Data Finders feature)
 Public records portals
• BRB Publications
• Portico
 NICAR Net tour
 Reporter’s Desktop by Duff Wilson (I especially like Duff’s guide for backgrounding people)

Government information





FedStats - Portal to government statistics.
FirstGov - Portal to federal and local governments.
Federal spending
USASpending – search and download federal contracts, grants and more.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Search social media sites







Facebook (note: You have to have an account and be logged on for this link to work.)
Pipl
123people
Whostalkin
Samepoint
Icerocket

Here are the links I use to get all this done – the best thing is these sites are all free.

Getting the job done (and other cool stuff)
 I use RSS (really simple syndication) feeds so I can go to one location instead of many sites to
catch up on the day’s events. I use Google Reader to manage my feeds,
(http://www.google.com/reader/), but there are plenty of other services available such as
Yahoo! Some of my favorite feeds: Docuticker (http://www.docuticker.com/), Lifehacker
(http://lifehacker.com/), Freakonomics blog from The New York Times,
(http://freakonomics.blogs.nytimes.com), local and national news sites, etc.
 Google docs allow me to work on spreadsheets and documents anywhere. I can also share them
with other folks. I’ve found this application to be very useful for collaborating on projects.
(docs.google.com)
 If you find yourself going back to a site day after day to see if it’s changed, you should monitor it
with Change Detection (http://www.changedetection.com/). Simply enter the site address and
your email. The service will check your page daily and send you an email when it has changed.
(Note, there are other services that do this, but this is the one that I’ve used.)
 Sometimes email is just too clunky to share files. I’ve been using drop.io to upload files and
share them with people. Check it out at www.drop.io
 Today’s search engines cover only a fraction of the Web. The most popular ones don’t always
return the same results, so you should be searching more than one. To help with this, check out
jux2.com - it searches multiple engines at once. Twingine.com shows side-by-side comparisons
of Yahoo! And Google search results. Very cool.
 BugMeNot – Offers solutions for getting into password-protected sites such as newspapers, etc.
 Monitter.com – Track key words, names, tags, etc. on Twitter in real time.
 Search.twitter.com – advanced search
 Skype – I love Skype to communicate quickly with co-workers. If someone else has a Skype
account you can call them for free and use the instant message feature to communicate. Also, I
really like the chat’s emoticons.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The dead Web – find historic information
 Use Google’s cache – Google stores a backup of most pages. This backup is called the cache. The
link is useful if a server isn’t responding when you click on a link, or if the host has taken down
the page.

 The Wayback Machine from the Internet Archive captures and saves images of web sites. Not all
sites are included, but it’s likely that most you’ll look for are. http://www.archive.org/index.php.
(For music buffs, the Internet Archive also has a Live Music Archive.)
 MINERVA from the Library of Congress collects sites that relate to very specific events such as
the Iraq war, September 11, etc. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/diglib/lcwa/html/lcwa-home.html
 The CyberCemetery is a library of sites for defunct government agencies http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/default.htm

Who is behind a site?
 Domain Tools http://www.domaintools.com
 Allwhois http://www.allwhois.com

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

