Census lookups and quick facts
CAR 2010
Alex Richards — Las Vegas Sun
Access this document:

http://bit.ly/

a5ZvWs
Consider this a primer to my favorite parts of the
Census site. It's a portal for all kinds of public
information:
• American FactFinder — probably the most wellknown element of the census site because you can
retrieve a a fact sheet that covers almost any
geography. [The next session in this room will
cover the FactFinder use for downloading and
analyzing data.] It's also the main gateway to
Census and American Community Survey (ACS)
files and tables.
◦ On the left sidebar, "Data Sets" allows you to
download tables from the Census or American
Community survey. To make it as confusing as
possible, these are your access options:
▪ Quick Tables/Demographic Profiles/
Geography Quick Reports: data about a
specific topic or industry in a single
geographic area.
▪ Subject Tables: ACS data for a single
geographic area.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

▪ Data Profiles: Focused on single-year
ACS estimates.
▪ Geographic Comparison Tables/Ranking
Tables: Compare data on the same topic
for different geographic areas.
▪ Detailed Tables: Highest level of topical
and geographical detail.
◦ Alternatively, in the "Download Center," you
can get specific pieces of information for all
census divisions in the U.S. at once.
• Census GIS shapefiles — a few different kinds
are available:
◦ Boundary files: state, county, census tract,
census block, congressional districts, etc.,
perfect for analysis and/or easy source
material as news art.
◦ TIGER/line files: water features, places, roads
and addresses, etc.
◦ Blocks make up block groups which make up
census tracts; in turn, these make up counties
and equivalents.
• Public sector employment/pay — a snapshot
for state and local governments for the month of
March in any given year. Not as good as what you
can probably get on deadline from your local
municipality, but excellent for quick comparisons
for general public professions between states and/
or the nation.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

• Population estimates — this constantly comes
up in a newsroom, especially for states and
counties. The estimates also have breakdowns for
race/ethnicity, age brackets and net migration,
though those elements typically lag.
• Building permits — aggregated at the county
level and relatively accurate. Alternatively the
SOCDS database (through Housing & Urban
Development) can yield the same information in a
better form.
• Annual Statistical Abstract — compiled from
both federal and private sources, and the various
sources are almost more valuable than the
information itself. Example: consumer complaints
on fraud and identity theft [XLS link], which led me
to the FTC's Consumer Sentinel Network databook
[PDF link].
• Health insurance surveys — great for
comparisons.
• "Facts for Features" — While I'm not suggesting
you really use these, they can serve as a workable
crib sheet for interesting data sets and surveys that
that the Census conducts, like the statistical
abstract. Each factoid has a source line, and it may
spark reporting ideas.
A few exercises to get comfortable with the site:

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

• Using FactFinder to find information on social/
economic criteria:
◦ Using fact sheets for a specific state, county
or city to get median income.
◦ Downloading states or counties from a list to
sort in Excel.
• Finding K-12 teacher pay and how it's changed in
five years:
◦ Look up state employee pay for full-time
positions.
Media contact information for the Census bureau:
• public information office email: pio@census.gov
• 2010 Census & ACS: (301) 763-3691
• demographic/economic data: (301) 763-3030
Other IRE tipsheets worth taking a look at:
• Ron Campbell's FactFinder guide (#1978)
• Jennifer LaFleur's Census guide (#3321)
Questions I may be able to help you with?
• Email me
• (702) 259-4085

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

