Tipsheet #3373

How to investigate police crime reporting and statistics: a cookbook
By Steve Thompson and Tanya Eiserer
The Dallas Morning News

Step 1: Read the FBI’s 2004 UCR manual. You can find it here:
http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/handbook/ucrhandbook04.pdf

Step 2: Get your police officials on the record about UCR early.
By the time our three-story investigation ended, Dallas police officials were saying things like,
“They're called guidelines for a reason; they're not rules. If the UCR was that adamant about it,
they would call them rules.”
We’re pretty sure that if we’d asked them at the beginning whether the guidelines are important
to follow correctly, they’d have said something like: “Of course. We take great pains to follow
them to the letter.” But, unfortunately, we didn’t bother to ask, because we didn’t foresee that
they would get this slippery.

Step 3: Request a copy of your department’s in-house staff review manual.
Some departments, including Dallas, have in-house manuals created to instruct their staff review
units on how to interpret UCR guidelines. Others go strictly by the FBI manual. Figure out if
your department has any in-house manuals on the subject and get yourself a copy. We didn’t
figure out until after our investigation that the Dallas Police Department’s in-house manual
blatantly contradicts the FBI’s manual in places.

Step 4: Make friends with your state police UCR people.
Ever found an FBI spokesperson very helpful? Neither have we, and this mostly held true for
those at the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting Program. UCR spokesman Stephen Fischer
grudgingly answered some of our questions, but was very reticent to say anything that might
expand on the FBI’s 2004 UCR manual, which the program views as a sort of bible. If you find
something in the bible that is not clear, he’s apt to just quote back to you the very passage you
found unclear in the first place, as if further explanation would just muddy the issue. You can try
him at Stephen.Fischer@ic.fbi.gov. The most helpful thing he did for us was to have FBI experts
give their opinion on how several short crime scenarios should be classified.
For instance, we sent Fischer this: “An intruder kicks in the door to a home, and as the woman
inside hears footsteps coming toward her, she begins to scream. Her screaming apparently scares

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

off the intruder, who rushes back out the door. Officers find no other relevant evidence.” And
Fischer said it should “probably most likely be a burglary.” That may sound obvious to you, but
the Dallas Police Department is more likely to classify such cases as vandalism.
More helpful to us was our state UCR program administrator. Most of the time, police
departments send their crime stats to a state UCR program, which then forwards it to the FBI.
We found our state program coordinator to be much more likely to address our questions
directly. Finding out who your state program officials are and becoming friendly with them
could prove critical to getting solid answers for your story.

Step 5: Don’t forget that UCR stats are used to allocate federal money
If a police department’s crime ranking looks good, they are happy to take credit. If it looks bad,
they’ll be quick to point out that the FBI discourages comparing one city to another based on the
UCR statistics. This is true, but don’t forget that, despite this admonishment, the federal
government does use these numbers to compare cities. And those comparisons help dictate how
the feds spread around federal grant money, including federal JAG program funds. The JAG
legislation specifies that if a city hasn’t participated in UCR during at least 3 of past 10 years, it’s
not eligible for the money. For info on that, see page 5 of this PDF:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/recoveryJAG/JAGrecoveryFAQ.pdf
To see how much federal pork your city would lose without UCR numbers, check here:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA/recoveryJAG/recoveryallocations.html

Step 6: Get very familiar with all the codes inside your department’s police reports.
The Dallas police department uses its own UCR coding system that both differs a little bit from,
and is more specific than the FBI’s codes. For instance, a 04122 means an aggravated assault
with a cutting instrument in which the victim is a white male. Get a list of your department’s
codes. Figure out where they are on police reports and how it will be noted if a report is
reclassified. Dallas police reports have a spot for UCR 1, which is how the report is initially
coded, and UCR 2, which is only filled out if a supervisor or staff review changes it for some
reason.

Step 7: Figure out how your department is most likely to be cheating.
No telling what kind of tricks your department is pulling, but here are some ideas of things to
look for:

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Aggravated assaults: If someone hits someone on the head with a bat, does your department
classify the assault as aggravated even if the victim doesn’t make a trip to the hospital?
According to UCR, it should.
Burglaries: If someone breaks into a house but gets scared away before taking anything, does
your department classify it as a burglary? It should, unless the police investigation establishes it
was something different. See page 29 of the UCR manual: “A forcible entry or unlawful entry in
which no theft or felony occurs but acts of vandalism, malicious mischief, etc. are committed is
not classified as a burglary provided investigation clearly established that the unlawful entry was
for a purpose other than to commit a felony or theft.”
Robberies: If force or the threat of force is used to take something, that’s a robbery. Is your
department sometimes classifying it as a theft? For instance, if a purse-snatcher rears back his
fist at a victim, it might be tempting to let him stay a purse snatcher. But he’s not; he’s a robber.
Unfounded offenses: See how your department unfounds offenses. Dallas police had gone to a
system where many car burglaries and thefts start out unfounded and stayed that way until
proven otherwise. Of course, the department put minimal effort into investigating these offenses,
so it was rare for ones that started off unfounded to make their way onto the books. After our
story on their policies, which included instances of crime reports made by a police officer, a
rabbi and others not getting counted, the department acknowledged flaws and made major
changes in their system.
Unrecorded offenses: Our department typically had a policy of making the police report, even if
it didn’t count in the city’s crime numbers. That made it far easier for us to quantify what they
were doing. We suspect that many departments make it far harder for crime victims to report
crimes, particularly minor thefts. Perhaps, they require that the person come down to the station
just to make the report. In those cases, no report gets generated, so it’s hard to track. One thought
we had would be to take a look at the city’s 911 call logs for some specified period and use that
to determine in some quantifiable way that crimes are going unreported.

Step 8: Consult department experts
Talking to beat officers and detectives can be very useful in figuring out what areas your
department may be fudging on the numbers. Often, they are angry about it because they know
it’s wrong and are more than willing to give you ideas of what you should look for in your
research.
If you department a UCR team, get to know that person in charge and download as much
knowledge of the department’s system from them. You will also want to get this person on the
record early because if you do undercover reporting problems, there’s a good chance that person
won’t talk you anymore. In our case, the head of the UCR team was helpful in the beginning, but
much less so later.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Step 9: Request hundreds of police reports.
It is not enough to find a few scattered instances of error. For your story to hold water, you’re
going to have to find something substantial and systematic. Here’s a description, included in our
story, of what we did to show how Dallas police were misclassifying assaults:
To see how Dallas police classify assaults, The News examined one week's worth – those reported
July 1 through 7. Of the more than 500 assaults, 75 were classified as aggravated.
The rest were reported to the UCR Program as simple and did not count toward the city's
reported violent crime rate. Of those, The News found about 40 that UCR guidelines indicate should have
been.
Adding the misclassified cases identified by The News to that week's 75 recorded aggravated
assaults would raise the tally by more than 50 percent.
Such underreporting over all of 2007 and 2008 would mean a significant portion of the reported
violent crime reductions during [the police chief’s] tenure were based on faulty reporting practices
rather than actual crime drops.

Requesting and sifting through more than 500 reports seemed daunting. But even with that size
sample, we faced questions about whether the week we chose was representative of what was
happening throughout the year. The moral of the story is get as big a sample as you can. The
bigger, the better.
Also, try to pick a sample that is far enough back in time that the investigative process is long
complete. UCR classifications may appropriately change during the course of a police
investigation. Detectives may come upon evidence, for instance, that the victim lied.

Step 10: Another way to identify problems.
We looked at hundreds of police reports to figure out that Dallas police had stopped properly
classifying assaults as aggravated when a suspect wielded a weapon such as a bat or a club, but
did not cause serious bodily injury. After our story was in print, we requested the police
department’s statistics for such assaults, using the department’s very specific coding (see Step 6).
What we found was that such assaults had plummeted by something like 60 percent.
In hindsight, this would have been an excellent way to have identified the issue in the first place.
You might try getting a detailed spreadsheet of your department’s crime numbers – one that
breaks down assaults, for instance, by type of weapon – and seeing if any categories show crazy
drops. If you see a category that shows a 60 percent drop, that would be a great place to start
looking for cheating.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

