Tipsheet #3374

Tip Sheet
Covering returning war veterans
Dave Philipps, Colorado Springs Gazette
dave.philipps@gazette.com

Since more than 1.5 million Americans have served in Iraq and Afghanistan stories
about returning veterans are be more common and more important everyday, but
delving into the world of military and former military can prove difficult and
confusing. Here are some tips to make it easier.
Avoid official military channels at all costs: The military has public affairs officers
to “handle” inquiries from the media but they often serve only to get in the way.
They will often steer reporters toward the message they want relayed and away
from more controversial subjects. There job is to make the military look good.
Instead, use facebook: Troops are an insular bunch. Usually they are only friends
with people in their platoon or their company. By accessing social media pages, you
can quickly identify individuals related to a story you want to do and contact them.
For example, if I know former soldier Paris McCaulley was just arrested for murder,
I can look him up on Facebook and find all his friends. They can usually tell me if he
was getting treated for PTSD, was kicked out of the Army, etc.
Always give a soldier’s full unit assignment in your reporting. Often journalists
will simply identify a soldier or Marine by the base where he is stationed. This is
often a meaningless distinction since some troops at the base may have deployed
several times while others have not deployed at all. Instead, give the soldier’s unit
assignment, down to the battalion level. For example. Paris McCaulley was a private
in the 2nd Battalion, 12th Infantry Regiment of the 4th Brigade, 4th Infantry Division. It
is a long citation, but it later allows you and others to spot trends.
Former soldiers and officers are your greatest resource. You can often find out
who they are and how to contact them through current soldiers or through
Webpages dedicated to the unit that are set up by veterans. Former soldiers will not
worry about damaging their careers or getting in trouble with superiors by talking
to you, so they can be a real asset.
Never start by asking about Iraq. This is just a different take on interviewing 101.
First ask simple questions to establish a rapport. Many veterans have conflicting
thoughts about war. They are both proud and ashamed. It is the best thing they ever
did and the worst. Ease into questions about it by first asking small questions about
where they grew up, their family, why they joined the military, etc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

