Consumer Investigations: Going Deeper
and holding bad players accountable
2010 IRE Conference in Las Vegas, Nevada
Co-panelists: Paul Knight, Houston Press
paul.knight@houstonpress.com
Tony Kovaleski, KMGH-TV, Denver
tony_kovaleski@kmgh.com
Robert Tiernan, Consumer Reports
tiernr@consumer.org
Moderator: Mc Nelly Torres, Florida Center for Investigative Reporting
torres@fcir.org

By Paul Knight
“Wild Rides”
The auto industry’s little angel may be more mischievous than people think.
I. Explanation of the story
1. How it started: With a tip about a woman’s Prius speeding out of control. If it was true, we
figured there would be other cases which regulatory agencies and Toyota itself investigated and
documented. We were wrong. (This was more than a year before Toyota’s problems would blow up and
become highly publicized.)
2. How it was reported: Started with the federal National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
While there were complaints from Toyota drivers, the NHTSA had only two official investigations
involving the Prius. Both of those involved the car’s cooling system. Toyota had received complaints,
too, but had simply mailed a letter to Prius owners urging them to make sure floor mats were properly
installed.
Without the type of documents that would traditionally go with this type of story, we looked
elsewhere. We started with the Web site consumeraffairs.com, a great online resource that collects
consumer complaints. And when you start talking to a couple people, that usually creates a lot more
leads.
LexisNexis and Google News were great tools, too. (We told the story on a national level.) We
searched for any bizarre crashes that involved a Prius. When we tracked down the people involved, if we
could, some were germane to our story.
Simply calling enough mechanics and dealerships proved fruitful also.
PACER and justia.com are great reporting resources, but for this story, we found only one
lawsuit involving a Prius and unintended acceleration. Of course, that one was worth it.
3. How it was written: Outlining a story like this – one of this length, with so many moving parts
– and doing it long before it’s written, is key to making a deadline. (I’ll probably bring copies of my
outline, if anyone is interested in seeing how I do it.)
II. Why we decided to go deeper, and what to look for when you’re deciding on lengthier projects.
1. Look for the larger theme. Ours was consumer behavior. Our story wasn’t simply about
Toyota trying to pawn off a faulty product on the public. The Prius, in only a few short years, had
become an untouchable car. How Toyota did that, and how the public bought it, is almost as fascinating
as cars that accelerate out of control.
So, look for these larger themes in your own stories. *Examples of other consumer stories that
have these larger themes, as well as another that I wrote myself.

2. Does the story have universal appeal? At the time of our article, the Prius was on everyone’s
mind. With $4-a-gallon gas prices, dealerships couldn’t keep the cars in stock.
Some of the best consumer stories, however, don’t necessarily have this universal appeal. Two
short stories I’ve written that have gotten an amazing amount of reader response have been about
DirectTV and hiring discrimination at Hooters. Solid consumers stories, but since there wasn’t the
universal aspect, they wouldn’t have worked as lengthy investigations/articles.
But decide if the product/company you’re investigating has this appeal, and if it does, it might
be worth doing a larger project.
3. Try to turn the story on its head. The good guys (consumers) versus the bad guys (evil
companies) are the general “consumer story” narrative. Why? Because that’s often the way it is. When
a company is preying on consumers, the story needs to be told.
But don’t be afraid to step back and look at a product/subject from a different viewpoint. You
can touch on the same points, but a viewpoint switch can sometimes take the story much deeper.
*Examples of these types of stories.

By Robert Tiernan
Financial Scams
I. Almost as soon as the economy tottered toward financial meltdown, the scam artists came onto
the scene, looking to financially profit from the distress.
We found six kinds of financial traps:
1. Foreclosure Rescue Scams
2. High-fee Debt Settlement
3. Reverse mortgages
4. Sub-prime credit cards
5. Uninsured savings accounts
6. Government bailout lures.
In each case, we set out to figure out how the scheme worked, examine the plight of a real person, and
try to give real advice on how a consumer could take an alternative action.

II.
Reverse Mortgages.
A new industry seemed to pop up over the pushing of these mortgages, in which older homeowners
could draw equity out of their homes.
1. We attended an industry conference in New York that held sessions on how to sell these and ploys to
use.
2. We explored the rules governing the reverse mortgages, also known as Home Equity Conversion
Mortgages.
3. We needed solid data to show who the biggest players were and who had the biggest default rates.
4. Tracked down real cases of people on the verge of losing their homes.
Problem: HUD was releasing only summary tables they produced and not the full dataset. We had to put
in second FOI for extra data.
By Mc Nelly Torres
Why the consumer beat is so important?
Through surveys and focus groups newspapers are learning that consumer issues are hot
topics for readers. But think about it: we are all consumers. Whether is a defective product or
a loophole on the system, consumer issues affect all of us. The beauty of covering consumer
issues is that your best sources are around you. Talk to your friends, neighbors, relatives and
co-workers. Look at consumer advocate Web sites and keep an eye on what’s going on in
government. But before you get started consider this:
Be available: Sometimes the best tips come from readers. Establish a tip line online but also by phone to
let readers know you are there for them. You might need to go through a lot of bogus stuff, but it
will be a matter of time before you get some good tips.
Consumer advocates and experts: Keep constant communication with these folks including
your local consumer affairs office. These agencies take complaints from consumers and the
records will be useful as you cover stories. Other sources include: attorney general office,
consumer services at the state level, and state agencies, but also your local economics crime
division and white-collar crime investigators.
Know the problem: Sometimes consumer issues are very complicated. Perhaps you found
the existing laws don’t protect people or the issue has never been addressed. This will be a
constant challenge. Keep a dialogue with your sources because they will be the ones who can
direct you toward the right track. For example: As I was investigating a business I
discovered how a scrupulous contractor with a history of defrauding consumers had
managed to use a loophole in the system, which allowed him to operate a business by using

another licensed contractor. He was on probation at the time I was looking into his business
yet he hired a license contractor to qualify his company. UPDATE: since the first time I wrote about this
contractors for an IRE handout, I can report now that he’s in prison serving a 10-year prison sentence
after he violated his probation because he didn’t want to pay back the increasing number of
homeowners who had filed complaints thereafter my stories were published. He skipped town and
months later he reappeared again working on a new business venture with a partner when he was
arrested.
Regulate the Regulators: A lot of the best consumer protection stories come from taking a
hard look at government agencies that are supposed to keep us safe (contractor business,
foreclosure rescue firms, nail salons, restaurants and dog kennels). There’s nothing wrong with looking
at this agencies to see if they are doing what they supposed to be doing. Look at their inspection
records, be aware of the regulation because sometimes there are loopholes that play a role on things
going wrong. Also ask yourself these questions: How often do they find problems? What is their
caseload? Is it so high that they are more likely to overlook violations? In short, are they doing their
jobs?
If it looks gray, move on: Don’t waste your time on what it seems to be confusing. If the
scam story is not clear chances are someone is not being honest with you. Sometimes is
better to walk away from what it seems to be a story. There are plenty of stories to go around.
Do your research: The Better Business Bureau might seem like a good resource at times, but
be aware that the BBB is a membership organization. I found that their records are not
reliable and that in many cases consumers think the BBB can help them with their problems.
The BBB is not a government agency. Look through your state’s incorporation records and
licensing agencies. Check your local or state licensing rules and databases because almost
every business needs a license. Also, keep in mind that blogs could be a source even though
their reliability is as good as the author. But most blogs provide resources so it could be a
useful tool. Use google and other searching engines to find out about the topic you are researching.
Court records: Civil and criminal. Always a good source of information.
Look for good anecdotes. Find interesting people, sometimes their stories are amazing and it adds to
the story.
Be organized: I can’t stress the important to this because how organized you are will determined on
how fast you can produce that investigative story but also quick hits in between to keep your editors
happy.
Learn about the bad guy: Use Lexis\Nexis, criminal background check, civil lawsuits,
divorce files, corporation records of current business but other businesses he might have
owned. If he/she is out there to make a buck more than anything else, chances are that other
businesses he/she had before went through the same problems. Also, check association the
business belongs to, its competitors, including former employees and enemies.
No promises: Don’t make any promises as you begin delving into an issue. This is
something I do from the beginning. I look into the problem and I’m honest with the
caller/reader from the beginning. Sometimes you get results, but sometimes you don’t. My

job is to write the story not to work as a problem-solver or mediator.
Databases: Look locally first. The consumer affairs office might keep complaints
electronically, but you should also look at your county electronic records and then move up
to the state. Licensing, inspections, occupational licensing, state corporate records, civil
lawsuits and other electronic records are great resources when investigating an issue or
problem.
Publish the data online: Say no more. Readers love to search inspections on their favorite
restaurants, pet food recall and nail salons. But don’t stop there, offer other tools to your
readers like studies you mentioned in a story and you have on a PDF format, why not post it
online too. Note: When planning to post a searching database online, you should keep in
mind the data could be dirty and it must be cleaned. Talk to the online folks to develop more
efficient ways to working together on this.
Offer a solution or useful information: When you write the story try to give something to
the reader whether is what to do if he/she is in a similar situation and where to go for help. I
try to get a tip box with each story. Sometimes is dreading, but I’ve learned to appreciate this
because it helps me to write the story. I concentrate on some areas and leave the other
information for the tip box. Try to give readers telephone numbers, Web sites and
organizations.
Looking out for the consumer: Ask yourself: How can I tell this story differently? Listen what people
have to say – you’ll be surprised at what they might offer. Once you identified what the topic/problem
is, look for a consumer advocacy group. They are everywhere. More importantly, keep an eye on
government agencies because their regulatory role is crucial on consumer stories. And hold them
accountable when government agencies are not doing their job. That’s yur job.

Story ideas:
Foreclosure scams – Still a huge problem nationwide including companies pretending to do loan
modification. Even the legitimate ones are having problems keeping up with the volume of applications,
records are lost, homeowners are not notified of outcomes (like we are foreclosing on your property
until someone comes to tape a sign on the front door) and by the time they know about it is a little too
late.
Scams targeting elderly and minorities – Just as the story I wrote about financial investments or CDs,
there’s a lot of scams out there trying to take advantage of people at a time when so many people are
struggling financially. Be aware of these scams, talk to regulators, including the BBB, and listen to
readers/viewers when they call with complaints.
Debt collector abuses: This issue had been reported over and over again but is not going away
especially as we recover from a recession. Many folks are unemployed and paying bills might not be a
priority especially when you have to choose from feeding your family or paying your bills.
You can read these stories if you go to the links down below:

Foreclosure: Losing the American Dream
Homeowners get the run-around when they seek mortgage modifications

http://www.consumeraffairs.com/news04/2009/08/foreclosure_losingthedream.html

'High-Return' Investment Schemes Target Affluent Seniors
International Banking Group's ultra-high-interest claims can't be verified

http://www.consumeraffairs.com/news04/2009/11/seniors_cds.html

Debt Collector Abuses Continue; Tougher Federal Law
Needed, Advocates Say
Consumers complain of illegal, abusive conduct as collectors defy federal, state enforcers

http://www.consumeraffairs.com/news04/2010/04/debt_collection_abuses.html

Resources:
Assistance for foreclosures
www.hud.gov/foreclosure
www.foreclosurelegalassistance.org
www.fdic.gov
Assistance on debt relief
National Consumer Law Center
www.consumerlaw.org
www.debtadvice.org
www.cardratings.com
www.consumeraction.gov
www.benefitscheckup.org

Track economic crisis and programs
www.financialstability.gov
Reverse Mortgage Resources
www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/hecm/hecmlist.cfm
www.gao.gov
Report: GAO 09-606

CONSUMER BEAT ---ONLINE RESOURCES
Consumer Groups:
Consumer Reports
www.consumerreports.org
www.consumersunion.org
www.consumer.gov
www.consumeraction.gov
www.consumersearch.com, which compiles product reviews from other publications.
www.consumerworld.org
National Consumer League
www.naticonsumersleague.org
The National Association of Better Business Bureaus
www.bbb.org
This is the main ship for the BBB, you can search a national database of companies, but also find your
local BBB.
Consumer Federation of America, a national advocacy group
www.consumerfed.org
The National Consumers League
www.nclnet.org
National Fraud Information Center
www.fraud.org
The Center for Science in the Public Interest

www.epsinet.org
Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing
www.ncinet.org
This coalition works against telemarketing and Internet fraud.
National Association of Insurance Commissioners
www.naic.org
National Consumer Law Center
www.consumerlaw.org
Scam Busters
www.scambusters.com
The American Council on Consumer Interests
www.consumerinterests.org
CONSUMER BEAT ---ONLINE RESOURCES
Government agencies:
Consumer Product Safety Commission
www.cpsc.gov
CPSC list all recalls but also collects data on injuries and deaths caused by consumer products. The
database known as the National
Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS), which list the number and severity of consumer productrelated injuries to persons
treated in hospital emergency departments in the U.S.
Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov
You can search the Web page to see if the commission has sued or taken any action against a local
company.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC
www.fcc.gov

Food and Drug Administration
www.fda.gov
Postal Inspection Service
www.usps.gov
National Association of Attorneys General
www.naag.org
Consumer information clearinghouse
www.consumer.gov
This site has government brochures and information in addition to links to all the federal regulatory
agencies.
Other sites:
www.crimes-of-persuasion.com
www.consumeraffairs.com
This is a general site with good leads on scams and other information.
Online complaint sites:
Angie’s List
This is a membership online consumer resource list.
www.angieslist.com
CONSUMER WEBSITES
www.ripoffreport.com
www.householdwatch.com
www.consumerwatchdog.org
www.consumeraction.gov
www.enn.com
www.fda.gov
www.bbb.org
www.baddealings.com
www.ftc.gov
www.consumeraffairs.com
www.findarticles.com
www.consumerworld.org
www.openpress.com
www.funerals.org

www.recall-warnings.com
www.highway61.com
www.allheadlinenews.com
www.derry.lib.nh.us
www.poynteronline.org
www.bls.gov
www.firstgov.gov
www.allsearchengines.co.uk
www.frugalcorner.com
www.epinions.com
www.scambusters.org
www.dotcomfailures.com
www.badmovers.org
www.movingscam.com
www.badbusinessbureau.com
www.movingadvocateteam.com
www.1stheadlines.com
www.guidestar.com
Links/Detailed Information From Specific Websites
S Consumer Information Center: www.pueblo.gsa.gov
S Consumer World: www.consumerworld.org
S National Fraud Information Center: www.fraud.org
S Federal Trade Commission: www.ftc.gov
S Consumer Product Safety Commission: www.cpsc.gov
S U.S. Dept. of Transportation: www.dot.gov/safety.html
S American Council on Consumer Interests: www.consumerinterests.org
S Consumer Alert: www.consumeralert.org
S U.S. Copyright Office: www.loc.gov/copyright
S Better Business Bureau: www.bbb.org
S U.S. Dept. of Justice: www.usdoj.gov
S Federal Consumer Information: www.consumer.gov
S Consumers Union: www.consumersunion.org
Consumer news and information about the US federal government.
http://www.firstgov.gov/Citizen/Citizen_Gateway.shtml
JD Power Information Center new
Using consumer satisfaction data collected, this site provides consumers information to help them in
their buying decisions.

http://www.jdpower.com/
Kids In Danger new
Organization dedicated to protecting children by improving children's product safety.
http://www.KidsInDanger.org/
RateItAll new
A place to find and share reviews of products, people, and travel destinations.
http://www.rateitall.com/
Ratings.net new
Providing consumer driven ratings, reviews, reports and links for products.
http://www.ratings.net/
ReviewCentre.com new
UK hosted UK product reviews contributed unfiltered by consumers. Rankings and "best" are based on
consumer reviews.
http://www.reviewcentre.com/
ReviewFinder new
Provides links to large numbers of other consumer review sources for products, and shopping links for
purchase
http://www.reviewfinder.com/
Send Me Surveys new
Take part in surveys online. Reviews and lists reputable research companies that conduct surveys, focus
groups and product sampling.
http://homepage.interaccess.com/~algordon/Surveys/

The Frugality Network new
Internet consumer resources.
http://www.frugalitynetwork.com/consumer.html
Thrifty Life Tips new
Advice and links related to shopping for the best prices.
http://THRIFTY.LIFETIPS.COM/
TimelyInsights.com new
Subscription based service offering consumer articles on on health, consumer protection, product
recalls, finance, business, family,
travel and other topics.
http://www.timelyinsights.com
Tips for shopping online new
Tips for buying and paying online safely and information on how to handle online disputes, refunds,
security, privacy and scams. Plus
information on child safety while online.
http://www.shopping-online-guide.com
Virtual Reference new
Extensive database on consumer information from Duke University Libraries.
http://www.lib.duke.edu/reference/virtual/consumer.htm
CONSUMER RESOURCES BY TOPIC
Where to Find Consumer Stories
Better Business Bureau
Consumer alerts and news
Consumer Information Center

Contains full text of hundreds of consumer info pamphlets available from the CIC, as well as consumer
news and alerts.
Consumer Law Page
Created by the Alexander Law Firm of San Jose, CA
Consumer Price Indexes
From the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Product Safety
Product recalls, press releases and a variety of consumer resources
Consumer World
Provides links to over 1,000 consumer related web sites
Federal Trade Commission
A website dedicated to consumer protection and a competitive marketplace – look for your regional
office
Federal Drug Administration
All things health including medical devices, drugs and veterinarian
FinanCenter
Calculators in ten subject areas to help consumers make wise financial decisions (Hint: click the
"Consumer Site" button)
NH State Library - Consumer Information Resources
An excellent list of links to consumer protection, product reviews, buyer's guides, and shopping websites
Productopia
Search for electronic product reviews on this site
Public Interest Research Group
USPIRG and PIRG state organizations work on a variety of issues including environmental and consumer
protection
ALSO:
- AG -and all his/her various bureaus
- Cops: fraud, bunco, swindle, financial crimes and
prevention units
- Local chapters of the ABA, ATLs
- Consumer Credit Counseling Services
- County or State Consumer Affairs Offices
- University Extension Services
-Postal Inspectors
- State Legislators
- State Department of Insurance
- Local AARP
- Local prosecutors office
CONSUMER RESOURCES
4consumers.com
Meta consumer search engine offering product reviews from leading consumer web sites.

AskAnOwner.com
Real people who can answer questions about products and services.
BestStuff.com
A network of reporters, authors, and industry experts offering reviews of new products.
Cala Creek: Consumer Information
Consumer information on variety of subjects, including home, health, beliefs, products.
Consumer Federation of America
Articles, publications, and news on consumer protection topics such as food and drug safety, internet,
energy efficiency, financial
services, transportation, and health care.
Consumer World
Consumer resources, articles and commentary on consumer issues.
ConsumerNow.com
Annotated listings of the best consumer web sites.
Consumers' Checkbook
You may download articles on many of the indexed rated subjects.
Consumersfirstlook.com
Reviews by a group of consumer product testing engineers of products that pass their standards.
Direct Marketing Association: Consumers
This site provides information and tips about shopping and rights as a consumer. Provides consumers a
way to opt out of telephone,
mail and e-mail contact lists.
Epinions
Consumer-generated reviews, buying tips and advice, ratings, price information, and searchable in a
variety of ways from price to
product type.
FirstGov: Citizen Gateway
Consumer news and information about the US federal government.
JD Power Information Center
Using consumer satisifaction data collected, this site provides consumers information to help them in
their buying decisions.
LiveManuals
A cost-free service allowing consumers to search through thousands of continuously-updated support
files for most any breakable
product.
RateItAll
A place to find and share reviews of products, people, and travel destinations.
Ratings.net
Providing consumer driven ratings, reviews, reports and links for products.
Virtual Reference
Extensive database on consumer information from Duke University Libraries.

PHONE LIST BY ASSOCIATIONS
ASAE American Society of Association Executives 202-626-2723
AUTO
Association of Consumer Vechicle Lessors 510-895-1900
AFIP - Assoc of Financing and Insurance Professionals 817-748-2434/817-428-2434
National Automobile Dealers Association 703-821-7041
National Vechicle Leasing Association 516-296-5790
American Financial Services Association 202-296-5544
American Automobile Manufacturers Association 202-326-5500/5539
Auto Service Association 202-543-1440
ASE, National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence
1-877-ASE-TECH
NATEF, National Automotive Technicians Education Foundation
703-713-0100
BANKING
Independent Bankers Association of America 202-659-8111
American Bankers Association 202-663-5473
Consumer Bankers Association 703-276-1750
BEVERAGES
International Bottled Water Association 703-683-5213
Water Quality Association 630-505-0160
American Water Works Association 303-794-7711
CARPET
Institute of Inspection, Cleaning and Restoration Certification 423-886-5070
CREDIT
Credit Union National Association 202-218-7748
FOOD
National Food Processors Association 202-637-8060
Food Marketing Institute 202-429-8226
ENERGY
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
202-429-8873
HEALTH

American Chiropractor Assoc 703-276-8800
American Dietetic Association 202-371-0500
INSURANCE
Independent Insurance Agents of America 703-706-5448
Insurance Information Institute 212-669-9290
National Association of Insurance Commissioners 816-842-3600
LEGAL
American Bar Association 202-662-1000
Association of Trial Lawyers of America 202-965-3500
MEDICAL
American Medical Association, Headquarters 312-464-5000
American College of Emergency Physicians 202-728-0610
Association of Mental Health Specialites (AMHS) 301-953-7358
National Accrediting Agency For Clinical Lab Sciences 312-714-8880
College of American Pathologists 708-446-8800
RETAIL
Direct Marketing Association 202-955-5030
National Retail Federation 202-783-7971
Grocery Manufactureres of America 202-337-9400
PHONE LIST BY ASSOCIATIONS
TRANSPORTATION
Association of American Railroads 202-639-2408
UNIONS:
International Brotherhood of Teamsters, AFL-CIO 202-624-8969
UTILITIES
National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners 202-898-2200
LOCAL CONTACTS TO REMEMBER:
-BBB's
- AG -and all his/her various bureaus
- Cops: fraud, bunco, swindle, financial crimes and
prevention units
- Local chapters of the ABA,ATLs
- Local PIRG office

- Consumer Credit Counseling Services
- County or State Consumer Affairs Offices
- University Extension Services
- Regional FTC and FDA offices
-Postal Inspectors
- State Legislators
- Department of Insurance
- Local AARP
- Local prosecutors’ office

