Tipsheet #3381

EXPOSING
DANGEROUS
CAREGIVERS
Using public documents to report on
misconduct by medical professionals

Clark Kauffman  (515) 284-8233

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

USING UNEMPLOYMENT-BENEFIT CLAIMS
TO TRACK CAREGIVER MISCONDUCT
The confidential personnel files at the Marshalltown Medical-Surgical Center in central Iowa
show that Dr. Andrew Ribner was fired in 2009 after a long series of incidents and allegations
involving poor patient care. Two of his nurses said that while Dr. Ribner was operating on a
patient, he used the wrong surgical device, then took a personal call and was operating with the
phone in one hand and his instruments in the other. They said Ribner was completing a face-lift
on a different patient when his wife appeared in the operating room, yelling and screaming – with
the patient still on the operating table – about the fact that they had been scheduled to meet for
dinner a half-hour earlier.
Those and numerous other allegations were quietly made public when Ribner filed for
unemployment benefits with the state. It led to a public hearing, conducted over the phone

and presided over by an administrative law judge who took sworn testimony and
accepted portions of Ribner’s personnel file as exhibits.
Public-disclosure laws on unemployment cases like this vary from state to state. Here’s
an outline of the process used in Iowa and many other states:
STEP 1. INITIAL CLAIM FOR BENEFITS
These requests for benefits are typically kept confidential.
▼
STEP 2. FACT-FINDING HEARING ON THE BENEFITS CLAIM
These informal hearings are typically confidential, although the outcome of the
hearing would be apparent in the event of an appeal. (See next steps, below.)
▼
STEP 3. THE ALJ HEARING
If either the employee or the employer objects to the fact-finder’s decision on benefits,
the matter can be appealed to an administrative law judge. These hearings, which
include sworn testimony and exhibits, are public in some states.
In other states, only the ALJ’s final, written decision is made public.
▼
STEP 4: EMPLOYMENT APPEALS BOARD
If either party objects to the ALJ’s decision, the
matter can be appealed to board or panel that will review
the testimony and exhibits and render its own decision.
▼
STEP 5: DISTRICT COURT
If either party objects to the appeals-board decision, the
matter can be appealed to state court judge. Obviously, the
appeals that reach this stage are treated as public record in every state.

➤ See the following page for a copy of the ALJ’s public decision on Ribner’s
firing for misconduct. Exhibits and testimony in this case provided a wealth
of detail on the nature of the doctor’s alleged misconduct.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

IOWA WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE APPEALS
DR. ANDREW B RIBNER
Employee
vs.
MARSHALLTOWN MEDICAL / SURGICAL CENTER
Employer
STATEMENT OF THE CASE:
The employer filed a timely appeal from the August 14, 2009 (reference 01)
/decision that on February 18, 2010. Claimant did not participate. Employer
participated through Robert Cooper, La Rae Schelling, and Jill Villalobos and was
represented by Rebecca Brommel and James Gilliam, Attorneys at Law.
TIP FOR
Employer’s Exhibits A through R were admitted to the record.
➤
REPORTERS
ISSUE:
Case exhibits
The issue is whether claimant was discharged for reasons related to job
are public, and
misconduct sufficient to warrant a denial of benefits and whether he is overpaid
often include
benefits as a result.
‘confidential’
material from
FINDINGS OF FACT:
fired workers’
Having heard the testimony and having reviewed the evidence in the record, the
personnel files,
administrative law judge finds: Claimant most recently worked full-time as an ENT
including their
physician specialist and was separated from employment on July 16, 2009. The
disciplinary
final series of complaints and incidents were reported on July 13, 2009.
history.
(Employer’s Exhibit F) He was fired because of a series of physician, patient and
staff complaints about lack of care, ignoring calls, his temper, and failure to follow
protocols such as using anesthesia without an anesthesiologist present.
The claimant has received unemployment benefits after the separation on a claim
with an effective date of July 19, 2009.
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:
For the reasons that follow, the administrative law judge concludes the claimant
was discharged from employment due to job-related misconduct … Claimant’s
history of physician, patient and staff complaints and abuse are contrary to the
best interests of the employer and amount to disqualifying evidence of willful job
related misconduct. Benefits are denied.
DECISION:
The August 14, 2009 (reference 01) decision is reversed. The claimant was
discharged from employment due to job-related misconduct. Benefits are withheld
until such time as he has worked in and been paid wages for insured work equal
to ten times his weekly benefit amount, provided he is otherwise eligible.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

USING FEDERAL LABOR RECORDS TO TRACK
CAREGIVERS WHO ALSO ACT AS EMPLOYERS
In 2009, the Des Moines Register reported on a labor camp that for the past 30
years had paid dozens of mentally retarded men just 41 cents an hour to work in a
poultry-processing plant. The company that ran the labor camp justified those wages
by saying (1) the men were handicapped and thus exempt from the federal minimum
wage, and (2) most of the money from each man’s paycheck was deducted as
compensation for the company acting as their “caregiver” and landlord.
The Register later discovered that many mentally disabled wards of the state were
working for as little as 11 cents an hour in two state-run institutions, with the full
knowledge and approval of the public officials who acted as their caregiver.
Finding out which employers in your state are authorized by the U.S. Department of
Labor to pay disabled workers less than the minimum wage is easy. Here’s how to
get started:
1. Go to: http://www.dol.gov/whd/specialemployment/CRPlist.htm
This is the U.S. Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division web site, where
you can download the latest list of “Community Rehabilitation Programs (CRPs) and
Patient Worker Certificate Holders.” The list includes all of the companies and
nonprofits in America that hold certificates issued under section 14(c) of the Fair
Labor Standards Act. (This national list was made public in 2009 as a result of the
labor-camp scandal in Iowa.)
The certificates authorize the payment of “special minimum wages” – wages that are
less than the federal minimum wage – to workers who have disabilities that impair
their productivity for the actual work that’s being performed.
The list contains the name and physical address of the certificate holder, as well as
the date of the employer’s most recent certification renewal.
The list also contains the certificate number generated by the Wage and Hour
Division. Certificate numbers containing an “S” are issued to community rehabilitation
programs, while certification numbers containing a “P” are reserved for companies
that employ patient-workers.
The list also indicates whether the certificate holder is private and not for profit, or
private and for profit, or a governmental entity.
2. Ask the employer or the Department of Labor for a copy of the employer’s
“Application for Authority to Employ Workers with Disabilities at Special Minimum
Wages,” better known as the “14c application.”
This form will include, for each job, a detailed look at how the prevailing wage for
each job was calculated; a description of the work performed; each worker’s
“weighted productivity” in their job; and the actual wages being paid.
The form also includes a master list of all employees receiving sub-minimum wages
– showing each worker’s disability, average hourly wage and job title. There will also
be a quarterly report showing the number of hours each person worked and their total
wages for that period. Names of the individual workers will likely be redacted.

➤ See the following two pages for a copy of the cover sheet of an actual 14c
application and one part of that report’s master list of disabled workers
and their average hourly wages (with names redacted).

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

QUICK HITS
UNLICENSED DOCTORS ON THE PUBLIC PAYROLL: Cross-reference the list of state and
county employees working in public hospitals and care centers with the records of your state
licensing boards. In 2008, the Des Moines Register found that none of the nine psychologists on
staff at a state-run home for the mentally disabled were licensed by the Iowa Board of
Psychology. The Register also found that neither of the home’s two most recent medical directors
were ever licensed to practice medicine in Iowa.
NON-REPORTING HOSPTALS: When Dr. Joseph Berdecia was fired from Knoxville Area
Community Hospital in Iowa, he left behind a string of allegations of sexual harassment, improper
contact with patients and theft of patient medications. The hospital's CEO offered Berdecia a
deal. She told him he was fired and was banned from the hospital – but she also allowed him to
sign what she called a "voluntary resignation which is not required to be reported to the National
Practitioner Data Bank." As of December 2007, almost 50 percent of the hospitals in the U.S. had
never reported a single privilege sanction to the databank. The databank isn’t publicly accessible,
but the Los Angeles Times and ProPublica compared the total number of disciplinary actions that
various state licensing boards reported to the NPDB with the boards’ own disciplinary records. In
California alone, they found dozens of cases involving misconduct by specific types of
practitioners, such as psychiatric technicians or occupational therapists, while the NPDB showed
no reports involving those professions.
INEFFECTIVE LICENSING BOARDS: Cross-reference care-facility inspection reports in your
state with those of the state licensing boards. In 2009, the Register found that the board that
licenses Iowa’s nursing home administrators had taken no action in cases involving
administrators who admitted covering up abuse and neglect. (Unemployment records provided
additional examples of misconduct.) The licensing board’s own chairman was forced to resign
after the Register found inspection records in which he characterized a caregiver's sexual abuse
of a nursing home resident as a harmless and “meaningful” relationship. The board had taken no
disciplinary action against any nursing home administrators during the previous two years. Even
when administrators had been convicted of felonies and sent to prison, the board took up to three
additional years to impose sanctions.
HIPAA VIOLATIONS: Using unemployment case files, the Register found that dozens of Iowa
health care workers had been fired for snooping through the medical records of HIV-positive men,
pregnant teenagers, victims of domestic violence and emergency-room patients. Not one of them
was prosecuted for violating the federal patient-privacy law known as HIPAA, and some remained
on staff in Iowa hospitals after four or five confirmed violations.
DRUNKEN AMBULANCE DRIVERS: Using a combination of state licensing records,
unemployment cases and court documents, the Register was able to document cases of drunkon-the-job ambulance drivers and paramedics in Iowa. One paramedic was given five warnings
for working as a paramedic while intoxicated.
LONG-TERM CARE OMBUDSMEN: Under the federal Older Americans Act, each state must
have a long-term care ombudsman who independently lobbies and advocates on behalf of the
elderly. Check to see whether your state’s LTC ombudsman is registered as, and is active as, a
lobbyist. You may also want to look into the issue of independence. In Iowa, the head of the
Department on Aging was forced to resign in June 2010 after the Register published e-mails
showing a concerted effort to muzzle the ombudsman.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

