Tipsheet #3385

INVESTIGATIVE BREAKING NEWS TIPSHEET
Greg Borowski, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
gborowski@journalsentinel.com
Suki Dardarian, The Seattle Times
sdardarian@seattletimes.com

2010 IRE Convention
Las Vegas

BEFORE NEWS BREAKS: Get tools, technology and training
Databases: Build databases and provide access to information services (like Accurint)
not just for long-term investigations but breaking news. Your goal is to track down people, their
property, businesses, vital statistics, friends and relatives, voting records, court records.
Technology: Make sure your breaking news reporters and photographers have smart
phones or other tools with Web access, the ability to take photos and send back information to the
newsroom quickly via text, tweet, e-mail, etc.
Social connections: Reporters and editors should have Twitter accounts or access to your
company accounts, along with any other social networking tools. Use them regularly to know
their advantages, limitations and, importantly, to build followers.
Virtual reporting hub: Inside your system or in a protected place outside your system,
establish a spot to store information (databases, documents, notes) so it’s accessible by the staff.
Physical hub: Is your newsroom able to accommodate a vast influx of reporters and
editors? Are there open desks where reporters can drag their laptops and work?
Training: Do it regularly, across the staff, to stay proficient in all these tools.
Practice: Use smaller breaking-news events as practice opportunities. Build and change
based on successes and failures. A good plan gives you a jump well before news breaks.

WHEN NEWS BREAKS: Engage the team; collaborate
Flood the zone and clearly define roles: Get bodies deployed in and then out of the
office. Assign all tasks; define all roles. Don’t leave any meeting with key questions unanswered
or key decisions unmade. Assign lead writers for print and online.
Delegate/break up into triage teams: Find themes around which to organize mini
teams: The event; the suspect; the victims; the system. If themes don’t work, try location-based
teams: in-office research, news-scene team, etc.
Share everything: Keep talking/e-mailing during the day. Everyone should empty
notebooks into central files all have access to. A witness who seems unimportant on Day One
may turn out to be critical later. Check it frequently, to spot information that is suddenly relevant.
Organize it so it’s easy to follow.
Huddle/meet regularly: It may be a 10-minute stand-up meeting among editors and key
reporters, or a more formal meeting to sketch out assignments and strategies. Collective

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

knowledge is more valuable, and powerful, than individual knowledge. Stay focused on the key
unanswered questions – they provide a roadmap for pursuing the story.
Start a timeline: As you know key facts and details, put them in a timeline format. Save
it in public spot, so others can add to it. This can help reporters visualize what happened,
minimize errors in stories and can be adapted for print and online publication.
Think presentation: You’re reporting for online and print. Get a running conversation
going about needs and ideas. Should pieces be broken into sidebars? Interactive maps? Get all
departments – photo, graphics, design – involved early.
Search public records: Keep some reporters back from the scene. Start identifying key
documents on the Internet, or by going to government offices. Make formal requests – inspection
reports, license applications, audits – early, before your competitors.
Use social media: To push your stories and information out, certainly. But social media
is not just a megaphone. It’s a listening device as well, a way to share information, monitor what
others are saying and often get first-hand accounts of what is happening.
Expand your source lists: Identify outside experts on a topic. Check your e-mail
regularly for tips. Readers with a deep interest or knowledge in a topic are often itching to share
information. And keep an eye out for ideas and tips made in comment sections on stories, posts
on Twitter and Facebook and elsewhere.
Make community a priority: What information – or social connections – do your
readers need? How are you serving those needs?
Reinforcements: Make your colleagues a priority, too: Supply lots of healthy food and
drink. Pace yourself and your team. Send people home and tell them specifically when to return.

AS THE DUST STARTS TO SETTLE: Be strategic; develop a vision
Start over: Huddle; review all the information you’ve gathered, identify questions left to
answer. Be sure everyone knows what they’re supposed to start on the next morning.
Keep meeting: Don’t let the steam go out of a good story; keep meeting, and make
specific assignments. Use records and sources to advance the story, push it beyond the news
conference updates and official word.
Think Sunday: Consider if there is merit in re-telling the story – or a slice of it – in a
narrative form. Is there a new perspective to offer, a step-back piece? What will readers need
most after days of breaking news stories? If you can, begin to make sense of the story – but don’t
overshoot your reporting.
Build a plan: Look even further down the road. Does the story point to underlying issues
with systems, government or business? Build a strategy to pursue those stories and questions for
the coming months – and years. If a reform took place, check in at six months to see if it’s
working as promised. Editors should make clear decisions about the level of commitment to
following the story, including when to scale back coverage. Set benchmarks for periodic checkins.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

