Tipsheet #3392

2010 IRE National Conference, Las Vegas
“Victims and the Investigative Narrative”
Simplify your story structure. Consider using a single case to illustrate your investigative
findings. Tracking one person's plight in depth helps readers to empathize and remember the story.
Introduce one character's dilemma, move to your findings, cite other cases quickly, then return to your main
case study. Fold other cases into sidebars or subsequent installments.
Think about which victim sources would make great main characters as you’re reporting—do not
wait until you’re ready to write. Typically, potential main characters emerge early in any investigative
series. Questions to consider: Whose story best illustrates the systemic problem? Who opens up most? Who
has a paper trail to corroborate the experience?
As you identify possible main characters, gather their case records and other forms of
documentation. Court records are a given, but seek more personal forms, such as journal entries, text or
instant messages and emails. Photos and videos are immensely important for multimedia.
Keep a chronology. This is the spine of your narrative. Plot the dates and dramatic events as you become
aware of them. Include the moments when secondary sources (lawyers, friends, family members, therapists,
etc.) became aware of your main character’s experiences This makes the later stages—outlining, writing
and fact checking—easier.
Identify the essential turning points in a victim’s story. What were moments when the narrative changed
and why? Where was the drama, suspense, anger, healing? Such turning points make for potential scenes in
your narrative structure.
Rely on the power of details. Use colorful facts to bring to life characters and scenes. What did they smell,
taste, see, and hear? What stands out in their minds to this day and why? Look for similar details in the
documentation you collect, and relate them in your writing. Instead of saying she's an attorney who puts in
long hours, write about the paper cuts on her hands. Instead of writing that housing conditions are
impoverished, describe what's in—or what's not in—the cupboards.
Use quotes sparingly and strategically. Quoting snippets of dialogue from court transcripts, depositions,
journal entries, and letters gives your narrative scenes a sense of real time. Quoting institutional documents
reinforces the systemic problem. But don’t feel the need to quote every source interviewed. When rewriting and tightening your piece, always reconsider the quotes. Do they move the pace of the story
forward? Do they offer something new?

Gina Barton, Investigative Reporter, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
gbarton@journalsentinel.com; 414-224-2125
“Fatal Care”: www.jsonline.com/fatalcare
Kristen Lombardi, Investigative Reporter, The Center for Public Integrity
klombardi@publicintegrity.org; 202-481-1208
“Sexual Assault on Campus: A Frustrating Search for Justice”:
http://www.publicintegrity.org/investigations/campus_assault/
Miles Moffeit, Investigative Reporter, Dallas Morning News
mmoffeit@dallasnews.com; 214-977-8368
“Trashing the Truth”: http://www.denverpost.com/evidence

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

