Tipsheet #3393

2010 IRE National Conference, Las Vegas
“Accountability Reporting in Higher Education”
Kristen Lombardi, Investigative Reporter, The Center for Public Integrity
klombardi@publicintegrity.org; 202-481-1208
“Sexual Assault on Campus: A Frustrating Search for Justice”:
http://www.publicintegrity.org/investigations/campus_assault/

Find sources who can lead you to students. With campus crimes, the hardest thing to do is identify
students who went through the college judicial process. Circle around those who would intersect with such
students, such as lawyers who represent victims or student activist groups or victim or peer advocates or
responders on campuses. Some places to start include:
1. Security on Campus—a campus-crime watchdog organization, founded by the family that
spawned the federal Clery Act. SOC is often contacted by student victims and school advocates or other
whistleblowers unhappy with their schools’ judicial processes.
Website: http://www.securityoncampus.org/
2. Students Active for Ending Rape—a student organization with chapters at hundreds of college
campuses across the country that are actively working to beef up policies on sexual assault and other forms
of sexual violence (stalking, dating violence, sexual harassment).
Website: www.safercampus.org/
3. Victim Rights Law Center—one of the few legal organizations whose lawyers represent student
victims in college disciplinary proceedings. It often files Title IX complaints on behalf of students as well.
Website: www.victimsrights.org/
4. Show up at campus events like Take Back the Night or the Clothesline Project.
5. Cultivate victim advocates on campus or peer advocates or police responders as well.
Request source data. Most people know about the Department of Education’s Clery statistics database.
You can download it from the DOE website at http://ope.ed.gov/security/. But don’t forget other federal
agencies where you can get information that you need. For the Campus Assault series, we discovered a
database maintained by the U.S. Justice Department’s Office on Violence Against Women, which gives
campus grants to help institutions improve their response to and adjudication of sexual assault. That
database served as a window into campus sexual assault proceedings for these campus grant recipients. We
filed a records request for it and other documents related to specific grants. The OVW Campus Grants
program is at www.ovw.usdoj.gov/.
Know your state and federal public records laws. One of best resources to help you figure out various
states’ disclosure laws is the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press. Their website is at
http://www.rcfp.org/ogg/index.php. While public schools must abide by states’ open records laws, private
universities do not. The best way to get around this limitation is to look toward the federal government for
information that you need. For the Campus Assault series, we filed Freedom of Information Act requests
for 10 years of complaints filed against universities and colleges under Title IX, which requires schools to
investigate campus sexual assaults. Many of those universities turned out to be private universities. To file
a FOIA request with DOE, contact the FOIA Public Liaison at EDFOIAManager@ed.gov.
Use the Center’s Reporters Toolkit. As part of our Campus Assault series, the Center for Public Integrity
put together a Reporter’s Toolkit to walk reporters who want to dig into the topic of sexual assaults on
college campuses through some important steps. Check out the Toolkit for reporting strategies and tips at
http://www.publicintegrity.org/investigations/campus_assault/toolkit.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

