Tipsheet #3394

“Criminal justice investigations: tips from unexpected people and documents”
John Diedrich, criminal justice reporter
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
jdiedrich@journalsentinel.com (414) 224-2408
www.jsonline.com
2010 IRE National Convention, Las Vegas
On the beat: Crime and Justice
Criminal justice is a web of agencies, people and paperwork. All are supposed to work
together but sometimes don’t. Rivalries and jealousies open to the door to tips and
document leaks for well-positioned reporters. Here are some strategies to get in position:
1. Locals v. feds friction: Some of the best tips on what is going on inside an
agency are from the outside. Federal agents have tips to what is going on inside
local police departments because they work with them (and the FBI may
investigate them). Likewise, local cops can point to problems inside the DEA,
FBI, IRS, ICE and others. Down time in trials is a great place to get cops and
federal agents to talk. (That was starting point for The Preachers Mob
www.jsonline.com/preachersmob/) Same applies with local and federal
prosecutors. Don’t overlook agencies like sheriff’s departments and U.S.
marshals. They have the less glamorous jobs but know about cases and problems.
2. Sources in unexpected places: Probation agents, judges (and clerks!), defense
attorneys, police clerks, investigators working for the medical examiner, private
investigators, politicians, firefighters and investigators and secretaries who work
for prosecutors all prove helpful during investigations and regular beat work.
Same goes for union officials. Rivalry inside a union led to a piece about a rouge
cop. http://www.jsonline.com/news/milwaukee/29174514.html
3. Sources on the other side of the law: Convicts can prove extremely instructive
in highlighting problems in the system, with the caveat to be careful. I have used
informants primarily as pointers to information. I find these sources by hanging
around trials and snagging them as they come off the stand.
4. Not so obvious documents: Search warrants, arrest reports, autopsy reports,
indictments and complaints tell part of a case. When investigating police or
prosecutor misconduct in cases, I have found great detail in probation records
(state and federal), wiretap applications, sealed court records and transcripts,
municipal arrest records, pre-sentence investigations, mugshots and 911 calls.
(Keep asking for them; such a 911 call was key to uncovering a cop beating in
Milwaukee.) http://www3.jsonline.com/story/index.aspx?id=691618
5. Trial exhibits: These can be a rich vein of information when doing an
investigation or examining a single case closely. After a trial, theses documents
are waiting to be examined. This was especially helpful in building the multimedia aspects of The Preacher’s Mob. Discovery in civil court, especially in civil
rights cases, will provide a glimpse into a police department not usually available.
Quick tips: start timeline early; consider 3- ring binders or e-system to organize docs.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

