Tipsheet #3395

IRE Tip Sheet
Business Investigations: Exposing felons in the home‐loan industry and insurance kickbacks
2010 IRE National Conference, Las Vegas

BORROWERS BETRAYED: Covering Business as a Crime Scene
Matthew Haggman, Staff Writer, The Miami Herald, mhaggman@miamiherald.com
Reporters Jack Dolan and Matthew Haggman were working a story on the high rate of toxic
home loans in Miami when they made a discovery that eventually resulted in the reporters –
along with database reporter Rob Barry, investigations editor/reporter Mike Sallah and
videographer Chuck Fadely – dedicating a year to a series called “Borrowers Betrayed” that
prompted the removal of Florida’s top banking commissioner and sweeping reforms in the
Legislature.
It began as an intensive computer‐assisted investigation with startling findings: 10,000 people
with criminal histories ‐‐ including convicted bank robbers, extortionists, arsonists, drug
traffickers and racketeers ‐‐ getting licensed as mortgage professionals during Florida's historic
housing boom from 2000 through 2007. Data also showed that once licensed, dozens had gone
on to commit mortgage fraud, stealing money, homes, even identities of their customers.
While this was a business story, the Herald reporters knew it was also a classic crime story ‐‐
one that needed to include profiles of the criminals and victims.
It's one thing to report sweeping findings on regulatory failure, but it's another to tell the
human side of fraud, the consequences told through the tears of real people.
In the end, this wasn't just a strong CAR project, but one built on intense, shoe‐leather
reporting: knocking on doors, staking out criminal brokers, prison interviews, and tracking
down thousands of police reports, court cases and state regulatory reports.
Here are the steps the team followed in telling the human story of high crime in Florida’s home
loan industry.

Checking Sources
It always begins with one key finding, and this one came as a result of reporters making sure
they do background checks on sources. In this case, after Dolan and Haggman interviewed a
mortgage broker on a toxic loan story, Dolan ran the broker’s name through the public record
aggregator, Accurint. The finding: a lengthy criminal record.

Taking a Broader Look
That one check led to a larger question: If this background query turned up this kind of a police
record, how many more people with criminal pasts are hawking home loans? After all, brokers
have access to the most personal financial details of a person's life: credit checks, bank

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

accounts, even social security numbers. And buying a home is the biggest investment most
people will ever make. At the time, Florida had the highest rate of mortgage fraud in the
country.
The team requested the database of all currently licensed professionals selling mortgages in
Florida from the state’s Office of Financial Regulation, which oversees the banking industry. The
names were run against the state’s Department of Corrections database of inmates. It
produced more than 1,000 matches.

Digging Deeper
The initial computer‐assisted reporting produced good results, but not comprehensive. The
team ran an expanded database of mortgage professionals (specifically, everyone who entered
the industry from 2000 to 2007) against the database from the Florida Department of Law
Enforcement, which included all criminals in local courts. In order to find federal offenders,
Barry expanded the mortgage broker database by running the names through PACER, the U.S.
federal court search engine.
As a result, the team discovered that more than 10,000 people with criminal records were
allowed to peddle home loans from 2000 to 2007 in Florida – during a time the state was swept
up in an unprecedented land boom.

Shoe‐leather Reporting
With those kinds of statistics, the reporters knew they had a great story. How do we make it
better? By drawing on the rich background of the criminals and the victims. That meant
knocking on doors, reviewing court files, emails, industry reports, and government documents
ranging from license applications to final orders explaining the (often limited) discipline meted
out.
It was through this work that the reporters discovered the likes of Scott Almeida (a burly,
tattooed convicted cocaine trafficker caught with a small arsenal of high‐powered weapons
who was granted a mortgage broker license) and Gary Kafka (a former bodybuilder with a long
rap sheet and violent past who spent nearly three years in federal prison for massive bank
fraud yet was allowed to peddle home loans – even as his federal probation officer said he
should not be allowed to work in the mortgage industry).
There was the wily Samantha Johnson, a fast‐talking con artist, who managed to steal homes
from the poor and elderly, including a recently widowed, disabled Vietnam veteran and a blind,
79‐year old woman suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Johnson’s method of operation: forging
quitclaim deeds in courthouses.
All along, Sallah kept pushing reporters to focus on the human story ("you already got the stats
on your side"). Indeed, to illustrate the “consequences” of allowing such people into the home
loan industry. More drilling down through case files and interviews resulted in countless
victims, such as Candance Young, a school teacher and single mother, who thought she was
2
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

refinancing her home but was tricked into deeding away her house by signing documents on
the back of a car in a Burger King parking lot. What she didn’t know was the broker who
promised to refinance her house had been convicted of grand theft.

Continuing to Pull the String
The work didn’t end with the initial investigation of the state’s failure to weed out
criminals. The reporters also found that state regulators ignored repeated warnings – including
from law enforcement – about bad brokers. Even when the state caught mortgage
professionals breaking the law, including fraud, they merely slapped them on the wrist and let
them keep their license.
Reporters even found a way for victims to get money. The team discovered, for instance, that
Florida once had a multi‐million dollar trust fund to reimburse victims of mortgage fraud. But
regulators had dissolved it, instead using the money for agency salaries and trips to luxury
hotels for top administrators. The group also learned about the banker who managed to recruit
a small army of ragtag, never‐do‐wells to sell home loans for him ‐‐ running up million‐dollar
mortgage fraud scams across the state.
In the end, the approach paid off: not only did the state launch major reforms, but the stories
reached people who said they rarely read these kinds of articles, but found them too powerful
to put down.

3
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

