Tipsheet #3400

CAMPAIGN FINANCE: TRACKING THE MONEY
Bill Allison, Sunlight Foundation
Wendell Cochran, American University
Jonathan D. Salant, Bloomberg News
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
The Federal Election Commission site, www.fec.gov, is the original source for almost all data
on contributions given to federal campaign committees, national political parties (the RNC,
the DNC, the DCCC, etc.) and political action committees.
The political parties and most political action committees file on the 20th of each month, and
the candidates and some PACs will next file on July 15. The candidates will also file before
their states' primary elections, and before and after the general election.
The House, the national parties, and the House Republican and Democratic fundraising
committees file electronically; the Senate and the Senate Democratic and Republican
fundraising arms still file on paper. Those paper filings are scanned into the FEC Website,
though often lag behind the due date.
Here are some things to look for in the next campaign filings:
1. Cash on hand. How much does each candidate have to spend? This is the key
indicator of how viable the candidate is.
2. Quarterly fundraising. If a challenger has an unusually strong month, especially if he
or she outraises the incumbent by a substantial amount, it is worth noting. But
remember that an incumbent has been raising money for more than a year now, so if
he or she is outraised slightly in a quarter, it may not be a big deal.
3. PAC receipts. Political action committees bet on winners. Most of their donations to
go incumbents. If a challenger is getting a lot of PAC money, or if one of the two
candidates in an open‐seat race is raking in PAC dough, that is a sign of how strong
that candidate is.
4. Party support. Check the party committees' filings to see what races they are playing
in. They're not going to spend much money on behalf of candidates they don't think
are viable.
While it still has major shortcomings, the FEC site has gotten better recently. Users can now
search raw FEC data by individual donor or employer
(http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/disclosure_data_search.shtml), download Excel
spreadsheets containing individual or PAC contributions to each candidate for House and
Senate seats (just pick a state from this map:
http://fec.gov/DisclosureSearch/mapHSApp.do). Great if you’re digging into a member, but
the downside is that this data is only available in this form for the 2008 election cycle and
the 2010 election cycle. If you want total control over the data, this link
(http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftp_download.shtml) let’s you download all the

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

campaign data from the last few cycles so you can create your own database raw data—
however, note that the Center for Responsive Politics now offers all of its data for
download, with standardized names, industry coding, spouse matching and more. (Available
at http://www.opensecrets.org/action/data.php).
CRP also provides the top 20 donors to every members of Congress by cycle and for their
whole career; codes contributions by industry and sector; provides data on contributions to
committees from the industries they oversee; and provides additional info like campaign
expenditures for House and presidential candidates. They also track contributions to and
from PACs and independent political groups known as 527s after the section of the tax code
that regulates them.
The Sunlight Foundation’s Political Party Time site, online at http://politicalpartytime.org,
publishes invitations to fundraisers that are collected from lobbyists (there are upcoming
events as well as an archive going back to 2007). The site publishes the actual invitations in a
PDF‐like format, and also digitizes some information so one can search for the host of an
event (these are often lobbyists), the location, the beneficiary, other members in
attendance, the date, and so on.
IRE’s Campaign Finance Information Center has a database that includes contributions and
how the candidates spent their donations. In some cases, it includes money flow to and
from PACs, candidate committees and party committees. http://www.campaignfinance.org/
Tips about stories: http://www.campaignfinance.org/background.html
The Internal Revenue Service has an online search for 527 committee filings. They don’t run
candidates, they don’t contribute directly to candidates, they don’t engage in express
advocacy (“vote for Jones”), and they’re not political parties, and thus are not obligated to
follow the rules (contribution limits, restrictions on sources of funds, etc.) that candidates
and federal PACs must follow. To find their donors and expenditures, see
http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoAdvanced8871Search.action
When nonprofit organizations, including 527s and 501c groups, advertise in a federal
campaign, they must disclose that spending to the Federal Communications Commission,
http://gullfoss2.fcc.gov/ecd, and the FEC,
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ec_table.shtml. The listings include the name of the
organization financing the ad, though not the sources of the money. Legislation in Congress
would require nonprofit groups running political ads to disclose their donors.
National Institute on Money in State Politics compiles campaign finance information from
all 50 states, and makes it available in an online database at
http://www.followthemoney.org. They code contributions by industry (using a method
incredibly similar to, and derived from, the Center for Responsive Politics). They also trace
the influence of money on state policies, from Enron and utility deregulation to the
privatization of state prisons.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOBBYING

Two new tools from the Sunlight Foundation are TransparencyData.com, which lets you
search, filter, and download federal and state campaign finance records in one place. The
information comes from the Center for Responsive Politics, the National Institute on
Money in State Politics. Congrelate.org is a tool for lining up different kinds of
information about members of Congress—how they voted on a bill, who contributed to
their campaigns, even how old they are. Sunlight is adding new data sets to both tools all
the time.
Lobbyists must file four times a year. Both the company hiring the lobbyist and the firm
doing the lobbying must disclose. They report information that includes the issues they're
working on, sometimes with specific bill numbers, and which branches of the federal
government they're lobbying. Lobbying firms and individual lobbyists also report campaign
donations. The next reports are due July 20.
CRP has a very useful lobbying database (http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp)
but it does not track new registrations.
Raw data: Both the registrations and lobbying reports are available at the House Clerk’s
Office at http://disclosures.house.gov/ld/ldsearch.aspx and the Senate Office of Public
Records at http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfields. The Senate allows you
to search by key words.
You can search for new registrations on either site.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

