Tipsheet #3407

Nonprofit Watchdog Centers: The do's and don'ts of
fundraising

Do’s:
• Research the rules listed on the foundation’s website.
• Look at the press releases of whom the foundation is
funding and contact the successful grantees for advice.
• Know what you want to accomplish and have a plan in
place for sustainability, marketing and collaboration.
• Apply for IRS non‐profit status and secure a fiscal agent
with non‐profit status while you are waiting for
approval.
• Start recruiting a board of directors or an advisory
board.
• Decide what role you will play. Each non‐profit needs
an executive director. If you want to produce content,
recruit someone else for the administrative work.
• E‐mail the contact person at the foundation to introduce
yourself. Ask if there are any rules regarding letters of
inquiry or grants not listed on the web site.
Establishing a relationship with someone at the
foundation will be valuable as you proceed.
• Listen to what is being said. Some foundations may not
fund the type of content or programs you want your
organization to produce.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

• Avoid exclusivity with any media outlet. Most
foundations prefer a variety of distribution for content.
• Become a member of INN (Investigative News
Network).
Don’ts:
• Don’t send in a letter of inquiry if you have not
done your homework.
• If you are accepted for submission of a grant
application, don’t write a grant that doesn’t match
the project you outlined in your letter of inquiry.
• Don’t list board members if you don’t have their
approval to be used as references.
• Don’t propose a project that does not fit in any of
the categories listed on the foundation web site
unless you have talked to the foundation staff or
consultant.
• Don’t assume the foundation will fund high school
programs just because you see a grant listed for a
high school program. With EEJF, we only fund high
school programs in Oklahoma and one in California
that was started before the board changed its
strategic plan.
• If you are turned down on your grant, find out why,
if possible. It can simply be a matter of the amount
of funds the foundation has available in any one
cycle. It also could be the foundation thinks you are
not far enough along in your planning process.
(Note: Arguing with the foundation
representative after the decision is made will not
help.)

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

• Don’t put up a web site that says “under
construction.”
• Don’t give up. If you have a good idea, you will
succeed.
Sue Hale, EEJF media consultant, suehale _ inc@me.com

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

