Tipsheet #3413

Hidden Cameras: Yours and Theirs
2010 IRE Conference – Las Vegas, NV
Brian Collister – WOIA, San Antonio
Cindy Galli – Inside Edition
Randy Travis – WAGA, Atlanta
Setting up your own hidden camera operation is no longer the only option – we’re relying
more than ever on surveillance video and other sources to catch something in the act.
There’s good, bad and ugly in not only using someone else’s hidden cameras, but also
using your own.

Finding and Using Surveillance Video
Places to look:
Mass Transit - Almost all transit systems these days have sophisticated multi-camera
surveillance systems that are server based. That includes buses, trains, subways, toll roads
and many highways systems. They record more than just accidents.
Police Departments – They love to hand out surveillance video of crimes in hopes that
we'll help them find the bad guy. Let them know you also want them to remember you
for the most sensitive stories.
District Attorney - Instead of only trying to get video from your local police department,
go where the biggest vault of video is located. Most District Attorney offices will have a
video library covering case from every law enforcement agency in your area and civil
cases. Be sure and tell them you only want cases that are already closed to avoid a fight
over any open records exceptions dealing with open cases.
School Districts - Depending on the laws in your state, you may be able to get video
from surveillance on buses and inside school campuses.
Lawsuits - If your attempts to get video from a public agency are blocked for any reason,
try searching local court records for lawsuits. Civil lawsuits against businesses may also
produce interesting clips that can lead to interesting stories. Check with the administrator
of the civil court to see if they maintain video evidence in a library.
Any other open records request you make – Always remember to ask for audio and
video recordings with every open records request. Sometimes you might get something
that's even better than pictures. (Execution Tapes)

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Hurdles to overcome:
Criminal Cases and Lawsuits - In cases where there is an open criminal investigation,
court case or lawsuit - you're usually out of luck. But it doesn't hurt to ask. Sometimes
the people involved want you to air the video and will give it to you anyway. But if you
can't get it, be sure and put it on your calendar to check every few months. Sooner or later
the case will be closed or that lawsuit will be over. Good things come to those who wait.
What Video? - When you ask for video from a public agency you will usually be asked
which video specific you're looking to obtain. When you tell them you want to see ALL
OF IT....you'll really blow their minds. After they come down from the ceiling, ask them
to walk you through the process involved in the capture and cataloging of incidents they
keep on video. Ask to see all policies and procedures, including blank forms, used in the
process. Most agencies will keep a log or spreadsheet documenting and detailing their
videos. If they don't there is a paper trail that you can use to lead you to the clips. Get the
raw tapes whenever possible. Don't let someone else decide what's important. It will also
help you figure out the truth.
Money - Most public agencies will try to keep you from digging into their dirty laundry
by handing you a huge cost estimate to obtain whatever records you're requesting and
video is no different. But there are ways to fight this tactic. When it comes to video you
need to realize most of these systems are server bases, so they're probably no longer
keeping them on DVD or VHS. Think of it this way - video on a server is now just like
any other database - it's just data. So in many cases you should be able to negotiate a
reasonable fee to transfer it to a factory sealed hard drive that you supply. If that doesn't
work, most states allow you to view for free. Tell them you want to come down and look
at their videos and then pick what you want to have copied.
Finally - If they fight too hard because you want to go through their entire video vault or
if you think it is just too much to tackle - try this approach. Ask to see all of their videos
over the past 6 months and all paperwork and electronic records associated with those
videos. Tell them to withhold anything they believe is not public for whatever reason.
This approach will give you a glimpse into what they have and how they keep it. Then
you can plot your next move....
Surveillance story ideas:
* Shoplifting tapes -- touch base with the DA or solicitor in the county that has your
biggest mall. If the mall prosecutes shoplifters, chances are they're using surveillance
video to prove their case. Ask for all the shoplifting videos for the last five years. Then
ask for the arrest records so you can track down the bad guys and ask them to narrate
what we're watching.
* School bus tapes -- great source for stories on bullying or even more serious stuff. Is
your school district reluctant to give up school bus video? Ask for tapes used for bus
driver training. You may get a "Greatest Hits" compilation.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

* Prison use of force tapes -- most state and local prisons have a policy to videotape any
violent encounter with an inmate. Usually, this is done to prove the prison followed
procedure in subduing the inmate. But these tapes can also be a great foundation for other
stories -- the treatment of mentally ill prisoners, tasers, pepper spray, etc.

Preparing for a Hidden Camera Operation
Do your homework.
Yes, you know your state is one-party consent. But that doesn’t mean it’s a hidden
camera free-for-all. Are there are criminal peeping statutes that might affect
surveillance? How about trespass laws? Privacy concerns may affect hidden camera
investigations in the workplace in some states. Know the intricacies before you go.
Consider the ethics.
Simply ask yourself if this is the best way to expose the issue. Are there alternatives (ie.,
obtaining surveillance video)? Look to the professionals for advice: The Society of
Professional Journalists and The Poynter Institute are just two organizations that have
good tip sheets on hidden camera ethics.
Dress the part.
That hidden camera is only as good as the attire you wear with it. If you’re shooting in
an office environment where everyone is wearing suits, your jeans and t-shirt will only
bring more scrutiny – and more opportunity for someone to spot a lens or a curious bulge
in your jacket. Blend in so your subject is focusing on what you say, not how you look.
Get your story straight.
Know “who” you are and “why” you’re there. (Your cover story, that is.) Rehearse all
potential questions you might be asked and know exactly how you’ll answer them. If
you’re undercover with other people, make sure you’re all on the same page about your
roles and who will be doing the talking.
Don’t lose control of your cameras.
Sure, it can make for a great shot if you leave a purse or water bottle camera stationary on
a table in order to get yourself on camera. But turn your back for a second and a nosy
subject can – and will – pick it up, leading to you getting made or your camera getting
damaged. Someone has to see only one loose wire that has come untucked for your cover
to be blown.
Know your limits.
How far are you willing and/or allowed to go? If the subject wants to take you to a
second location or meet again, do you agree? Weigh the risks and the benefits
beforehand. Anticipate being asked to sign documents while undercover (ie. job
applications, contracts) and consider how you’ll deal with that, since, depending on
what’s in the fine print, you could open yourself up to civil or criminal violations.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Relax … but not so much.
These days, cameras are small enough that it’s easy to forget you’re wearing one. This is
not advisable. Next thing you know, you’re taking off the jacket that is wired to your
pants or saying something totally inappropriate to be forever caught on tape. Stay
relaxed so your subject is as well – but also stay alert, paranoid and ever mindful of what
you’re up to.
It’s kind of a sit-down interview.
Meaning … not only are you looking for a nice shot, but you are trying to get usable
sound out of your subject. Just as you would in a sit-down interview, do NOT talk over
someone. If he’s just about to spill the beans, you saying “Mmhmmm, sure…” right over
his big revelation will do you no good. Besides, silence can sometimes be so much more
telling.
Have an escape route.
Okay, so you just got made … maybe. How do you get out of it? What do you say
(hopefully without lying) to get out unscathed and without revealing your purpose for
being there? Think it through before you go in. The more dangerous the situation, the
more you also want to know where entrances and exits are. If you have a crew waiting
for you on the outside, know precisely where your meeting spot will be when you’ve left
so you can walk out with purpose, not confusion.
Always, ALWAYS expect the unexpected.
What will happen if one (or more) of your cameras goes kaput mid-shoot? Have a plan
in mind of where you might go should you need time and privacy to do impromptu
repairs. And don’t forget to always carry back-up batteries and tapes if you’re in for the
long haul.
Be redundant.
Whenever possible, have a second hidden camera rolling. If you're wearing a camera, put
another one in a bag. If you have the resources, take advantage. One may go down and
you need the back-up … or you simply may be able to get two really great shots at once.
Keep your mouth shut!
This always bears repeating. Remember that anything you say can be used against you
later if those tapes are subpoenaed. Wait until you’re powered down to talk about what a
stupid scam artist that guy was. That goes for anyone with you, especially if you’re
wiring a house for a sting where you’re apt to have more people there helping out. Put
someone in charge of passing the word when you either start to roll or power down.

And if you don’t already use these resources, use them now:
The Poynter Institute: http://www.poynter.org/
The Society of Professional Journalists: http://www.spj.org/ethicsresources.asp
The Reporters’ Committee for Freedom of the Press: http://rcfp.org/

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

