Tipsheet #3416

Check your sources: Figuring out what criminal justice data and documents really say.
IRE Conference | Las Vegas | June 11, 2010
Ryan Gabrielson; Investigative Reporting Fellow
University of California, Berkeley
ryan.gabrielson@gmail.com; gabrielson@berkeley.edu
510.643.1387 (office); 480.223.3283 (cell)
Just like human sources, datasets and recordsets have limitations, even shortcomings. This is
particularly true of criminal justice data, a species of electronic records that carries a tortured
history. Officials manipulate numbers for political ends. Police agencies categorize incidents
erratically. Reporters erroneously tell the public that crime figures say things the data does not,
and often cannot, say. The remedy is to gather information from other sources – people and records
from other parts of law enforcement, the courts, health care, etc. Here are some tips to help better
understand the numbers and provide the public a truer view of law enforcement performance.

Crime stats: Often released in the form of annual figures (Uniform Crime Reports) that are

collected by police departments and published in the FBI’s sprawling, “Crime in the United States.”
Law enforcement agencies increasingly produce fresh numbers throughout the year and post
interactive maps on their web sites that document reported criminal activity in their jurisdictions.
Overall counts of crimes observed by or reported to police, categorized according to each individual
agency’s proclivities. “Violent” crime includes homicide, attempted‐homicide, rape, aggravated
assault, and armed robbery; “property” crime includes larceny, arson, and burglary, auto‐theft.
Those categories mean different things to different departments.
Sometimes mistaken for: Data showing all criminal activity. Headlines and local TV news teasers
blare, “Violent crime’s up!” or “Thefts are down!”
Reporting steps: Make requests for “calls for service” logs a regular part of your beat checks that
can provide you a second measurement of what incidents police are responding to. Don’t expect
that the call logs will match exactly the crime figures, because a 9‐1‐1 call can be labeled one thing
by a dispatcher, and another thing by the responding officer. You can further test the veracity of
crime counts by reviewing a random sample of investigation files for a particular category of crime,
like sexual assaults, to learn how a department classifies incidents. Data on injuries reported by
hospitals, compiled by the National Center for Health Statistics
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/index.htm) offers yet another independent check on the level of
violence taking place in our communities.

Clearance rates: Percentages calculated annually that departments often hold up as a key
measurement of a police department’s performance. The numbers say what share of criminal
investigations a police department closed during their year through arrest(s), or by ruling the case
unfounded, suspending the investigation or by “exception.”
Sometimes mistaken for: Data showing how many cases police solve.
Reporting steps: “Clearing” an investigation can mean many things. If a case was closed by arrest,
did police refer it to prosecutors? If yes, did prosecutors file charges? Break down clearances by
category to find out what share are arrests, how many cases do detectives suspend without results,
or shut down quickly because they believe no crime was committed. Pay particular attention to
“cases cleared by exception,” which is supposed to be applied sparingly and only to the cases in
which detectives have enough evidence to make an arrest but cannot due to circumstances outside
of their control.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Response times: A measurement of how long it takes for each part of the emergency response

system to get police to the scene of the emergency. They documents how long, on average, it takes
dispatchers to report the emergency to police and route officers, for officers to arrive at the scene.
Sometimes mistaken for: The be‐all, end‐all of whether police are doing their jobs.
Reporting steps: Some research suggests that fast responses are only beneficial in a limited
number of circumstances, such as when the crime is still in progress. However, that is little comfort
to the caller fearing for his life. If you can, get data for all priority one emergency calls, which
sometimes includes a field documenting the nature of the emergency. Interview the police officers
themselves about their departments’ response times to understand what drives the numbers. Has
the patrol division’s staffing been cut? Are 9‐1‐1 dispatchers fumbling calls?

Conviction rates: The percentage of cases involving criminal charges that result in a conviction
on one or more charges (or some other charge filed later or negotiated as part of a plea bargain).
Perhaps the most malleable data point in all of criminal justice. Prosecutors choose what cases get
charged, and unsurprisingly take to court the cases most likely to result in a conviction.
Sometimes mistaken for: The percentage of criminal cases that prosecutors win.
Reporting steps: When dealing with conviction rates, it’s best to start with what’s missing. Request
logs of all cases police send to prosecutors and look for types of crimes that don’t result in charges.
If police reported 50 sexual assaults last year, but prosecutors only brought charges in five of them,
that’s a red flag. Prosecutors might be avoiding difficult cases that can deflate their conviction rates.
Alternatively, they might be avoiding cases in which police investigations didn’t gather sufficient
evidence. Interview detectives about their relationships with the DA’s office, if they feel their work
is handled properly once referred to prosecutors.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

