Tipsheet #3417

The Education Beat
(Don’t Let Anyone Tell You It’s Lame)

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The Wonderful World of Data
Good news! Educators use data!
Which schools get the greenest teachers?
How many children with disabilities were excluded from testing
at that school that made the huge leaps in test scores?
When does an English learner stop being an English learner?
How much money is your school district spending on repairs and
how does that compare to industry standards?
What vendors are taking the superintendent out to lunch?
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

When Schools Pay Teachers Not to Teach
Lynne Holyoke knew her principal wanted to fire her. The retired art teacher said the two had often
sparred over her teaching style. But instead, Holyoke said the school district made her an offer: Take a
year off with pay and resign at the end of it. Holyoke agreed and spent the year on paid administrative
leave, doing art therapy, volunteering and mulling her future.
"It was like a package to go," she said.

Holyoke is not the only educator who has been pulled from her classroom but paid
nonetheless. Fifty‐six educators have been put on paid administrative leave in San Diego
Unified over the last six years, taken out of their ordinary jobs but kept on the payroll for
anywhere from a few days to more than four years.
Some teachers have been accused of crimes or inappropriate behavior and are removed from their
classes until the charges are proven or disproven. Some are awaiting hearings that decide whether they
will be fired. A small number are suffering medical problems.
And others such as Holyoke are paid as part of a settlement to avoid the expensive process of firing
them, especially when the cases against them are difficult to prove in court.
School district attorney Mark Bresee said that teachers sometimes make formal pacts — agreeing to
resign in exchange for staying on paid leave for a fixed time — and sometimes simply agree informally to
resign after time. The practice is used across the country but rarely quantified.

While still uncommon in the sprawling school district, the frequency of paid
administrative leave has increased significantly in the past two years, along with its costs.
Estimates done by voiceofsandiego.org based on data provided by the school district found that the
practice cost more than $2.1 million over the past six years. Costs have risen from an eventual payout of
an estimated $262,000 for three teachers put on leave in the 2003‐2004 school year to more than
— andwithout
counting
— for
educators
in and
2008‐2009.
©2010$716,000
- Duplication prohibited
permission
from 26
Investigative
Reporters
Editors, Inc.

How to explore pay and monkey
business around it …
• Started with an unrelated complaint: Employees were stuck
on paid leave for too long
• Read administrative procedures and bargaining agreements to
find out what papers are filed
• Talk to employee groups and staff about what financial string
is used. Track trends.
• Periodically request list of employees on leave
• Look at the number of job reclassifications filed, who gets
them and how much money they get
• Keep an eye out for spiking just before retirements
• Track budgeted positions that are vacant
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Paid to Leave, and Paid to Come Back
Five years ago, finance director Richard Knott was one of nearly 1,500 employees who took a
bonus to leave San Diego Unified. By replacing expensive senior employees such as Knott with
younger, lesser‐paid workers, the school district estimated it would save $7.7 million by 2008.
The school district gave senior employees 7 percent of their final salary to depart, whether or not
they formally retired. For Knott, that totaled an extra $16,799 a year, spread over nine years — a
payout that will eventually exceed $150,000.
But though Knott took a buyout, he was still in demand. An expert in California school finance,
Knott was quickly asked back to consult San Diego Unified on budget issues. Over the past five
years, he has earned more than $480,000 to help navigate the confusing world of school finance,
on top of nearly $82,600 he has already earned for leaving San Diego Unified in the first place.
Knott is one of at least 14 high‐ranking San Diego Unified employees who left with the "golden
handshake" and later returned to earn more money. Over the past five years, San Diego Unified
has paid more than $1.8 million to rehire senior employees with special skills, compensating for
the brain drain caused by the bonuses. Those same workers have already earned more than $1
million in bonuses for departing in 2003.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

More questions to ask and explore:
• Has there been an increase in paid leave since a new
superintendent came in? Has anyone repeatedly
been on paid leave?
• How many retirees have been rehired again? How
much have they been paid? Is it worth it?
• What expenses are top employees charging? What
are they charging them to? (Venison?)
• How much time are employees taking off? Which
schools have worse rates of absenteeism?
• Grab Form 700s and check them against contracts.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The School Guru Who Promised Rescue and Brought Ruin
Juan Pablo Ladron de Guevara had floundered in a big, conventional school, but not at Cortez Hill Academy. He relished the small
classes and loved chatting with his English teacher, his "all‐time most favorite teacher in the whole world.“
"I actually felt like coming to school," de Guevara said.
But Cortez Hill enrollment didn't keep pace with soaring downtown rents in the summer of 2006, making money so scarce at the
tiny charter school that it relied on parents to help maintain the dim, aging building on A Street. Balancing the books frustrated
the principal, a former counselor who could soothe troubled teens but was less familiar with finances.
Michael R. Hazelton sold himself as an expert who could help. He was soothing. Gray‐haired. Nice. A Harvard University seminar
topped his resume, loaded with impressive work at a national company and a school that had once aided Cortez Hill. The school
hired him as its executive director to reverse its fortunes.
Instead its deficit ballooned from $16,559 to $188,187 in the single year that it employed Hazelton. When an audit revealed that
he gave himself an $18,350 raise without the blessing of the Cortez Hill board, boosting the six‐figure salary that had already
dwarfed what his predecessor had earned, Hazelton was already gone.
Two of its 13 teachers lost their jobs as Cortez Hill struggled to pay its bills. And something else was missing, something de
Guevara couldn't quite describe. Rumors about Hazelton spread and graffiti proliferated in the bathrooms. De Guevara started
skipping class to hang out with friends in the library.
"Everyone found out what Mike did," de Guevara said, adding that "the school changed so much. I hated it.“

Cortez Hill isn't the only charter school where Mike Hazelton promised rescue and brought ruin.
In four years, he has led three Southern California schools and each has been crippled or closed
by the time he walked away, suffering deficits or battling accusations that Hazelton improperly
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.
enriched himself or corporations he founded.

The parallel world of charter schools …
• Look up Form 990s to get pay, related entities
• Request articles of incorporation and IRS filings for
any entities (Guidestar, Secretary of State)
• Annual financial reports and audits (may be on file
with the school district)
• Check out documents filed when charters start up or
renew (resumes, board members, parents)
• School district monitoring reports

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

More questions to explore:
• What related entities do charter schools have? Why do they
exist and what is their role? Who profits from them?
• How is attendance tracked? Especially important for
independent study.
• What rules are charter schools free from and what impact
does that have?
• What happens when a charter school expels a student? Look
up mobility records to find trends.
• Are charter schools serving as many English learners and
students with disabilities as similar neighborhood schools?
• How much are charter schools paying their administrators?
How does that compare to school district pay?
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Insert Teacher Here
The teacher didn't want the job at Gompers Middle School.
Principal Vince Riveroll didn't want to hire someone who didn't
want it. So it floored Riveroll when he walked into a staff meeting
years ago and found the man he rejected standing there, shoulder
to shoulder with his teachers.
"They assigned me here anyway," Riveroll recalls the teacher
saying.
It wasn't a glitch. It is the major flaw in how hiring works in San
Diego Unified. When the school district places teachers in front of
your children, the decision may have little to do with whether
they make sense for your school, whether the principal wants
them or even whether they themselves want to be there.
Teachers are placed into schools through a complex and
sometimes haphazard system driven by seniority and the need to
find classrooms for teachers displaced when schools lose students
or close. Even when principals do have a choice, their decisions
are limited by factors that have nothing to do with whether a
teacher is right for their school.
Labor rules mean newer teachers can be pulled from schools they
love merely because they have less seniority than other teachers.
Sometimes they are assigned to schools they didn't choose. While
ensuring that the teachers still have jobs, the system can force
unhappy matches as the hiring pool dwindles, even though
human resources staffers try to carefully match teachers and
schools.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Where are your teachers going?
• Find out how your school district tracks teacher
requests to switch schools
• “Post and bid reports” may exist
• Systematize it by building a spreadsheet and link the
data to demographic information about schools
• Some states keep data on these trends, too

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

More questions to ask:
• Which schools have the highest turnover? Is it
caused by policies or teachers’ choices?
• Has turnover spiked under specific principals?
• Where do the newest teachers go? Are there
exceptions to the trends worth studying?
• What about principal turnover?
• Which schools do their hiring late?

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Other areas to explore
• Testing and tests (cutoff points, partial credit)
• Title 1, Title 2, etc.
• Forgotten laws (school report cards)
• Recycled reforms
• Special education (general fund contribution,
settlements, amount of time students spending in
mainstream classrooms)
• The chaos that is preschool
• College alignment (how many kids take remedial math?)

• Laws on paper versus laws in practice (NCLB)
• Grants and the problem of chasing the money
• Oh yeah ‐‐ instruction
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The grab bag …
• Your state department of education
– Dropout rates, teacher credentials and experience, suspension rates,
computers per kid, nurses per kid

• Your local school district and County Office of Education
– Rate of English learners being reclassified as fluent, how much time
special education students spend in mainstream classrooms
– Monitoring reports for schools in trouble
– Financial red flags from County Office
– Expense reports, budgets, meeting minutes, audits

• Routine documents reviewed by the school board
– Retirees being rehired by the school district, job classification changes,
contracts for outside services

• Required filings to the feds (Consolidated Application)
• Charter schools (finances, minutes, etc.)
• And don’t be afraid to gather your own data
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

