Tipsheet #3419

Ivory tower inspection: Holding higher education’s complex bureaucracies accountable.
IRE Conference | Las Vegas | June 12, 2010
Ryan Gabrielson; Investigative Reporting Fellow
University of California, Berkeley
ryan.gabrielson@gmail.com; gabrielson@berkeley.edu
510.643.1387 (office); 480.223.3283 (cell)
The inner workings of many post‐secondary institutions can be as incomprehensible to the public
as bubble fusion. This opaqueness is a chief complaint of parents and lawmakers who pay for much
of the higher learning. Without transparency, misconduct festers in academia just as it does
everywhere else. Demystifying higher education should be a top priority for reporters covering
universities and colleges, to enable better policy decisions by leaders and personal decisions by
families.
Go to class. Pull up the course catalogue for the college or university you cover and select a handful
of classes to visit each semester. Large general education lectures are typically best. You’ll get to
talk with students in their environment, getting a sense of their daily concerns and happenings.
What you see and hear in these classes can serve as conversation starters when you talk with
faculty about the state of their institution. Also, look for classes that appear strange, particularly
courses directly tied to athletics. You might find academic fraud instead of higher learning.
Get to know the numbers people. Chief financial officers aren’t the public faces of their
universities. They often, however, serve as an institution’s brain and can provide a picture of the
institution colored by the financial data. Community colleges sometimes have volunteer committees
made up of business professionals from the outside community who get to review the campus’
fiscal health multiple times a year. These individuals can make great sources because of their access
to inside financial information and they can speak to the press without concern of losing a source of
income.
Pull every audit and read every word. An audit of a campus’ “internal controls” might not sound
like the start of a blockbuster story. Set aside that preconceived notion. That phrase refers to how
the university or college manages its cash and whether it is at serious risk of being defrauded.
Often, there is a committee overseeing the auditing process that receives very little public attention
and, at times, are the only people who ever see the results of the internal probes. Make a habit of
regularly speaking with these people, attend the meetings where they review draft reports and set
the schedule for what departments will be audited in the coming months.
Map out the money. Universities and colleges have myriad sources of cash. Once the campus
deposit's the dollars, it can be very challenging to track what all they pay for. Break down the
funding sources one‐by‐one. Start with student charges – tuition and fees – because there is
sometimes more accountability for how these dollars are spent, and this money is often of most
importance to our audiences (they come directly out of families’ wallets). How much do student
charges generate in all? What parts of tuition and fees are earmarked for specific expenses? What
students are paying the full tuition, how much tuition cash goes to financial aid? Once you’ve
tracked tuition dollars, do the same for state funding, federal grants, and so on.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

