Tipsheet #3420

“Bulletproofing the Story”
EDITORS’ TRACK
2010 IRE National Conference

Maud Beelman
The Dallas Morning News
mbeelman@dallasnews.com

—Be organized. A project’s successful outcome is improved by time spent planning up
front. Develop an organizational scheme so that information in notes, documents, sources
and interviews can be shared and leveraged across the team. Adapt your organization to
fit your needs, and adopt the scheme that works best for the majority. How you do it
(three-ring binders, double-punch folders, Word docs, spreadsheets, databases, wikis)
isn’t as important as doing it. Good organization saves time in the long run, and being
able to put your hands on a key document quickly breeds confidence up the chain.
—Have a records mindset. Assume there are documents or data for whatever you’re
investigating. Since it can take time to get access through open records laws, talk to
sources who can help focus your request or can suggest other ways to obtain the
information. Remember, when making your requests, that electronic databases are also
“records” and allow you to sort, sift, or compare valuable pieces of information.
—Backstop your reporters, by reading key documents, court records and/or interview
transcripts. As someone not directly involved in the reporting, the editor has a broader
view and might glean information for the “bigger picture” or see dots that need
connecting.
—Background all human sources, companies at the front end, especially if they play a
key role in your story.
—Consider crowd-sourcing (we use our DMN Investigates blog) to unearth witnesses
or other original forms of information.
—It’s a team sport, even if there is only one reporter. The reporter-editor relationship in
an investigation differs greatly from the daily beat by virtue of time and complexity.
Budget time throughout to discuss your project with other reporters and your editor(s).
—Be a good listener, and take notes. Many reporters think aloud, and you can help them
remember what struck them initially as they labor over a long rewrite.
—Discuss the big interviews in advance, especially if there’s a chance you may get
only one shot, so that everyone knows the main goals and information being sought.
—Sit in when necessary, on key interviews, if the investigation is controversial and
your reporters are under attack. You’re there as a show of confidence and institutional
backing. But do this only with the support of your reporters. The goal is to be helpful, not
Big Foot.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

—Footnote memos and story drafts. Microsoft Word has a feature that makes this easy,
and the footnotes move with the copy as you revise and rewrite. Footnoting makes the
fact-checking, editing and pre-pub review go more smoothly.
—Beware the dangers of the master narrative. Constantly question the validity of your
thesis and methodology. Look for weak spots in the reporting; seek out facts and
information that dispute the narrative. Challenge each other’s conclusions and
assumptions throughout.
—Know your reporters’ sources, particularly the anonymous ones. And think long and
hard about using them. Readers don’t believe us when we use anonymous sources, and
their presence can weaken an otherwise strong investigation.
—Anticipate points of attack, and address them in the reporting and writing. For a fresh
perspective, moot court the story with others in the newsroom not involved in the effort.
—Make clear all angles and context of your story by asking your sources (especially if
they are targets) both big-picture and detailed questions, so that there are no surprises
after publication. Consider having your questions reviewed by a lawyer, especially if
you’re submitting them in writing. And don’t wait until the last minute to do the
confrontation interview.
—Include the “humility graf,” as my boss calls it, laying out what you don’t know and
why. If a target or key subjects won’t talk, draw their stories from public records or find
other ways to tell their side so that readers know you’re trying to be fair and want to help
them understand all the issues.
—Don’t let the camel get his nose under the tent. Check facts, names, details at least
three times against original source records. When you’ve spent a significant amount of
time on a project, there’s no excuse for inaccuracies, big or small. Schedule enough time
for fact-checking. Use one of the well-worn systems (such as the Tom French red-pencil
test) or another that works for you. If you’re writing something controversial — and
usually we are — even a simple error can undermine overall credibility.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

