Tipsheet #3421

COVERING IMMIGRATION

Stephanie Czekalinski, Jill Riepenhoff-The Columbus Dispatch; Doug Haddix-IRE
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

STORY IDEAS
Search Extra!
Extra! on the IRE
Web site.
www.ire.org/extra
extra/

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

STORY IDEAS
Monitor the Immigration page
at New America Media.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL MAINSTREAM MEDIA
Newspapers, TV stations, blogs often
publish information on people and events
that are of interest to immigrant
communities. But it’s often hidden.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Part of town with large
concentration of racial or
ethnic group

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Things in your community
people need: Interpreter

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

SOURCES
Be sure to background groups or individuals before
citing them. Be careful of sources with axes to grind
and advocacy groups that might skew data.
The Southern Poverty Law Center considers FAIR
(Federation for American Immigration Reform) a
hate group, yet it’s quoted often in the media as an
objective source.
Pew Hispanic Center has a wealth of nonpartisan
data and research.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Sourcing through organizations
Different organizations serve different parts of
the community and the kinds of stories you get
from those organizations will differ.
They will give you different kinds of access to
the community, as well.
Covering immigration isn’t limited to writing
about illegal immigrants and raids.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Keys to reaching immigrant sources
If the immigrant community feels isolated or under attack,
take time to let people get to know you.
Be aware of your ethnicity or gender - it can impact how
some members of a particular ethnic group or religion treat you.
Face time counts - drop by stores, parks, bars that cater
to your community just to say hello.
Be aware of a language barrier - allow time to clarify
when you or your subjects are using their second language.
If you use an interpreter, be aware of their possible
relationship with the person.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Maria
Like many members of the
general public, many
recently arrived
immigrants do not
understand how the
media works in the US
and therefore can not
anticipate the impacts of
talking to you.
Many do not distinguish
between on-the-record
and off.
Be aware of names.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

CONTACTING YOU
Only a segment of your
audience may have email.
Provide a phone number that
people call any time. Texting
works.
In some communities, the only
way to find the person you want
is to give your number to
someone who knows you and
who knows the person you want
to talk to.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Hispanic Chamber of Columbus

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Mexican bakery

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Damas Latinas

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

TIP SHEETS
Tip sheets
from IRE on
immigration
have full
listings.
Fully
searchable by
year and
subtopics.
Free
downloads for
IRE members.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

KEY IMMIGRATION WEB SITES
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and its Fact Sheets
link
American Immigration Lawyers Association
Center for Immigration Studies and its mailing list of news
articles about immigration.
Executive Office of Immigration Review in the U.S. Department
of Justice
Bender’s Immigration Bulletin has a daily digest of news
coverage.
http://www.justicejournalism.org/ the results of an Immigration
in the Heartland fellowship are posted.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

DATA AND STATISTICS

U.S. Census Bureau’s Minority Links page.
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse
University offers free data plus a subscription service.
Immigration collection of reports and research by the
Congressional Budget Office and Government
Accountability Office.
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL DATA AND TRENDS

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL DATA AND TRENDS

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL DATA AND TRENDS

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL DATA AND TRENDS

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL DATA AND TRENDS

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

LOCAL DATA AND TRENDS

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Terms and sources

•Terminology: illegal alien, illegal immigrant,
undocumented immigrant, undocumented
worker when to use what.
•Resource sheet: knowing who to call
•Courtesy of the Institute for Justice and
Journalism, justicejournalism.org

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

FOR MORE INFORMATION
Stephanie Czekalinski, editor, Fronteras de la Noticia
Reporter, The Columbus Dispatch
sczekalinski@dispatch.com
614-461-5227
Jill Riepenhoff, projects reporter, The Columbus Dispatch
jriepenhoff@dispatch.com
614-461-5292

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

