Tipsheet #3424

Unsung Documents
IRE Conference, Las Vegas, Nev. June, 2010
``The government produces so much information that they can't hide the truth all the
time.'' -- I.F. Stone
Tisha Thompson WTTG-Washington, D.C.
tisha.thompson@foxtv.com
Norberto Santana, Voice of Orange County
nsantana@voiceofoc.org
Mike McGraw, The Kansas City Star
mcgraw@kcstar.com
Some of the best documents you'll ever use are little-known ones that you probably
haven't found. Don't assume the document you need doesn't exist. There's an endless and
continually expanding lode of documents to be mined.
Five tips for finding and using documents:
1. Never view documents in a vacuum. Combining two or more documents, or documents
and interviews, is often the key to investigative stories. Such ``triangulation'' unlocks the
full potential of unsung documents and sources.
2. View documents over time; compare this year's annual report to ones published five
and ten years ago. Build a chronology to tease out patterns.
3. Help short circuit the troubling trend of journalists failing to use the federal Freedom
of Information Act and state open records laws. Sometimes they work and work well.
Besides, journalists have an obligation to keep the machine well greased.
4. If someone refers to a document during an interview, ask for a copy. Carry a thumb
drive so there's never an excuse for someone not to copy what you want. A digital camera
can stand in as an ad hoc photocopier.
5. Make copies of your documents before you start marking them up. That way, when the
graphics folks ask for copies, you won't feel so dumb.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Some of our favorites:
Federal tax liens; 990 tax returns.
Campaign contribution reports and databases.
Raw documents for personal financial disclosure reports.
FBI files on dead guys. Dead men do tell tales
Court records. It doesn’t matter who won or lost; discovery is a great tool. Check a free
site: www.lexisone.com. Don’t forget affidavits and divorce files.
Administrative Law judge opinions at various federal agencies.
OMB Filings and clearance lists; government cell phone, ``calling card'' and 800 number
information; visitor sign-in logs.
Flight logs and manifests.
Letters/emails from companies and individuals commenting on proposed regulations.
Reports by inspectors general, General Accounting Office, Congressional Research
Service and congressional oversight committees, their raw notes, transcripts and drafts.
Air Travel Consumer Report: http://airconsumer.dot.gov/reports/index.htm.
Opinions by state's attorney or ethics officer; state legislative research reports.
Corporate reports. www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/webusers.htm.
Unemployment and workers’ comp claims.
Real estate records and Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings.
Potential federal whistle blowers from Merit Systems Protection Board: MSPB.gov.
911 Tapes and surveillance videos.
Federal Audit Clearinghouse http://harvester.census.gov/sac/ .

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

