Tipsheet #3430

Finding and
Negotiating
for Data
Sanjay Bhatt, The Seattle Times
Danielle Cervantes, The San Diego Union-Tribune
2010 IRE Conference, Las Vegas

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

What we’ll cover
Why you need a data strategy
Where to find data
How to negotiate for it
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Why data matters
 Data gives you the

spectrum. Anecdotes only
give you random points
along that spectrum.
 Data gives your coverage

more authority

 Lets you probe system-

wide questions

 Leads you to new sources
 Data is not just numbers,

but anything stored in a
database (text, documents,
images)

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Tiered data strategy
Tier 1: Readily available, quick analysis
Tier 2: More intensive hunting, joining datasets
Tier 3: Creating dataset from scratch, advanced
statistical analysis and data mining

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Examples: Enrollment, foreclosures
 Which saw biggest jump  What are foreclosure

in enrollment of poor
kids?

 In these schools, what %

of teachers have less
than 5 years of
experience?

 Build an index to group

schools by achievement
based on data elements

rates, by city or county?

 Do census tracts with

high-spread loans have
higher foreclosure rates
than census tracts that
do not?

 Deep dive into roots of

foreclosure in one
neighborhood

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Finding Data

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Wh e r e t o fi n d d a t a
o The questions you have will guide your search
o Focus initially on public datasets that aren’t hard to get, that
agencies generate routinely
o Payrolls, contracts, other financials
o Campaign contributions, disclosure statements
o Test scores, school safety, fleets and facilities
o Birth/death rates, vaccination compliance, surveys
o Inspections, licensing, enforcement/response

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Find data online
 Federal clearinghouse: http://data.gov
 Track the stimulus: http://recovery.gov
 Demographics: http://factfinder.census.gov
 Environment:

http://epa.gov/emefdata/em4ef.home
 Reporters Committee for Freedom of Press has
state-by-state guide to obtaining electronic
records: http://www.rcfp.org

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Finding local data
Can try Google search

• (“clark county data”)

Agency’s site

• index for data page

Cities with online data
catalogs

• Seattle
• San Francisco
• New York
• Washington, D.C.

• Medicaid drug utilization
Audits, task forces,
legislative committees • Worker’s compensation fraud
State agencies will
extract data for your
region

• Liquor sales, food stamps, traffic
fatalities, etc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Other data sources
 Think tanks, foundations and other non-profits

employ data analysts who crunch government
data for their own agendas.

 Pew Charitable Trusts: http://www.pewtrusts.org/
 Annie E. Casey Foundation: http://aecf.org
 Kaiser Family Foundation: http://www.kff.org
 Urban Institute’s National Neighborhoods project:

http://www2.urban.org/nnip/

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Requesting data
Flex your rights
Be strategic
Everything’s negotiable
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Know your rights
• Freedom of information act (FOIA)
• State open records laws and amendments
• Local laws
• Open meeting laws
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Freedom of Information Act (1966)
• Provides access to all records of all federal
agencies in the executive branch, unless those
records fall within one of nine exempt categories
• Enhanced in 1993 when agencies ordered to use
discretion to release records, even if exempt;
exceptions apply only if “foreseeable harm” shown
• Amended in 1996 to cover electronic
information; database queries do not constitute
new record; 10 days to 20 days for responses

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

California Public Records Act (1975)
• Promotes understanding of how the government is
performing its functions
• More explicit definitions, predictive of records
scenarios, exemptions
• Electronic records

Proposition 59 (2004)
• Constitutional amendment passed by voters
• Law to be broadly construed if it furthers the people's
right of access, narrowly construed if it limits the right
of access
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Local: Proposition D (2004)
• Amendment to City Charter, similar to CaPRA
• Good leverage

Open Meeting Laws: Brown Act (1953)
• Right to attend and participate in meetings of local legislative
bodies; includes city councils, boards of supervisors, district
boards, commissions, standing committees; requires advanced
notice
• Access to minutes or proceedings anytime there’s a quorum,
including official meetings or “unofficial” meetings where
public business is discussed

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Right attitude
 Be optimistic: You have the

 Practice your mission: This is

right to see documents/data, so
assume you’re going to get what
you need.

your watchdog duty as a member
of the fourth estate; you’re doing
your j-o-b.

 You are the public: These are

 Remember: “The people do not

your documents, not theirs. You
also represent your readers—
thousands more constituents /
citizens / taxpayers

yield their sovereignty to the bodies that
serve them. The people, in delegating
authority, do not give their public servants
the right to decide what is good for the
people to know and what is not good for
them to know.” (Calif. Brown act)

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Strategic homework
 Gather agency intel : What its mission? What segments of the
public does it serve?

 Get to know people by name and learn their lingo
 Understand what types and scopes of data the agency keeps
and its technology

 Obtain code sheets and data dictionaries
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Homework, cont.
 Ask if the agency has ever done an inventory of its databases
 Go online and to counters for forms, applications that get entered in a
database

 Search for IT job postings for the agency
 Ask if the agency has ever done an audit of its records or a management
performance assessment. Check for a methodology section.

 PRA/FOIA logs: See what other media and the public are requesting
 At the federal level, the OMB has to approve the creation of any
information system for a federal agency

 Get insider details about data issues through a PRA for correspondence
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Strategic request
• No two requests are ever the same

database; narrow your request for quick hits,

• Initiate a conversation first, even if it’s just a

dailies

formality

• Tell them how you want the data – be explicit

• Write the letter: Decide your approach and the

tone. Will you send a friendly, casual e-mail?
Hard-line, explicit form letter? To whom are you
sending the request, and when?
• Predict exemptions, privacy concerns,

redactions

• Limit pre-authorized costs (or ask for a cost

waiver), and pay only copying charges.
• Leave room to haggle
• Keep a log, entering every date, name and

conversation, e-mail or letter

• Think big for projects and ask for whole

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Negotiation
 Haggle using the wiggle room you built into your request
 Refer to case law, local precedent, previous requests
 Exemptions must be narrowly construed
 Request the release of nonexempt portions of the record
 Decide ahead what you can sacrifice, what you can’t do without
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

 Edit the scope of the data: date range, categories, departments,
etc.
 Compromise on electronic formats
 Redactions: They’re inevitable. Play off their odiousness and
inconvenience for leverage. Know what’s missing and what was
removed – and why.
 Settle: “You get your redactions and narrowed date range, but I
get all departments, a text file, 20 fields and data delivery by
the end of the week.”

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Excuses, excuses!
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Contacts
Sanjay Bhatt

The Seattle Times
sbhatt@seattletimes.com

Danielle Cervantes Stephens
The San Diego Union-Tribune
danielle.cervantes@uniontrib.com

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

