CHASTITY PRATT DAWSEY
FREE PRESS EDUCATION WRITER

EDUCATION BEAT TOOL BOX
The right data will allow you to compare, contrast and provide readers with longitudinal
studies or analyses. In writing about education and youth issues, it is important to first
find out what information your schools, agencies or states collect so that you can request
it regularly.
WHAT’S LEGAL?
Some states do not give out identification information on students or
juveniles offenders. In Michigan, juvenile offender information is public.
News organizations may have their own rules about when to use it or not.
But, if you can get the records publicly or from a source, get it and decide
what to do with it later.
Know your state’s public records law – what information can you get and
what information can’t you get? In Michigan, the Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) as amended by 1996 PA 553 can be found at www.michigan.gov/ag
Know your state’s public meetings laws. Sometimes courts and school boards will meet
behind closed doors for sessions that are open. Know when to ask for admittance.
Michigan’s Open Meetings Act can be found at www.michigan.gov/ag

WHAT EDUCATIONAL INFO IS COLLECTED?
Test scores, discipline data, expulsions, violent crime counts by school
and by district, free and reduced lunch statistics, demographics, and
licenses for teachers and staff. All of this data is on a database that you can
request. This is reference data and story fodder.
Find out when the data is collected and the costs. Ask for it on a CD. Ask
for the fees to be waived. Get to know the person who collects data and
the FOIA officers so that the process will be smooth each time you request
a pile of documents or databases. CDs or electronic versions are best.
TRAIN your sources to prepare certain info on a regular basis.
WHO WORKS FOR YOUR SCHOOLS?
Ask for a list of all of the people who work for your districts as well as
titles, annual or hourly pay, experience, addresses, work address, on a CD.
Also, the Michigan State Police collects info on teachers who have
committed crimes. Names, violation/crimes are all public information.
Administration and superintendent pay – how do your local
administrators’ pay compare to others’? How does pay and fringe benefits
in districts where students are majority nonwhite compare to districts
where students are majority white? Look at the poverty levels and the perpupil spending on administration versus classroom (teachers, counselors,
aides) spending. What is driving the disparities?
Licensing – your state may have a database that you can search for
investigations of teachers.

WHERE’S THE MONEY?
Expenditure reports – this is a district’s check book. It lists every payment.
Request the expenditures for a fiscal year “excluding payroll” so that the data is
not bogged down with payroll checks.
Annual report – basic data on the schools for the past year. It usually includes
enrollment, testing, directory and summary of highlights for past year.
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report – audited report on the past year’s
spending. Basic reference material.
Employment contracts – be sure to get the contract for teachers, support staff,
administrators, the superintendent and all bargaining units
Audit (independent) – a contractor or vendor is paid to review the books and tell
whether the records were properly kept. The audit does not usually say whether
budget decisions were wise or unwise, just whether the financial records were
maintained within the law.

OTHER MUST-SEE DOCUMENTS:
Court files – lawsuits have valuable documents – depositions, bank
statements or other files that may have been turned up by law enforcement
that may have been denied or unavailable to the public
Complaints – does your district have a complaint line?
FOIA log – see who’s looking for data and what data they’re looking for –
especially useful when attorneys or former employees are looking for info

NEED HELP writing a FOIA request letter? Need a person to explain the FOIA
laws? Go here:
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press www.rcfp.org
Freedom of Information Center - www.nfoic.org/foi-center
Marion Brechner Citizen Access Project - www.citizenaccess.org

