IRE Tip Sheet

Panel: Insurance Coverage for Investigative Reporters: Everything You Need to Know
in One Hour, presented at the 2010 IRE Conference on Friday, 11 June 2010
Topic: Application & Underwriting: How and Where Do You Get Media Liability
Insurance Coverage, by James T. Borelli, Media Liability Practice Leader, CNA
Insurance.
I.

II.

III.

Market Overview:
- Media Liability Insurance is a niche area of the insurance industry.
- There are currently 8 to 9 markets that provide Media Liability Insurance
as a regularly available product.
- Many professionals involved in underwriting this coverage or handling
claims on such policies are former journalists or media attorneys who
understand the nuances posed by media risks and the need for customized
coverage
- The underwriting process is more collaborative than in other lines with
greater leeway for the underwriter to exercise individual judgment in
quoting risks and developing customized policy provisions.
- Work with your insurance broker and the insurer’s underwriter to obtain
coverage that is tailored to meet the needs and exposures of your
organization.
The First Step: Finding an Insurance Broker to Represent You
- Insurance brokers represent media risks in dealing with media
liability insurers in the application and underwriting process.
- Brokers can assist in determining your coverage needs, completing the
application for insurance and in negotiating policy terms and conditions
on your behalf with media liability underwriters.
- It is important to find a broker with specific expertise and experience in
media liability. Such brokers can be found at the large insurance
brokerages (e.g. Aon, Marsh, Willis, Lockton) or local or regional
“boutiques” that have a special focus in this area.
- Your regular insurance agent can help you find a broker as can a
representative of one of the regular media liability insurance providers.
- Get several recommendations, interview over the phone or in person and
choose the one who seems best for your organization.
- Brokers either charge you a fee or are paid a commission by the insurer
from your policy premium. The latter of these two options is generally
preferable for you, the insurance purchaser.
Appling for Media Liability Insurance: A Crucial Step
- It is important to answer the application questions fully, accurately and
in a professional manner.
- An application and materials submitted with it are often the first and only
information an underwriter sees on a risk. As with everything else

1

IV.

initial impressions matter. Applications that contain illegible
handwriting or that are incomplete may result in terms and
conditions that are substantially less favorable than those that are
complete, polished and professional in appearance.
- Incomplete or inaccurate responses on an application for insurance may
result in a denial of a claim or voiding of the entire policy.
- Applications for media liability insurance generally ask about the nature
of a media risk’s operations, content and distribution, its editorial
and legal review procedures, its contracts, hold-harmless/indemnity
agreements and releases and its media liability claim experience
over the last five years.
- Supplemental materials are also frequently asked to be submitted with
applications for media liability insurance. Common materials requested
are annual reports, financial statements, and sample copies of contracts
and releases.
- Generally media liability applications are about 6 to 8 pages long and are
easier to complete and much less intrusive than applications for credit and
other types of insurance.
- Take time to complete media liability applications thoroughly and well.
If you fill out an application for one insurer, others providers will
usually accept it. Involve your broker and attorney in the process as
needed.
Key Policy Provisions and Coverages
- Look for media liability policies that contain a broad listing of covered
media perils (e.g. any form of defamation, invasion of privacy,
misappropriation, copyright and trademark infringement, and negligence
in content.)
- Open perils language is preferable to named perils and is typically
provided by lead-in language to the covered perils that reads, “including,
but not limited to.”
- Occurrence based coverage is available in media liability policies and is
preferable to claims made based coverage, which is a more standard
coverage trigger in many other professional and specialty errors and
omission lines. Occurrence based coverage is broader because it
covers claims whenever they are made against an insured so long as the
allegedly wrongful media activity occurs during the policy period.
With claims made policies only claims that are made during the policy
period are covered.
- A Media liability policy should apply to newsgathering activities as well
as the actual publication, broadcast or other dissemination of content,
particularly in view of the growing trend of newsgathering claims against
media.
- Media liability policies should cover punitive damages to the fullest
extent possible as such damages are often the largest portion of
awards against media.

2

V.

- Independent contractors and free lancers should be covered under the
policy for alleged wrongful acts committed in the scope of their work for
you.
- Examine the policy provisions relating to selection of counsel, especially
if using your regular media attorney to defend claims against you and
your organization is important to you.
- Examine the policy exclusions and definitions carefully. Sometimes
they take away or limit coverage provided in the insuring agreements.
- Coverage should extend to your Internet and on-line media activities and
the policy territory should be anywhere claims are brought and wrongful
media activities are conducted.
- In the policy conditions examine the settlement provisions to see if
coverage is limited in any way if you refuse a settlement offer the
insurer wants to accept.
- The policy conditions should also provide that coverage is not
prejudiced by failure to reveal a confidential source and should give the
insured sole discretion over whether to retract or clarify content.
- A variety of endorsements are available for most media liability
policies that extend the base coverage or add on additional coverage
in return for additional premium. Among these endorsements are ones
that provide coverage for network security/privacy breaches, subpoena
defense expense and distributors of your content, on an additional
insured basis. Your broker can help you decide which endorsements to
request from media insurers.
Media Liability Coverage for Individuals and Organizations
- Insurers will consider providing coverages to all sorts of media entities
and individuals working as journalists or media professionals.
- Individuals sometimes have difficulty meeting financial
requirements and minimum premiums necessary to obtain a media
liability policy, but are often covered under a media entity’s policy as
an employee or independent contractor.
- Individuals can also sometimes obtain media policies made available
through associations of writers, journalists or media professionals.
Insurers can often offer coverage at lower premiums to members of
such associations because of the critical mass the membership as a
whole creates.
- Insurers will consider non-profit organizations as well as for-profits, and
non-profits have been insureds on many media liability policies.

About CNA: Serving the business community since 1897, CNA is the seventh largest
commercial insurance underwriter in the U.S. and currently insures more than one million
businesses and professionals throughout the world CNA's involvement in insuring
media risks dates back to 1979. Today CNA provides media liability protection and
related technology and specialty insurance products to a variety of risks .

3

4

