Tipsheet #3437

Pretrial Justice Institute:
•
•
•

Founded in 1977.
PJI is the nation’s only non‐profit dedicated to ensuring pretrial decision
making for safe communities.
PJI’s mission is to advocate nationwide for fair and effective pretrial practices
that eliminate inappropriate detention, optimize diversion from prosecution,
and maintain community safety.
o PJI accomplishes this mission by facilitating research that drives
evidence‐based practices, assisting state and local governments in
improving their pretrial policies, and provides technical assistance to
elevate local pretrial practice.

“Better Court Coverage with a Focus on Bail Reform”:
•

•
•
•
•

•

Over the past 20 years our nation’s courts have used money bond in a higher
percentage of cases than ever before and have set higher bond amounts. This
has not been the result of increased crime but has occurred despite falling
crime rates. As a result, fewer arrestees are released pending trial even
though over half of them will never be sentenced to incarceration.
The jail population since the late 1990s has been increasing as a result.
Since the late 1990s 2/3rd of the jail population are awaiting trail (considered
the pretrial population).
When money bond is ordered less than half can post the amount required.
The result is a jail population that is essentially poor rather than essentially
dangerous.
Money bond does nothing – either by design or intent ‐ to address
community safety. In fact, there are numerous examples of gang members
committing crimes to raise bail for one of their members and of defendants
using the proceeds of crime to pay their bail costs.
Bail Reform calls for the courts to base release decisions upon risk, rather
than cash. Evidence‐based risk assessments allow courts to assign
appropriate supervision and monitoring restrictions to those who can safely
be released, while detaining, without bail, those who pose an unmanageable
risk to the community.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

