Tipsheet #3439

Mark Caramanica
FOI Director, The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
1101 Wilson Blvd, Suite 1100
Arlington, VA 22209
(703) 807-2100
mcaramanica@rcfp.org
www.rcfp.org
FOIA Tip Sheet
1. File FOIAs months (even years) before you expect to start on a project. Federal FOIA
requires agencies to respond to records requests within 20 days but in practice that
deadline is almost never met. Anticipate long delays and plan accordingly.
2. Use certified mail if making requests by mail. Email and fax may help speed your
request along. Keep detailed records of every step of the process in a spreadsheet for
every request you make. Include the following information in your spreadsheet: (1) when
the request was made; (2) what was requested; (3) who the request was sent to; (4) when
the agency must legally respond; (5) records of all communications (letters, telephone
conversations, e-mails, etc…) subsequent to filing the request including who you
communicated with and what was covered. In subsequent communications, make clear
that you are not altering your original request unless you clearly intend to do so.
3. As a member of the media, ALWAYS request a fee waiver and expedited review. The
Reporters Committee FOIA letter generator contains all the necessary key phrases to
make such requests. Find it at http://www.rcfp.org/foia/
4. Think about the kind of documents that would be important to your story. Do your
research before sending a request. Know what documents you want and where they may
be held beforehand. Give the FOIA officer enough information about the records you are
requesting so they can be retrieved quickly. Do not let your request be denied because it
is vague or overly broad to an absurd extent. However, a broader request than what is
necessary is not per se bad and can be used strategically. It can give you some room to
negotiate a narrower request later and makes you appear reasonable.
5. Know your beat. Get to know the FOIA officers and the agency practices on your
beat. Ask if it would be possible to “shadow” them to learn what records are kept by the
agency, how they are indexed and stored and how FOIA requests are processed. Do not
assume an adversarial posture. You can be persistent with your demands but always treat
them with respect. Understand that FOIA offices are often understaffed.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

6. If you are not eligible for a fee waiver, do not automatically accept an agency’s
estimated cost of complying with your request. Before going forward with processing,
request that the agency break down and itemize the figure if it seems too high. Consider
reviewing the documents in person to save on copy fees or bringing your own copy
equipment to the agency. To that end, always state in your request letter the maximum
you would be willing to pay for your request and that the agency should contact you
before processing if the estimated costs exceed your maximum.
7. Make FOIA a regular part of your reporting so that you can stay on top of developing
stories. Any records that are routinely produced such as budgets, calendars,
annual/monthly reports, etc… should be routinely requested.
8. Note that agency’s are empowered to make discretionary disclosures even if the
materials requested are technically exempt from FOIA. Urge the agency to refrain from
redaction and/or nondisclosure. Cite President Obama’s and Attorney General Holder’s
directives on open government calling for broad disclosures and presumptions of
openness. Find them here:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/TransparencyandOpenGovernment/
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/FreedomofInformationAct/
http://www.justice.gov/ag/foia-memo-march2009.pdf
Some FOIA Resources
1) The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press: http://www.rcfp.org/foia/
The RCFP website contains a wealth of material on access to government records and
meetings including: (1) publications regarding how to navigate the federal FOIA and
laws restricting access; (2) the Open Government Guide, a comprehensive database
comparing numerous facets of open records/meetings laws across the 50 states; and (3)
an automatic FOIA request letter generator.
2) The Art of Access, Strategies for Acquiring Public Records, David Cullier and Charles
Davis, CQ Press.
An instructive guide that goes beyond the legal aspects of access to discuss, among other
things, how to use government records in reporting, strategies for interacting with
government officials and how to discover what information the government collects and
how it is maintained.
3) National Freedom of Information Coalition: http:www.nfoic.org
4) U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Information Policy FOIA materials:
http://www.justice.gov/oip/oip.html

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

5) Government Attic: http://governmentattic.org/
Tremendous archive of government documents released under FOIA that are freely
accessible to the public
6) GWU National Security Archive: http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
Publishes declassified documents obtained under FOIA
7) The Sunshine in Government Initiative: http://www.sunshineingovernment.org/
A coalition of media groups (AP, AAN, ASNE, NAA, NAB, NNA, RCFP, RTNDA,
SPJ) dedicated to promoting openness in government.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

