Quick shortcut for using PDFTOTEXT
Chris Milholland
San Diego State University

On some computers it is possible to skip the command window entirely, saving yourself
the time and frustration of typing in the line-item code each time you want to convert a
new .PDF document.
Make It Easier and Faster!
First the XPDF program must be installed on the computer (extracted to a folder on the
hard drive). Within that folder, there are many different files.
Find the file named PDFTOTEXT. There should be two files with that name, one is a
.TXT or text file, and one is a .EXE file or an application. The .TXT file is the user’s
manual and provides brief explanations for each of the commands. The one we want is
the application (.EXE).

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Once the PDFTOTEXT application is selected, it’s time to create a new shortcut to the
program. You can either right-click on the file and select CREATE NEW SHORTCUT,
or go up to the top of the screen and select FILE > CREATE NEW SHORTCUT. Both
methods will work.

Depending on how temperamental your computer is, it may or may not let you create a
shortcut within this particular folder. If this is the case, just tell your computer that is it
ok to put the new shortcut on the desktop or wherever (as long as you know where the
new shortcut will be placed and can get to it in just a moment).
Now select the new shortcut and again either right-click on it or go up to the FILE menu
and this time select PROPERTIES. A screen similar to this should appear:

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Now comes the part where we are telling the program what function we want it to
perform on our documents, but without having to open up the command prompt and go
through it line-by-line for each new PDF.
In the TARGET line, after the last character enter a SPACE then -LAYOUT.
Sometimes there will be “ “ quotation marks around the target, add the SPACE and the
-LAYOUT outside of the quotes. If there are no quotes, you shouldn’t need to add them.
It should look something like this:

The first part may be different (the location of your XPDF folder), what is important is
that the PDFTOTEXT.exe and the -LAYOUT are there.
You can now click APPLY and then OK and are nearly ready to convert PDF’s to
importable text files at lightning speed.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

One last step to make life easier is to RENAME your new shortcut as something that you
can easily recognize. This new shortcut can be left in the XPDF folder or placed on the
desktop for even easier access.
Now all you need to do to convert a PDF document into a text file is to drag your PDF
over the new shortcut and let go of the mouse button. The converted text file should
appear in whatever location (folder) that the original is in. It will have the same name as
the original PDF but will end in .TXT.
Some files may take longer to convert than others, so don‘t get frustrated if the text file
doesn’t appear right away (especially large PDF files may take up to several minutes).

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

