Tipsheet #3441

Close To Home: Great stories begin with local reporting.
IRE Watchdog Workshop | San Francisco, CA | September 25, 2010
Ryan Gabrielson; Staff Reporter
California Watch at the Center for Investigative Reporting
rgabrielson@californiawatch.org
510.809.3176 (office); 480.223.3283 (cell)
Local reporting is often stigmatized as a numbing procession of planning and zoning meetings, “not
in my backyard” protests and feel good articles about people living on a particular block that the
newspaper or station deems critical this week. Get past that notion. The term “local” limits only the
geography you look at first, not the subject matter of your reporting. And knowing where to start
can do more to empower you as a reporter than to minimize your scope.
Too often we cover local governments, businesses and people through processes. But when you
take people and issues out of the procession of meetings, bigger and more important stories
emerge. Most great news investigations spring from beat coverage, in which a reporter who knows
what she’s looking at comes across something that doesn’t seem quite right. Bring an investigative
mindset to your day‐to‐day reporting.
Start doing interviews with people that aren’t tied to a daily deadline. You’ll be less focused on
getting a quote (or sound bite) and the source will likely be more inclined to reveal things you
wouldn’t think to ask about.

A trail of paper (or pixels): The records and data you need.

I) Government agencies are good at spending money and there are great stories in the details. Get
an electronic log of active contracts for the agencies on your beat to find out where taxpayer cash
goes. Use state business filings (from corporation commissions, secretary of state offices) to see
what individuals are standing behind the corporate names. Then pull financial disclosure forms
filed by the relevant elected officials to check for links between public servants and private benefit.
II) Find out how much money they make. Make it an annual habit to get salary data for all top
officials in the agencies you cover. But don’t stop there. File records requests for documents
detailing all forms of compensations that government agencies provide to employees, like special
service contracts for side jobs that tap into dollars that few pay attention to.
III) Internal audits are supposed to raise alarm bells for government leaders if there are problems
in particular agencies. Read the full audit reports, of course, but also get the auditor’s working
papers and correspondence, because the final reports tend to omit illuminating details. Plus,
those internal documents often include information that isn’t necessarily in public documents.
IV) Regularly request top officials’ calendars and emails to find out who is saying what to whom,
and when.
V) Nonprofits aren’t always charities. Many operate as businesses and, increasingly, particular
species of nonprofits serve political purposes or are taking on public responsibilities once provided
by government workers. Look at Forms 990 (a tax record submitted by nonprofits to the IRS) for
ties between the officials you cover and nonprofits that work in the area.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Blazed trails: Examples to draw from.

I) “Seniors for Sale”; The Seattle Times
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/seniorsforsale/
An ongoing series examining adult family homes, where seniors are exposed to neglect and abuse
that in hundreds of cases likely led to death, all while Washington state officials look the other way.
II) “Cashing in on Kids”; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
http://www.jsonline.com/watchdog/watchdogreports/56121342.html
An expose of the public child‐care system Wisconsin Shares that was being bilked by scam‐artists
for millions of dollars and turned “kids into valuable commodities.”
III) “Bell Salaries”; Los Angeles Times
http://www.latimes.com/news/local/bell/
This story began with a reporter asking the city manager a very simple question. “How much
money do you make?” Now there are near daily revelations about a city government gone rogue,
raising taxes and ordering police to impound cars to generate revenue to pay massive salaries.
IV) “Private school tax credits rife with abuse”; East Valley Tribune
http://www.eastvalleytribune.com/special_reports/rigged_privilege/
A multi‐part series detailing how Arizona’s tax credit for private school tuition was being abused by
wealthy families to send their children to elite schools for free and by executives at scholarship
charities use took taxpayer cash to buy themselves property, cars and to fund outside businesses.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

