CAR for Business Reporting

Tipsheet #3442

Jaimi Dowdell, IRE
Atlanta, GA

Links
Ready Reference
 Wikipedia (for links, sources only)
 Census (esp. Data Finders feature)
 Public records portals
• BRB Publications
• Portico
• Free Public Records Finder (FreePRF)
Directories by and for journalists
 NICAR Net tour
 Reporter’s Desktop by Duff Wilson
 Power Reporting by Bill Dedman
Deep web searches
 Facebook
 Pipl
 123people
 SocialMention
 Whostalkin
 Samepoint
 Icerocket
 PeekYou
Discover who is behind a site
 Domain Tools
 Allwhois
Search the dead web
 Search engine cache (Google, Bing)
 Wayback Machine
 Library of Congress’ archiving project: Mapping the Internet Electronic Resources Virtual Archive
(MINERVA)
 CyberCemetery – sites of defunct government agencies and commissions
Random sites I’m currently finding useful
 Academic Earth – Free lectures and courses online
 Google docs – access your work anywhere and collaborate online
 RSS and feeds - Google Reader to manage feeds
 BugMeNot – Offers solutions for getting into password-protected sites such as newspapers, etc.
 Drop.io – File sharing, moving, collaborating, etc. Audio features included.
 change detection – monitor a site
 Search.twitter.com – advanced search
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Tipsheet #3442






Yahoo site explorer (have to have a yahoo account)
HARO – Help A Reporter Out
HTML to PDF converter
Zamzar - Easy pdf to Excel converter

Finding online

What do they have?
 Ask for the document and/or data retention schedule.
 Missouri, Georgia
 FOIA – Open records logs
 State and federal statutes
 Appendix and footnotes to audits and reports
 Inspectors General
 State auditors
 GAO reports (Government Accountability Office)

Searchable data
A lot of data is already available online; you just need to know where to look. Here is a list of places you
can go, right now, to find searchable databases from government agencies:
 FedStats – Statistics from government agencies.
 Data.gov – “The purpose of Data.gov is to increase public access to high value, machine readable
datasets generated by the Executive Branch of the Federal Government.”
 USASpending.gov – Search and download federal contracts, grants and more.

 OSHA – workplace safety data.
 Fatal Accident Reporting System data (FARS)
 Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA)
 Federal Railroad Administration – Railroad crossing accidents.
 National Agricultural Statistics Service
 Census - American FactFinder quick profiles of states, counties, etc.
 EPA Environment data searches  FAA data (service difficulty reports, on-time data, aircraft registry, etc.) www.faa.gov/data_research/
o Service Difficulty Reports - av-info.faa.gov/sdrx/
o On-time stats - www.transtats.bts.gov/OT_Delay/OT_DelayCause1.asp
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Tipsheet #3442

 Landings (aircraft registry, pilots) www.landings.com/evird.acgi$pass*129569481!mtd*7!map*_landings/images/landingstopbuttons.map?98,11
 Bureau of Transportation Statistics - www.bts.gov/data_and_statistics/
 National Sex Offender Registry - www.nsopw.gov/Core/OffenderSearchCriteria.aspx?Advanced=1
 Bureau of Labor Statistics - http://www.bls.gov/data/
 Recalls (look at tabs for topics)

Aviation for consumers
 Consumer Reports – Download pdf report to find on-time statistics by airport, departure by
time, chronically delayed flights, tarmac delays, mishandled baggage, and more.
 From Bureau of Transportation statistics – Data is downloadable into Excel and includes flight
delays, baggage fees by airline, chronically delayed flights, cancelled flights and more.

Downloadable data
Besides searchable databases, there are plenty of places you can go to download information so you can
analyze it on your own in a spreadsheet or database manager. Here are some places to get this kind of
data (Note: Look for key words on government sites such as: Excel, .xls, download, database, etc.):
 Census data - query and download results factfinder.census.gov/servlet/DatasetMainPageServlet?_lang=en&_ts=262968313843&_ds_name=
ACS_2007_3YR_G00_&_program=
 Census download center - factfinder.census.gov/servlet/DownloadDatasetServlet?_lang=en
 Nursing Home Compare data download from Medicare.gov www.medicare.gov/Download/DownloadDB.asp
 FRA data download - safetydata.fra.dot.gov/OfficeofSafety/publicsite/downloads/downloads.aspx
 MSHA accident and incident data download www.msha.gov/STATS/PART50/p50y2k/p50y2k.HTM
 FBI Uniform Crime Reports download spreadsheets - www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm#cius
 Federal firearms licensees from the ATF - www.atf.gov/statistics/ffl-list.html

Advanced search strategies
You can also use advanced searches in Google to find data. Check out this guide to Google searching with
the advanced form - www.googleguide.com/sharpening_queries.html:
©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

 Search by file type: example – filetype:xls
 Search by domain: example – site:.gov
 Search by url: example – allinurl: ftp

Tipsheet #3442

Some folks have been asking me what the different file extensions mean. Here’s a quick cheat sheet (Note:
If you find an extension that you can’t identify, just google “File extension .xxx” where “xxx” is the
extension):
 Spreadsheet file
o .xls – older versions of Excel
o .xlsx – 2007 version of Excel
o .ods – Open Office Calc
 Database file
o .mdb – older versions of Access
o .accdb – 2007 version of Access
o .dbf - common database file
 Text files
o .txt
o .csv – comma separated value
o .lst – usually a text file containing a list
o .dat – data file
 PDF files - .pdf
 PowerPoint files - .ppt for older versions and .pptx for 2007 version.

Potential databases for business reporting
Data from IRE and the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting. (Contact datalib@ire.org or
573-884-7711 with questions.)

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Tipsheet #3442

Home Mortgage Disclosure Act

HMDA, enacted in 1975, requires all banks, savings
and loans, savings banks and credit unions with
assets of more than $33 million and offices in
metropolitan areas to report mortgage
applications. Use the data to:
 Track subprime loans
 Look for discrimination
 Find changes in your area since the
housing crash
 Look for trends

SBA Disaster Loans
Data contain loans made to businesses and
individuals as disaster assistance. The data
identifies the borrower, the disaster, the
amount and, for business borrowers,
whether the loan was paid in full or deemed
uncollectible. Here are some questions this
data can help you answer:
 Which disasters have hit your
community hardest
 Are there any people/businesses
who’ve received multiple loans?
 What’s the biggest loan?
 How much hasn’t been collected?
 How much won’t be collected?

IRS Tax Exempt Organizations
 Get a list of all of the nonprofits in your
community
 Find the biggest ones
 Find the ones the generate the most
revenue
 Find the ones that generate the least
revenue
 Use this information to investigate
individual nonprofits
 Example – Atlanta spreadsheet
 Get individual 990s from Guidestar or
Foundation Center

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Other data to consider







Tipsheet #3442

Federal Contracts
IRS Migration
NAFTA Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA)
Local contracts
Toxics Release Inventory
Campaign contributions

Get story ideas

Extra!Extra! is IRE’s story blog. I’ve gotten lots of story ideas and examples from this site. Some
categories you might find interesting:








Business
Consumer Safety
Economy
Housing
Nonprofit
Real estate
Workplace

Get advice

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Tipsheet #3442

The NICAR listserv has helped numerous journalists conquer their data questions. I highly recommend
searching the list archives to help answer any questions you might have and signing up for the list itself.

The IRE tipsheet database has hundreds of handouts that professionals have written relating to business
reporting. Search by “business” or any other topic you’re tackling.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

