Tipsheet: 3443

Investigating Local Government by Nigel Jaquiss, Willamette Week
Government is the allocation of money, power and permission. The wealthiest Congressional district in the
U.S. is not Greenwich or Santa Barbara but right next to D.C.
Two rules about sources: first, there are no secrets; second, everybody wants something.
Quote from All The King’s Men, p 191.193
1.

2.

Who are the players? What do they want and how will they try to get it?
a) Public meetings. Don’t be stenographer. Who’s there and why?
b) Official’s calendars and correspondence. Who lobbies them?
c) Gladwell’s connectors
On the government side, who is motivated to talk?
a) Elected officials want one thing: re-election.
b) Chief of staff, mid-level money people, lawyers, lobbyists and union bosses know most
things. Rivals and retirees know the rest.

One rule about documents: there are always more than you might think and they are all helpful in providing
facts, chronology, human sources and in convincing people to talk.
3.

4.

In any investigation, get documents before asking questions.
a) Every agency’s most important document is its budget.
b) Audits, bond offerings and CAFR are also useful
c) Go see the documents where they live
Government is people. People create documents that tell you who they are.

Useful records include statements of economic interest; traffic tickets, lawsuits, police records (name check
everybody of importance), administrative proceedings (such as land use, licensure etc), bankruptcy filings,
tax liens, property records, tort claims, voter registration, UCC filings, Corporation records, OLCC records,
professional licensure, campaign finance records, voters pamphlet statements, building permits, demolition
permits, RFPs, contracts, program audits, emails, phone records, expense accounts. Don’t neglect social
media: Facebook and to a lesser extent Twitter are great sources of information.
5.

6.

The information contained in every day records contains multiple stories and will compel
people who do not want to talk to address your questions and they will support your story
with solidly attributed facts.
Some examples
a) Goldschmidt story: yearbook, police and court records, archives
b) Adams story: reverse directory
c) Governor’s race: property records, demolition permit; DOJ

Your job in covering local government is to explain to readers how resources are being allocated. You
work for your readers, not elected officials or your sources. Do not be a stenographer.

©2010 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

