Tipsheet #3463

CAR Conference 2011
Wendell Cochran, American University, wcochran@investigativereportingworkshop.org Twitter: @wcochran
MaryJo Webster, St. Paul Pioneer Press, mwebster@pioneerpress.com

Data State of Mind:
Approaching story ideas with the mindset that you are going to quantify or measure something, rather
than just getting the facts and all sides of the story. This requires that you analyze some data on your
own, making you less dependent on public officials to give you the straight story and oftentimes giving
you a story that wouldn’t have been possible without the analysis.
The data could be a very simple table with summary information (i.e. total budget figures for each city
department this year compared to last year) or it could be very detailed information (i.e. the city’s
accounting logs with one record for every expenditure).
Some examples:
City of Maplewood was considering a new ordinance that would set prohibitions on where certain sex
offenders could live. The reporter had done the simple story saying they were talking about this. I
suggested that we try to measure what would happen if they instituted such an ordinance. We mapped
out all the locations of the places sex offenders would have to stay a certain distance away from –
schools, parks, churches – and then, using mapping software, determined such a law would essentially
push all sex offenders out of the city altogether. The council dropped the idea at their next meeting.
Former Pioneer Press reporter Jeremy Olson got an email about a federal story on an increase in
children being treated in hospitals in the US for medication overdoses, so he decided to see if that held
true in MN. The first thing he did was pull out several years’ worth of death data (which we have in‐
house) and looked for deaths on poisonings. And he found that it wasn’t primarily children – it was
young adults like Cody Nelson, the lead of his story. And where did he learn about Cody Nelson?? From
the data, of course. From there, he started calling state and federal experts and discovered that this was
a topic that was just starting to hit the radar screens of public health officials. What if he had not gone to
the data first? What if he had simply called state officials? Jeremy thinks he wouldn’t have found this
story.
A few years ago, several cities in the Twin Cities metro started passing ordinances prohibiting smoking in
public places. As more and more cities piled on, the objections from restaurant and bar owners got
louder. We kept writing story after story filled with he said, she said. The restaurant owners complained
this was driving them out of business; the public health advocates claimed it was necessary to protect
the health of waiters and other restaurant staff. So we decided to see if we could measure whether or
not the restaurant owners’ claims were true – were they really losing business? The answer, which we
found through data from the state’s department of revenue, was largely no.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

How do you develop this mindset?
Think of data as people too.
The database you get from a public agency is just like a human source. It can answer questions, raise
questions, point you in the right direction, or even mislead you if you’re not careful in not only how you
ask the question, but also in how you interpret the answer. It can be a tipster or it could be the key
source in your story or it could just offer some background or context.
Define your story ideas as questions, not statements
Instead of saying, I want to do a story about unsafe bridges…say I want to find out what percentage of
bridges in the state are unsafe? This frames your story into something that is quantifiable and helps you
figure out how to get started.
Tune your radar to pick up opportunities to quantify
Some examples to watch for:
• Trend stories that vaguely say something has changed over time or is bigger or different here
versus there. Don’t take generalities, dig for the data.
• When interviewing sources, listen for times when they refer to something that was measured –
when they talk about something increasing or decreasing; when they clearly make it sound like
there was some analysis to get that answer. Ask them, where did you get that? And then,
perhaps, you might also want to ask to get the raw data yourself.
• When you find yourself asking a source to give you summary numbers for a story, stop and think
whether it would be better to get the data that those numbers are based on. For example, if you
are writing a story about how overtime has caused the police department’s budget to go
through the roof… instead of asking the city to give you total figures on overtime this year
versus last year (or some other breakdown), ask yourself if you’d get a better story if you had
data showing how much overtime each employee got? Get as many years of data as possible
• A local government (city, county, state, etc) created a program to do something last year. Can
we find a way to measure whether it has succeeded? Can we compare that to other cities?
• A breaking news story. How often has this occurred in the past?
• IRE’s Extra Extra to find ideas that others have done
• Look at your own past stories and look for missed opportunities – could you go back and do a
deeper or broader look at the topic using data?
• That rumor/myth that is always circulating. Can you figure out whether it’s true? (i.e. a Pioneer
Press reporter used airline data to prove that the holidays are not the busiest time of the year at
Minneapolis‐St Paul International Airport)
Learn what datasets are available on your beat
What is collected and why? How does the government agency use the data? What reports are
generated from it? This will prove useful in a couple ways…first, it might give you more insight into your
beat and second, it might set the stage in case you need some of this data down the road (especially if
the story is time‐sensitive). Find out who keeps it, where they keep it, when it is collected, how is it
stored, etc.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

