Tipsheet #3470

Making HTML Tables
Interactive
Michelle Minkoff, Data Producer, PBSNews.org
Lightning Talks: NICAR 2011

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

What are we talking about?
y We push for openness of public data, so turnabout’s
fair play, let’s make our own data more open
y Posting data online as static HTML is good…, but…
y People like to CLICK (just think of how much fun
popping bubble wrap is!)
y Srsly, searchabale dbs imp so I can find the data pt
that matters to me
y Skip the usual pattern of query>results>details
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

It shouldn’t be this hard!
y But searchable databases require a good amount of
back end and front end work.
y Detail pages are great for organizing many pieces of
info
y If we just want people to literally find their record,
you may not need a db back end
y You can do this within your CMS, if it allows
Javascript
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Get your table ready
y You’ll need a static HTML table
y That looks like:

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Double check that table
y Make sure you:
y Have a <thead> and <tbody> section of that table
y Have end tags for all beginning tags (no <tr> with no
</tr>)
y Give your table an id

y You can use a Google spreadsheet to generate this
HTML table if you like
y Another quick way to make HTML table is
Tableizer: http://tableizer.journalistopia.com/
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Add the secret sauce:
DataTables
y Not the only option – Tablesorter is popular
y I find this one more intuitive

y Used this on a few LAT projects, and also now on
some to-come pieces at PBSNews.org
y Go to the code!

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Include needed libraries

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Make the table pretty

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Allow numeric sorting

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Making the table
interactive

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Looking at a finished
project
y How did we implement all this at LAT?

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Other stuff you should
know
y Don’t do this with more than 1,000 records, or your
site is likely to crash/be obnoxiously slow
y If you’re not sorting by formatted numbers, or
straight text (maybe you’re using a checkbox to sort
on), you may need to write your own sort.
DataTables docs will help.
y Searching tables only kicks in after typing two
letters.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Full walkthrough at:
bit.ly/nicar11datatables
Have fun!
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

