Ready when the story breaks
CAR 2011
MaryJo Webster, St. Paul Pioneer Press
mwebster@pioneerpress.com

There are two ways you can incorporate data into a breaking news story.
1) Get a few pieces of information from an online database lookup (i.e. find out who owns a plane
that just crashed)
2) Analyze raw data using your own software
For either approach, the most important thing you can do now is to get an idea of what’s possible.
• Spend some time researching what’s available in your area and bookmark key websites.
• Get to know the people who “keep” local data that might be useful to you in case you
need to call them.
• Practice working with the online searchable database or downloading and working with
raw data BEFORE you actually need it.
• Look for an “explainer” story that you could do now with the data, that would not only
give you practice with the data, but also result in a story for your news org.
When you’re on deadline, you don’t want to be working with data that you’re not at least a little
familiar with. This is especially true if you’re planning to analyze raw data using your own
software.
There may also be some databases you want to keep in-house (and update at least once a year) if
they are not readily searchable on a website, or if it’s something where you might need all the
records for an analysis.
Plane Crashes:
Find out info on flight origination and destination, takeoff times, etc. on FlightAware (you need
to get on there quickly, though. The free stuff is only for a limited window of time):
http://flightaware.com/

Find out who owns a plane and other details. It works best if you have the tail number (also called
the N number):
http://registry.faa.gov/aircraftinquiry/

Airport-Data.com
http://www.airport-data.com/ (search everything from tail numbers, to airports, to serial numbers, etc)

NTSB Accident Database:
http://www.ntsb.gov/ntsb/query.asp

Landings.com:
Searchable databases of pilots and registered aircraft, and service difficulty reports--SDR’s (note:
the reporting requirements for SDRs are not very comprehensive). http://www.landings.com/
Car accidents:
FARS-Fatality Analysis Reporting System has a query tool that allows you to find summary data
on fatal accidents in your locality, going back a number of years. You can either view the results
online or download to a txt file:

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/ncsa/fars.html

Also check with your state highway patrol — they likely have their own database of accidents.
Commercial trucks and buses:
The U.S. Department of Transportation has a database called SAFER that has information on
interstate trucking and bus companies. You can find out safety records of a trucking company and
more.
http://www.safersys.org/

Vehicle recalls (like the Toyota recall last year):
Download data files of all complaints filed with NHTSA, defect investigations, recalls, and
technical service bulletins (updated regularly).
http://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/downloads/

Bridge Collapse
The National Bridge Inventory database, kept by the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal
Highway Administration has inspection data on all bridges in the U.S. The data is usually a year
or so behind, so it might be worth checking with your state agency that oversees bridges to see if
you can get a more current copy of this same data for your state (we were able to do that easily in
MN). Best way to get the national dataset is from NICAR: http://data.nicar.org/node/2521
Example: When the I-35W bridge collapsed in Minneapolis in Aug. 2007, I obtained the bridge
inspection database from NICAR and was plowing through it within a couple hours after the
collapse occurred (and with a deadline looming in less than 2 hours). That night, I used it solely
for reporting on the most recent inspection results --the fact that it was considered deficient and in
need of repair or replacement. In the days that followed, we generated several stories, including
one that showed there were many other bridges in the area considered in equal or worse shape
than the 35W bridge.
Scandal
• Campaign finance contributions (federal, state, local). Best source for federal level
candidates is the Center for Responsive Politics. You can use one of their search tools or
download a chunk of data, http://www.opensecrets.org/action/data.php
• Government contracts (federal, state, local)
• Government employee salary databases (you will most likely have to request a copy of
these databases from the respective authorities)
Example: Center for Public Integrity cross-matching Enron executives with campaign finance
contribution database to find those who had given large sums to then-President Bush.
Workplace safety:
OSHA’s website allows you to search their inspection database online.
http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html

This would be useful following workplace accidents at local businesses. You can also get the raw
data from the NICAR database library.
Bad Weather

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Storm Events database (kept by NOAA) has data on all kinds of weather events, including
tornadoes, hail, high winds, etc. The NICAR database library also offers the raw data for
purchase.
http://www4.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-win/wwcgi.dll?wwEvent~Storms

Check with your local branch of the National Weather Service to see what they might have. One
in MN keeps an Excel file with all the past tornadoes and details about each one.
Also check with your state climatology office to see what they have. The MN one has data on
precipitation, temperature, etc. on a daily basis going back decades.
National Hurricane Center:http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/
The Hurricane Research division produces ArcView shapefiles after each hurricane with data
points every two kilometers showing maximum sustained winds — great for estimates by
neighborhood or ZIP code.
FEMA: http://www.gismaps.fema.gov/ has all kinds of goodies following a weather disaster.

Flooding
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers maintains levees throughout the U.S. If you live near one or
more of these, would be worth getting inspection records on the levees in your area. Find the
closest Corps office and ask them for inspection records. (The Minnesota office only had PDFs of
the inspections)
A few years ago, the Pioneer Press got FEMA’s list of Minnesota communities participating in
the National Flood Program. (A city must be a participant in this program for its residents to be
eligible for flood insurance). We found a number of communities in flood-prone areas that
weren’t in the program.
Other Examples:
Ford Motor Co. announced it was closing a manufacturing plant in St. Paul. I worked with
another reporter to get the parcel data for the plant and the neighborhood (which is mostly
residential). We used the property values in the surrounding neighborhood to calculate what the
land would be worth if the 122-acre site were simply redeveloped to replicate the surrounding
neighborhood. We turned this story around in a couple of days.
Other data you might use on deadline:
• Census data: to get demographics of a particular city or neighborhood
(http://factfinder2.census.gov/)
• IRS 990 forms: to get basic financial information about a non-profit organization
(http://www2.guidestar.org/)
• Local property records. Most county assessor/appraiser offices have searchable databases
on their websites that allow you to find out who owns a particular piece of property (and
whether they are current on their taxes). I’ve run into some counties that don’t display the
owner’s name, however.
• Felony convictions. If your state has an online searchable database (by name). If not, add
this one to the list of databases you should have in your in-house collection.
• Education data. The National Center for Education Statistics has a “build a table” option
to get a variety of data on schools across the country. http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/bat/. Also check

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

•
•
•

•

with your state department of education to see what they have (MN, for example, puts
Excel files of all their primary data tables online for easy download)
IPEDS has all kinds of data on public universities. Use the “download custom data”
option. http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter/login.aspx
CDC Wonder database. Public health data. http://wonder.cdc.gov/
PACER, federal court records. https://pcl.uscourts.gov/search. Great for finding if someone has
been in federal court for criminal, civil or bankruptcy. There is a cost for pulling up the
actual documents, so you must have an account. (No way to download data in bulk,
unfortunately)
National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) has “estimates” of productrelated injuries treated in hospital emergency rooms (data is a sampling of reports from
ER’s around the country). Use it to give readers some idea of how common injuries are
related to a particular product (i.e. snowmobile, crib, air mattress, cleaning product, nail
guns, etc) http://www.cpsc.gov/library/neiss.html

Databases you might want to have in-house for deadline reporting:
• Birth certificates
• Death certificates
• Voter registration
• Government employee salary databases
• Local campaign finance data (state, county, city)
• Felony convictions

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

