Tipsheet #3481

TimeFlow is a tool created for reporters by Fernanda Viegas and Martin Wattenberg of Flowing Media
Inc. that manages chronologies and timelines. It was envisioned as a way to:
•
•
•

Keep notes on long‐running stories, such as court cases, bankruptcies or police investigations
that often require reminding readers and viewers of the events so far or the history of the case.
Compile disparate material for projects in a way that might help see relationships and events in
a new light.
Organize information for narratives and reconstructions of events.

The key features include the ability to zoom in and out on any period of time, to filter and color code
events, and to edit your notes in‐place or import them from a spreadsheet. It won’t automate your data
entry, but it should help you organize and visualize the notes you’re taking anyway.

Getting started

Looking at raw data

Take a look at the installation instructions on
the TimeFlow github wiki at
http://wiki.github.com/FlowingMedia/TimeFlo
w/download‐and‐install‐timeflow . You can
install this into your own documents folder or
onto a flash drive.

The Deepwater Horizon oil spill
To get started with TimeFlow, open the
Example dataset called “Deepwater Horizon
Spill”, accessed
from the menu
under “Examples”:

Before digging in, take a look at what data is
included in this timeline. Choose the “List” tab
at the top of the main screen:

Your list will be sorted chronologically no
matter what order they were entered in.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Getting oriented on the timeline

First, notice the dates. Unlike other tools, you
can use approximate dates in TimeFlow ‐‐ it
handles and displays dates entered as years,
months, days or date and time.

Switch back to the timeline view using the
controls at the top of the screen. There are four
sections to the timeline along with the main
window:

An entry with both a start and end date is
shown as a span and a start date alone is
represented as
the event date:

There are several types of data in TimeFlow.
The key one is, of course, a date/time value to
place the data on the timeline. A “URL” type
links to source material; a “list” is a small set of
values that might apply to a single record, such
as the people or organizations involved in an
event or subject tags used for colors and
filtering. (Details are covered in the section on
“creating your own timeline”)
You can also view data in the timeline itself.
Anytime you mouse over a point, you see all of
the data for that point:

This timeline defaults to the entire span of the
data, including the 1990 law holding owners
responsible for oil spills.
The small section at the bottom
is one of several ways to
navigate through time. Click on
a year, month or day to zoom in on that period.
Because we’re looking at the BP oil spill, the
first step might be to zoom in 2010.
You might want to zoom in a little further to
just months of April – June 2010. You can do

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

this three ways: drag your mouse around the
points you want to see in the large window

If you zoomed in too far, you can zoom out a
little or all the way using the Zoom control.
Here you can also choose how your timeline is
displayed. “Diagonal” is good for small timelines
like these, since it shows as much text as
possible like a set of stairs:

...or narrow the band on the small navigation
pane on the bottom of
the timeline by clicking
and dragging its edge:
Finally, you can double‐click in an area of the
main timeline window to zoom in on that
period. (It doesn’t work well until you start
narrowing in on a period of interest.)

For larger timelines, this view sometimes makes
you think a pattern exists when it doesn’t. Then,
a “loose” view might be better:

You can scroll through your timeline by
dragging the yellow area in the navigation pane
at the bottom.

Controls in a timeline
There are two areas of controls in the timeline
view. In one, you control how the view is
displayed. In the other, you control the labels,
colors and groupings.

For a very large timeline, you might use the
“graph” view to help you navigate to areas with
a lot of entries.

Look for the most basic controls in the upper
left panel. It changes with each view of your
data (calendar, timeline or graph):

The lower left section of the controls stay the
same no matter what view you have of your
data:

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

the first point in your timeline, in this case the
1990 law holding oil companies responsible for
spills.
Scroll down to a more interesting time:

(Dot size is reserved for data that has number
values in it, such as campaign contributions. In
this case, if we had the size of the oil slick, we
might choose to use it.)
Try playing around with it, envisioning various
stories. In this view, all of the groups have been
removed and we’ve selected the red “BP” actor
to see, in context, what BP had done during the
spill:

The calendar keeps the settings you made on
the timeline, so it is highlighting the BP actions.
Days in which there are no events are grayed
out.
Notice how the options on
the upper left of your
screen have changed. For
large timelines, this view
of the dots will show you
the most. But for small
ones like this, you might
want to see the labels.

All of the points are still visible, but the ones
not selected are grayed out to highlight your
story.

Calendar view
Sometimes looking at a calendar is easier than a
large timeline. When you click on Calendar on
the top navigation menu, it always takes you to

Sometimes you’ll see half a dot, or a dot with
more than one color. That means it’s got more
than one category chosen:

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Practice questions for viewing
timelines and calendars:
1. When did President Obama first visit
the spill site? Where was he the day
before his visit? 1
2. Did BP executives see appear before
Congress before or after oil began
washing ashore?
3. When did the Interior Department’s
Minerals Management Service, or
MMS, propose stricter safety rules on
offshore rigs?
(In each of these questions, zooming in and out,
selecting different actors to highlight in color
and switching between calendar and timeline
views will help you see patterns easily.)

Filtering
Once a timeline grows to more than a few
dozen events, there is simply too much to
digest in one sitting. That is when the tool’s
filtering options come into play.
For this example, we’ll use a different example
dataset: the Obama‐First 100 Days:

This timeline opens up to a slice of the first 100
days, visible on the bottom navigation view:

Zoom out to 100% and take a look at the “global
controls” on the left to get yourself oriented.
You may not have noticed it, but there is
another indicator on the left menu:

This tells you that all of the items in the dataset
are being shown – there is no active filter.
Right now, the data is being shown by the place
of the event – the White House, D.C. or
somewhere else. The most frequent places are
listed first on the list.
To get a different view of the data, try switching
to a view that shows “tags” with no groupings,
then highlight “stimulus”:

1

Note: In early releases of the software, there was
an error in the sample data showing Obama in the
Gulf Coast on Apr. 28. That date is really May 28,
which was corrected in later releases.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Now you have a list of items you can choose
from in the left hand
column:
The color map reminds
you how to read your
timeline.

While there is still way too much to look at, it
becomes easier to see the patterns of the
stimulus bill, which he signed on Feb. 17.
Switch to the “Filter” view using the tab on the
top left:

These tags were made
up as the data was being
typed in. They are not
mutually exclusive – an
entry could both be a
“reversal” from previous
policy AND an “energy”
action.
Let’s first look at how
quickly Obama reversed
policies of the Bush administration, and what
those first actions were:

At first, all you see is an empty search box. But
you can add in any of your categories from the
dataset under the menu item “Filters”:

(If your example looks different, flip back to the
display view and switch it to “Diagonal” on the
upper left panel.)
i
Add “tags”, “who” and “entry type” and
“location” to the filter list by checking them off
on this menu:

It’s pretty simple now to look through the
events that marked a reversal. Now try looking
at the stimulus program:

(You may still have a color highlight shown. If
you do, flip back to the timeline and clear all of
those selections by clicking on them again.)

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

This is much bigger and might need more
filtering. Let’s look just at trips taken to
promote the stimulus:

Editing a timeline
There are several ways to edit your timeline.
The easiest way is on the timeline itself.
To follow this example, clear all of your filters
on the Obama first 100 days’ example from
either the Display or Filter view:

(Note: the counts you see next to each item are
unfiltered counts. In the example above, there
are 22 entries for all trips, not just those for the
stimulus.)
This narrows your view
to just nine items:

You can see that the better you tag your data,
the easier it will be to use later on.

I’ve also
turned off the
grouping and
colors to get a
clean view of
the timeline,
and narrowed
my view to
late January:

Finally, you can do the equivalent of a full‐text
search for keywords or phrases:

To edit, right‐click on a point in the timeline:
Regular expressions (not case sensitive) are also
available, but not documented, in the search
box. In this case, it searches for Michelle, Sasha
or Malia.

You can delete the event, edit it, or add another
on the same day. (If you didn’t select an existing

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

event, you’d just have the opportunity to add
one.)
If you choose “Edit,” you’ll get a form to fill out:

Add fields – the kinds of information you want
to enter, such as a label for the timeline, a long
description or tags, under “Edit,” “Add field”.
Add records – an entry in the timeline – in the
same way, or directly on the timeline or
calendar itself.

Importing
Right now, importing from a spreadsheet
replaces all of the existing data – there isn’t a
way currently to add to your dataset.
In this case, we might want to add people to
this National Prayer service. (If you’ve defined
your data field as a list, the way this one is,
separate items with a comma.)

Importing from a spreadsheet is done two
ways: by copying and pasting, or by saving as a
text (“TSV” or “CSV”) file. Most often, you’ll just
copy and paste.

Adding a lot of events is probably easier from
the calendar view:

One trick in using spreadsheets as your data
entry is to define your date fields as “text”
rather than “General” types. The reason is that
TimeFlow is more forgiving than Excel in its date
formats and the precision it expects, so it can
handle information that can’t be well sorted or
represented on a spreadsheet:

The advantage of using these views over the List
and Table views is that TimeFlow keeps your
place as you edit. On the other views, you will
have to scroll back to where you left off.

Creating a timeline
If you haven’t already typed your information
into a spreadsheet, one way to create a timeline
is to start from scratch. In the menu, choose
File, New from Template, to choose some
existing setups. You will probably use the
template “Events with start and end dates” as
your model.

To get the data into
TimeFlow, select all of your cells and copy. This
data will replace whatever you already have
open, so consider starting a new timeline to
make sure you don’t lose any other work.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Do the same thing with the “tags” field.
Select the text in the import box, then paste:

This data also has a column for the direct link to
stories that acted as the source for the
information. TimeFlow correctly guessed it was
a URL field, but it might not have.

Best practices

Once you import, TimeFlow will guess what
kinds of fields you’ve imported and give you
some basic statistics about them:

There are also a few best practices for reporting
with timelines built into this data. First, there is
a source for each row. This dataset was built
from news reports, so it simply records which
news source and then the link to the story.
There is also a field called “work status”, which
says whether or not the data has been fact‐
checked enough for publication. That way, you
can filter for only information you need to
check, or alternatively only information you feel
comfortable publishing.
It also has an “ID” row number, which helps
when you want to sort in the order you entered
the data. For instance, you may have
accumulated many points from a single
document spread over a long period of time.
This will help you get back to the way you saw it
originally if you have to fact‐check.

We’ll want to change those guesses in some of
these cases. The “actors” are used as tags for
filtering – each row has a list of actors in the
event, and we want them to be split up when
they are imported. Change “text” to “list” when
you want TimeFlow to treat it that way:

Once you’re happy with your decisions, click the
“import this” button.
You may still have to check some default
settings. In this case, the data had fields that
were named “start” and “end,” which TimeFlow
recognizes as the key date fields in your data.
These are the ones that will be used to place
the points on the timeline. But you might have

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

other names, and you might have multiple date
fields.
The fields used for your timeline are
determined under “Edit,” “Set date fields”
menu:

In this case, we need to add the “end” date to
use as the ending period of a span of time:

In this case,
TimeFlow
didn’t
understand
the “Sept”
abbreviation
for Sept. 14,
2009. You can
just fix it in the
List view:
Once it’s fixed, you can erase the entry in the
“unparsed fields” so that you only see the ones
that are still problems.
You can check to make sure none of the dates
are missing by checking the “Summary” tab at
the top right:

Notice, too, that there is at least one record
that didn’t have a good date: it shows that 97
percent of the “start” dates were defined. This
is a good way to check to make sure your data
was complete:
One of the easiest ways to check your data is to
go to the filters, then add the new, “Unparsed
fields” field to your list.

Exporting
You can select all of the non‐missing
“UNPARSED FIELDS” to look at the bad data on
the list view:

Right now, there is no way to print a timeline or
its entries. To get a simple list, use the “File,”
“Export HTML” to get a full listing that can be
printed in Word or another text editor. Export a
“TSV” to import into Excel or another
spreadsheet program. (This stands for “tab‐
separated values,” and will be imported as a
text file in your spreadsheet or database
program.)

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

FAQ
Q: My timeline doesn’t show up. The dates seem
to all be there, but the entries are in 1969.
A: Check the menu item “Set date fields” to
make sure it understands which columns you
want to use as your dates. It should guess, but
sometimes it doesn’t.
Q: Not all of my data got imported. There are
several rows missing.
A: One type of entry is particularly difficult to
parse: those with long narratives that end with
a quotation mark. Go back to your original data
and add a space after the end of the entry.
Q: My “list” fields didn’t separate out. They are
still being shown as one long piece of text.
A: Check your delimiter. It will separate based
on commas.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

