Tipsheet #3491

Importing data using the Microsoft Excel Import Wizard
Garance Burke
The Associated Press
gburke@ap.org

Importing data into Microsoft Excel will enhance your reporting by allowing you to do
original, in-depth analysis on a variety of different types of information. It’s fortunate
that Excel can accommodate multiple data formats so you can do basic or complex sorts,
filters, pivot tables and more. In this lesson you’ll learn about different data formats, how
to identify a format, which ones are Excel-friendly and how to get them into Excel.
In which format do you want your data?
A data file that is already in Excel format will have an extension of .xls (An extension is
the combination of letters after the period in a filename). Someone might ask, “What
format do you want these data in?” Just explain that you are working in Excel and that
you’d like it in .xls format.
Government agencies use many different software programs that store data in their own
proprietary formats. However, these programs can also export data in other commonly
used formats. Below you’ll see some common formats and their extensions. Excel can
work with these formats and – with the help of the import wizard – you can open these
files. Always explain to your data keeper that you are working with Excel and would like
the data in Excel format. If that isn’t possible, ask for the data in any of these Excelfriendly formats and it should be no problem to import them.
.txt
.csv
.dbf
.html
.mdb
.pdf

Text file
Comma-separated value
Database format
Hyper-text mark-up language
Microsoft database (Access file)
Portable Document Format

Getting started:
1. Open Excel. If you have an Excel icon on your desktop, double-click the icon. If
you don’t see an icon, click on the START button in the bottom left corner of the
screen, then PROGRAMS, then find Excel. It may be in a Microsoft Office
folder. A blank spreadsheet should appear and look like the following.

©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

2. Click FILE (top left corner of the screen), drop down to OPEN. An OPEN box will
appear over the blank spreadsheet.

2. Navigate to the file you want to open. If the file doesn’t appear, don’t worry!
Non-Excel files won’t appear unless you change the Files of Type to All Files.
Now you should see your file. Double-click the file you want to open.

2
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Using the Wizard to open a .txt file:
The import wizard has three steps. It will walk you through importing the data. Let’s start
by opening a fixed width .txt file with the Wizard (please select the file called debtfix).

Step 1
The Wizard is intuitive. It has looked at the data and decided it is fixed width. There are
two data types – delimited and fixed width. In a delimited file, little separators called
delimiters chop up the data at different intervals and store it in different fields. A comma
is a common delimiter. A tab or a semi-colon can also be a delimiter. Fixed width files
are a second way data is often structured. In a fixed width file a space is used to tell the
program to create a new field. Here’s what a fixed width file would look like if you tried
to open it in any word processing program.

Start importing: This box allows you to tell the Wizard where to begin importing the
data. Often, a file will have introductory notes at the top. You don’t want to import these

3
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

as they will confuse your analysis. Start your import on the row that contains the headers
or the data. When your data looks good, click NEXT.
Step 2
Here you can set the field widths if the Wizard makes a mistake. Just double-click a line
to remove it and click where you’d like to add one. Often, a fixed width file will come
with instructions, telling you where a field begins and ends. For instance, you can see that
the FIRST NAME field here begins at 16 and ends at 30. Pay close attention to these
instructions! Make sure you check every field, both vertically and horizontally.

Step 3
This step allows you to set the data format. You get four options General, Text, Date
and Do Not Import Column (skip). General means numbers are treated as numbers
and letters as text; Text is data that you won’t be performing math on (words, zip codes,
phone numbers and social security numbers). Date, in six styles (MDY= month, day
year; DMY= day, month, year…) Go through each field and pick a proper format or clip
Do Not Import to skip the field.

4
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Click FINISH

Using the Wizard to Open a .csv file:
Here’s what a .csv file looks like if you try to open it in a word processing program. This
isn’t too useful:

Instead, open Excel, then FILE, then OPEN. Navigate to debtcsv. The intuitive
Wizard has decided that this is a delimited file. That’s right.
Step 1:

5
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Step 2:
Click Next.

Here, the Wizard is wrong. This file is comma-delimited file, not tab. Unclick the tab
box. Click the box next to Comma. Each field also has a text qualifier (‘) so change the
Text Qualifier from “ to ‘.

Step 3:
Repeat the instructions for formatting text (mentioned on page 4). Click FINISH.

6
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Opening an .html file in Excel:

Open Excel, then click File, then click Open. Navigate to your HTML file. Click on it. It
opens instantly in Excel.

Always save, and save again:
Now that you’ve successfully opened your file in Excel, you must save it in Excel format.
Go to FILE, then SAVE AS. In the SAVE box, make sure you select Excel.

7
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

