Tipsheet #3497
BWW: Missoula, Mont.
March 2011

Story ideas and development
IRE Watchdog / Montana 2011
Michael Berens – The Seattle Times
mberens@seattletimes.com

Sure, you’ve mastered key tools of the trade. You’re aggressive. And relentless. But time and
time again you watch in bewilderment as big enterprise stories break around you. Not just good
stories, but the spectacularly juicy kind, the ones overflowing with incriminating statistics and
ironclad documents.
I could have done that story, you tell yourself. If only I had found it first.
Indeed.
The difference between creating a story and following one is often little more than developing a
discerning eye and adopting a strategy. Barring out-of-the-blue sources that drop from some kind
of journalism heaven, we have to find our own stories.
And, you may eventually realize, it’s not enough to know what to do. Anybody can make
telephone calls, file public record requests, do a Google.
The key is in the execution, the intrinsic art of our craft.
Here is a sampling of tips and techniques.
Finding the enterprise story
* Scour agency disciplinary or regulatory reports. Dive into minutia. Scour enforcement actions
– who was fined or discipline? Dissect regulatory rulings – who did something wrong and why?
Be vigilant for the unusual, and be on guard for nuggets of compelling information that may be
unrelated to the actual case. Look for thematic patterns that suggest a broken system. In a recent
enterprise story, I stumbled on a notation that a psychologist, who had sex with a patient, was not
allowed to treat women age 50 and older. So, a 49-year-old woman represented a sexual risk but a
50-year-old woman was fair game? This nugget developed into a three-day series.
* Follow the paper; find the data. Have you ever tracked every document that flows through a
particular state agency, and how information is captured electronically? Guaranteed, you’ll
probably be shocked at the reams of info and data that you never knew existed. And look for
interagency sharing, as well. Lots of key documents are shared among agencies. For instance,
hospitals and nursing homes are required to submit a detailed financial schematic of their
operations to the federal government via the Medicaid Cost Reports. The report can contain
salaries, staffing levels and drug mark-ups. The forms are always on file with the state as well.
Whether you’re tracking fatal traffic accidents, police shootings or prison system contractors,
documents and data flow in multiple directions.
* Review state audits and state inspector general reports. You probably have been doing this for
years. But read them with a fresh eye. A probe on fiscal mismanagement in your human services
agency might include a single notation that, by the way, the agency has failed to track foster child
deaths. Likewise, cruise through federal repositories of reports in search of local nuggets or
themes that can be adapted locally.

* Look-up lawsuits. This is the adjustable wrench of journalism tools. Lawsuits connect us to
moments of conflict, internal documents, exhibits and depositions, and sources of every caliber.
Lawyers are great sources; they are document-based creatures – just like us – and they often

1
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

relish contact with reporters. Routinely pull lawsuits; don’t wait for a big event. Look for
unrelated story nuggets buried within the suit.
* Follow the money. This mantra from the Watergate-era has endured all these years because
it’s true. Demand line-item budgets. Identify contractors and especially sub-contractors. You’re
looking for questionable expenditures to unknown consultants, companies that received huge
contracts that you’ve never heard of before. Another common tactic is to ask for a list of all
lawsuits paid out.

Stage 1 - Research
You have the idea. It’s met the checklist challenge (see previous handout). Now you need to
scrub the idea, pull and twist it to see if it falls apart. Don’t make the mistake of pitching it to an
editor just yet. Many seemingly great story ideas fall into the trash after this phase – at least for
me. An Excel spreadsheet is an excellent organizational tool to keep lists of names, companies,
budget numbers, etc.
* File key public record requests as soon as possible. Don’t jam everything in one giant request.
Segregate items because agencies might withhold access until the entire request is filled.
* Create a timeline in a Word file. It’s a critical time-saving step that brings diverse information
into focus.
* Scour the internet, of course. But hunt in nooks like blogs. Recently, I found executives of
two global companies fighting it out in a blog; it was amazing.
* Somewhere, someone has made your story idea their life’s calling. Guaranteed. Maybe it’s
research held by a Washington think tank, or it could be a housewife with a basement computer.
Someone knows a lot more about your idea than you. Find them. Enlist their help. Ask them to
educate you.
* Check state and federal legislation. Most states offer searchable legislative indexes. Many
legislative committees have reams of information to tap. Plus, learn about who is pushing specific
agendas, who stands to profit or lose, etc.
* Scrub names and organizations through every database you can get your hands on, from
criminal records to real estate holdings. Don’t neglect Secretary of State records to check
businesses. Scrub names of public companies via the Security and Exchange Commission, too.
* Obtain a list of public employees from the state personnel agency. In Ohio, the list includes
the hire date, title, termination date if applicable and reason for termination (death; disciplinary
action; normal retirement etc.) look for the recently retired person with lots of experience; they
make great sources and guides. Also, the list identifies problem employees, which can be fleshed
out with records request for investigative files. Use the list to spot ghost payroll scams as well.
* File a public record request for the agency’s employee directory. Know who is where and
how you can reach them. Also, look for obscure departments and people. What do they do and
why?
* File records request for all databases. You want the raw data (let’s hope you know how to
work with databases, or have a database editor at your paper). Some of the best investigations

2
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

were assembled with a state agency’s own data. And look for federal databases that contain state
data. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration keeps fatal accident data for every
state.
* Get inside the agency, literally. Find ways to see the operation. Insist on meetings at the
agency. Always pick up records at the agency rather than mail. Don’t be afraid to ask for a tour (I
once did this with a state agency and what I saw became the lead of an investigative story). Pick
up the brochures; get the internal newsletter; examine bulletin boards. Get a feel for the place.
Stage 2 – Write a memo
Once you’ve framed the minimum story it’s time to make it official. There are many ways to
write an effective memo. Here’s my method:
* I open the memo with story language – a lead, of sorts – that teases the strength of the themes. I
usually write a 12” overview of the core themes and potential findings. Write with strength but do
not overstate your research.
* The second part of the memo outlines my reporting strategy. Editors need to know that you
have a plan. I typically detail how I’ll pursue the most difficult angles; what kind of travel or
expenses are expected; photo and video possibilities. Basically, it’s an outline of what I know and
what I hope to find.
* Finally, detail how much time you will need.

Troll for stories
Government Accounting Office
www.gao.gov
Federal Inspectors General
http://www.ignet.gov/igs/homepage1.html
Troll for documents
Guidestar – charitable group records
http://www.guidestar.org/
U.S. District Court Records
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/
Just for fun
Wayback Machine
http://web.archive.org/collections/web.html
Reporter’s Desktop
http://www.reporter.org/desktop/
Investigative Reporters and Editors
www.ire.org

3
©2011 - Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

