James Drew, Investigative Team
The Dallas Morning News
jdrew@dallasnews.com 512-370-3818
www.dallasnews.com

2011 IRE National Conference
Orlando, Fla.
“Generating Investigative Story Ideas”

Getting the time so `Time Equals Truth’
If they’re not the most important questions facing investigative journalists today,
they’re certainly near the top. They always have been and always will.
How do you generate investigative story ideas? And when you find some, how do
you decide which ideas are worth investing in? How do you approach your editor to get
time? Finding those answers determines whether you end up with a genuine investigative
story, or something that is a mile wide and an inch deep -- the opposite of watchdog
reporting.
Ideas are everywhere. They arrive in phone calls. They surface at the end of an
interview. They’re buried in committee meetings. They hide when a government official
uses his private cell phone instead of government e-mail. They sit in court records, hiding
in plain sight, sometimes for years.

The first step can’t be skipped – ‘pre-reporting’
The key to sifting through them is found in the art and science of “pre-reporting.” It’s
helpful to set up a system that works best for you, but here’s a checklist that can serve as
a framework.
• What is the motivation of the tipster? Is it “score-settling” that would lead to a
journalistic dead end, or genuine interest in helping to solve a problem? What has
led this person to your doorstep? Do they know more than you about the topic?
Where did they get the tip?
• What is the background of the tipster? It can save a lot of time to background the
person shortly after getting the tip.
• Is the tipster shopping it? If so, are competitors likely to bite and is the story best
handled in a daily? If it’s time-sensitive, could it be a running investigation or will
it require reporting over weeks or months?
• Has the story been done before, or is this a new twist on an old story? The best
stories can’t be googled or found on Lexis. Is the subject anyone’s “sacred cow”?
Does the story run against the grain of conventional wisdom?
• If the tip pans out, has here been an effort to conceal the information in the tip?
How many people know what the tipster knows? Has the topic been covered in a
shallow way by competitors without enough reporters? Is it on a beat that is no
longer covered because of cutbacks or inertia?
• How extensive is the problem? Is it confined to a local government, a region, a
state, or could it have national or even international impact?
• Are there victims and if so, how many? Will they talk? Will they be
photographed? Will they be interviewed on video? The answers likely will shed

•

light on other questions. How big is the potential impact of the story? How much
outrage will result from the story?
Are there records and data? If not, is this a matter of “contested fact, he-said, she
said”?

Wrestling the tip-less story idea to the floor
Although many reporters dread the “tip-less” story idea, some of the best
investigations result from analyzing institutions or powerful individuals who have not
faced scrutiny. This is especially true in “one-party situations,” when there is no credible
opposition and an absence of checks and balances. But if your editor assigns you to
investigate “coal” and you end up with nothing but a lump after your deep dive, you
could imperil the ability of the staff to get the time needed to pursue watchdog stories.
Without a tip, the most important question is whether there are records and data.
• As you wait for records, you become a student of the institution. Why does it
exist? What were the roots of its creation? Who were the players? Why would tax
dollars be used for such a program? How is the system supposed to work? What
are people saying? Is the system not working? Is it turning what should be its
beneficiaries into victims?
• It’s crucial to “find a spark.” A tip can easily be confirmed. A story idea absent a
tip can be a dry well. Records showing that a state investment in a high-tech firm
-- at a time when a Democratic donor to a Republican governor buys stock in that
company – gets you more time. How much do you need? Is there more out there?
As you compare the potential of competing story ideas – based on tips or without
them -- Jeff Leen, assistant managing editor for The Washington Post’s investigations
unit, has offered a formula that is helpful in deciding which ones to pursue. He wrote in
the IRE Journal: “A news story is a break in the daily pattern of mundane events: a
murder, a plane crash, a police shooting. An investigative project is a pattern within those
breaks: a series of murder investigations botched by poor police work, a design defect
causing 737s to crash, several police shootings at unarmed people in cars.”

Attacking the `architecture’ of the story idea
Patterns can be found only through “pre-reporting.” It can be painful, because it can
lead to nothing and you have to quickly walk away. It is the time to attack the
architecture of the story idea before your editor does. Some questions to consider:
• Will your on-the-record sources remain so? Are there any factors that would
motivate sources who have identified problems – financial or otherwise – that
would prevent them from speaking out?
• What is the reliability of your data? Have you run CAR to ground? Are there
flaws?
• What are the chances that the data will change? In other words, how long will it
take you to land the story, and is there any possibility the data could shift and lead
to your story being spiked?
• If there is a big unknown that is part of the story idea – a pattern of wrongdoing
that could be rooted in the conduct of a public official who resigned for reasons

•

•
•
•

that no one believes but can’t be nailed down without great effort -- is there a
“minimum” investigation that an editor will approve? Does it hinge on nailing all
elements of the story? If a story about contract steering doesn’t have a quid pro
quo, don’t hope it’s going to come together. Make sure it’s not a deal-breaker
with your editor before you do any more work.
If a problem has been caused by individuals or institutions exploiting loopholes,
how egregious is that conduct and were those loopholes opened intentionally by
someone? Is that someone in a transcript of an arcane legislative committee
hearing? Did they obscure their efforts in the name of “good government,”
knowing it wouldn’t get on the radar screen of reporters. How could anyone
object if allowing the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation to pursue
“alternative investments” – like rare coins – was wrapped into legislation to allow
the bureau to invest in stocks in the mid-1990s?
As you present your findings to the people you plan to write about, what are they
saying? Is it credible? Does the logic of your story stand up? Are there cracks in
the façade? Put your cards on the table when you got ‘em.
Can you do what Rick Meyer of the Los Angeles Times suggested? “Sum up your
story on the back of a business card. You can write as small as you want, but your
summary must fit the card.”
If you’re in charge of writing the dreaded “day three story,” could your copy be
taken by a legislator and turned into a bill?

How to get the managing editor to say, ‘Yes, do it now.’
How do you know when to start? The best answer is only when you have a good idea
of how it’s going to end.
It’s easy to say that when you pitch your project idea to an editor you have to prove to
them that enough work already has been done to land the story. But that’s how it works
and it involves a great deal of work.
The pitch memo should be written in story form. The best ones get to the point
quickly. They explain why citizens will care. They explain why the story deviates from
how things are supposed to work. They offer evidence and cite sources that will serve as
the underpinning. They often provide historical context. They use the examples of
victims who already have been interviewed to show the depth of the problem. They cite
the law, and whether it’s being broken. They outline the structure of the story or how it
would unfold if it’s a series. They also make it clear why the time and resources should
be provided to pursue the project. When I write story memos, my goal is to craft a three
to four-page document that is good enough for my editor to give to the managing editor
for approval.

