Covering Drug Trafficking and Designer Drugs
Brian Haas
The Tennessean
615-726-8968
bhaas@tennessean.com

IRE National Conference 2011
Orlando, Fla.
Smart Drug Coverage: From Cartels to Pill
Mills

Thanks to surges in cross-border production, the United States is flush with most illegal drugs.
Mexican cartels have been particularly busy over the last five years pumping marijuana, heroin
and methamphetamine production to record levels, according to the U.S. Department of
Justice. And then there are a host of new designer drugs, created by savvy, backroom chemists
that often circumvent local and federal drug laws to provide a dangerous, but legal high.
Here are some tips and resources that can help you uncover trends as they’re emerging.
ILLICIT DRUGS RESOURCES
National Drug Threat Assessment
http://www.justice.gov/ndic/topics/ndtas.htm
This annual report is a wealth of information on major trafficking trends in the United States.
It’s chock full of detailed data on drug production, major trafficking cartels and their networks
and major trafficking corridors. This is mostly useful for national- and regional-level drug
intelligence, but it does a great job of explaining major cartels and their trafficking networks
across the nation.
Drug Abuse Warning Network
https://dawninfo.samhsa.gov/
This system is comprised of emergency room visits from major metropolitan areas and autopsy
data from medical examiners who participate in the program. It doesn’t include every city in
the United States, but it provides a reasonable baseline for drug use and abuse in the country.
Unfortunately, the data is typically about two years behind, making it less useful for identifying
emerging trends, but valuable nonetheless.

Search Warrants
Open record law vary state by state, but search warrants in most states are public record once
they’ve been served. There are no secrets at that point anyway considering that the targets of
the searches receive copies of the warrants. In any event, even if state search warrants are not
open record, federal search warrants are.
The majority of search warrants you read are likely to be small-time dealers peddling dimebags
from their homes. Typically cops will bust a buyer, flip him into a confidential informant and
begin working up the chain to mid-level distributors and producers. But even the big busts
require search warrants, often for communication devices like cell phones in addition to
physical locations. These documents are invaluable in tracking drug distribution in your
community and often refer back to original sources, in this case, a Mexican cartel.
The title page typically includes the suspected crime being investigated and the target, whether
it be a person (in DNA cases), location or storage device (computer or cell phone).

Then you have the narrative page. This is the meat and potatoes where a detective has to
provide the probable cause that would compel a judge to sign off on it. It typically spells out
their entire investigation.

Finally, you have the inventory page, exactly what they seized.

Federal search warrants are pretty similar. Here’s a sample cover sheet.

Other potential resources for covering illicit drugs:


Pull state/local medical examiner data of deaths where drugs are present or drugs were
the cause of death.



Emergency room and drug treatment intake data.



Get to know your street-level narcotics guys, consider doing a ride along on a sting.
Many of these guys live and breathe busting “dopers” and are eager to talk.

SYNTHETIC DRUG RESOURCES

Over the past two years, two main classes of designer drugs have gained traction in large cities
and college campuses: synthetic marijuana and amphetamines that mimic the effects of Ecstasy
or cocaine. Many of these substances are legal because state lawmakers have yet to ban them.
And by the time they tamp down on one, chemists have already changed a molecule or two to
create a completely new legal high.
Often marketed under the guise of “incense”, “bath salts” or “plant food,” they tend to sport
psychedelic packaging, drug references in their names (“Skunk,” “Kush,” etc.) and are only sold
to people over the age of 18 at gas stations, conveniences stores and head shops. To
circumvent federal laws, the packaging typically reads, “Not for human consumption.”
So how do you track these drugs?
State Poison Control Centers
http://www.aapcc.org/dnn/default.aspx
Poison control centers across the U.S. are keeping tabs on these products. There were more
than 2,800 reported cases across the nation in 2010 of people brought to emergency rooms
after ingesting “incense” products, according to the American Association of Poison Control
Centers. As of May 12 this year, there had been more than 2,200 cases of people hospitalized
for ingesting “bath salt” products.
SENTRY Program
http://www.justice.gov/ndic/sentry/
The U.S. Department of Justice’s SENTRY program issues watches and warnings based on
emerging trends in designer drugs. It appears to be updated regularly with intelligence from law
enforcement agencies across the nation and includes a map showing regional trends. Already,
they’re tracking what may be the next trend in designer drugs, a psychedelic chemical called
2C-E, or “Europa”, that is already being blamed for at least one death in Minnesota and the
sickening of nearly a dozen others (http://www.justice.gov/ndic/pubs44/44285/sw0010p.pdf).

