Ten steps for building and maintaining a watchdog culture
Greg Borowski, senior editor/projects and investigations
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
gborowski@journalsentinel.com (414)224-2252
www.jsonline.com/watchdog

2011 IRE conference
Orlando, Fla.
Session: “Building a
watchdog culture”

In times of tight budgets and increased online demands, watchdog journalism is more important
than ever. But how do you do it in practice? This tip sheet is aimed at managers who make the
day to day decisions that ultimately determine the success or failure of watchdog efforts.
1. Know your newsroom: Do an audit of your priorities and resources. Are you focused on kickbutt breaking news or longer-range enterprise stories? What is the highest area of interest for
your readers, what’s your bread and butter? This will help you identify areas to build on – but also
what to scale back. The time needed for better watchdog reporting has to come from somewhere.
2. Know your people: Identify those on the staff who have data base skills, a knack for digging,
an appetite for watchdog work. You need a core group to build on. If you don’t have these skills in
your newsroom, get them – through training or strategically as new hires are made.
3. Set the tone: Make it clear watchdog reporting is a priority and that everyone in the newsroom
can – and should – do it. Take time in news meetings to focus on stories with watchdog potential.
When making the rounds in the newsroom, ask about investigative efforts – FOIA requests, data
base analysis – not just what’s for the paper tomorrow. Take an interest early. Maintain it.
4. Open the doors: Even if you have a designated watchdog team, that’s not enough to sustain
an effort. Good ideas come from all corners of the newsroom and reporters need to know if they
have a good idea, they will get to pursue it. If they are inexperienced with watchdog reporting,
provide extra support – or, better, a partner to help them. Spread the resources you do have.
5. Take chances (but measured ones): The temptation is to go for the home-run each time out
… and it may be there on any given story. But doubles and triples are great, too. Before investing
major time, do some initial spadework. If a “gotcha” tip doesn’t pan out, is there a good “at least”
story you’ll get along the way. Also, consider rolling out major investigations in pieces over time. It
can be more manageable, builds interest and increases reader reaction.
6. Work as a team: At times, watchdog reporting can be a long, slow slog. Don’t let reporters get
into the tunnel by themselves. Hold group meetings to vet ideas and brainstorm. When news
breaks, look for investigative angles and divvy them up. Keep candy in your office drawer.
7. Make tough choices: You told the staff watchdog reporting was important. Now prove it. It
may mean items sometimes become briefs instead of full-fledged stories. It may mean dropping
stories all together. It may mean identifying people to back up beat reporters on daily coverage.
Walk the walk. If you don’t, reporters will see through it. They are watchdogs, after all.
8. Seek a balanced diet: Watchdog reporting is more than just the blockbuster six-month
investigation. From daily stories with an accountability edge to mid-range enterprise to searchable
data bases online, build it into all that you do. Make it part of the newsroom’s DNA.
9. Recognize success: Highlight examples of good work, so others know what to strive for.
Good stories breed good stories because people see similar angles on their beat or are simply
motivated to match it. Every time a new reporter succeeds, your watchdog capacity grows.
10. Tell the world (or at least your readers): Label the watchdog stories, create a tip line, an
email account, a corner of your web page. These steps help build the brand. They also can lead
to more tips and are a visible sign to the public that you’re open for business.

