How to investigate gun dealers
IRE Conference 2011 Orlando
Ben Poston and John Diedrich
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
bposton@journalsentinel.com

Documents
ATF’s Firearms Qualification Reports – you can FOIA these from the agency,
but they will likely be heavily redacted. Still, it will show who the FFL applicant
is and if they have any relationship to the current owner of the store.
ATF Firearms Inspection Reports – same redaction headache.
Your state Department of Financial Institutions (or equivalent) – to find out
who the registered agent is for the gun business.
Local zoning/building inspection records and any police reports to that address
to see who listed as the responsible person for that business. Business leases and
other business documents, which may be included in ATF files or from local
government body.
State civil lawsuits - check state files for any disputes between owners or
judgments filed against the business for leads on owners and ownership.
Federal court records – federal laws allow revocations to be appealed into
district court. In such cases, clean copies of ATF files may be included. These
may be on www.pacer.gov or in physical file. The file may even include parts of
the FFL’s acquisition and disposition book (showing all guns in and out of store)
or Firearms Transaction Records, called 4473’s, showing purchaser information.

Data
ATF Adverse Action Database – this will show all gun dealers recommended for
revocation or denial of renewal. From this you can determine how long it took
the agency to shut down a gun dealer near you and also shows every stage of
activity. This took us months to acquire and then more time to find someone at

ATF who understood the data and who would send us the record layout with
explanations of fields and terms.
Current Federal Firearm License Database – posted publicly on the ATF
Website as an Excel spreadsheet. This shows basic information about each gun
dealer such as licensee name, address, phone number and a unique ID number.
Revoked gun dealer Database – was posted publicly last year, but now reporters
probably need to submit a FOIA to get a copy. We got this in a PDF format and
had to convert to text, then to Excel.

