Managers: Bulletproofing the story
IRE National Conference, Orlando, Fla., June 10
Blake Morrison, Investigations Editor, USA Today,
bmorrison@usatoday.com, 703-854-3487
Joel Engelhardt, Investigative Team Editor,
The Palm Beach Post, jengelhardt@pbpost.com, 561-820-4732
Rose Ciotta, Deputy City Editor, The Philadelphia Inquirer,
rciotta@phillynews.com, 215-854-5024

At the start: Beginning a project
*Define the thesis/premise: What's the “best case scenario” and what's your fall
back?
*Define proof: What will it take to nail the story? Stay true to highest standards
whether in sourcing or documentation
*Create your own trail: Build a database of your reporting and research; update
and index often. From the onset, use DocumentCloud, Google Desktop or other
tools to track what you collect. You'll end up discovering information you may
have overlooked
*Play Devil’s Advocate: As an editor your role is to support the reporter(s) but
also to test and/or adapt the premise or thesis. Is the reporting taking the story
elsewhere? You need to maintain perspective and behave with two minds — the
Encourager and the Skeptic
*Test premise at the outset: Don’t be afraid to approach those with the most at
stake to ask whether what you think what you’re seeing seems reasonable or is
supported by what they know. Do early interviews with the story subject to
establish a baseline response
*Data first: Be sure that data analysis occurs as early as possible so it can shape
the rest of the reporting

Digging in: The middle phase
* If a reporter says he loves you, check it out: Meet regularly with reporters, ask
questions and take notes. It’s not like you want to poke holes in the story, but if
you don’t, readers will. Or worse, lawyers. Good reporters will be able to answer
technical questions and have the documents to back their answers up. That’s good,
because when you get the story lawyered, the lawyer is going to be demanding the
back-up.
*Electronic tools do no harm: Implore your reporters to put details into a
spreadsheet and to keep their notes organized. Chronologies are a great way to
track complicated information and changes dating back years.
*Don’t be hands off: Editors don’t want to get in the way but they need to know
more than cursory details to assure that errors do not creep into copy. On important
projects, editors need to acquaint themselves with key documents, database
methods, interviews of key players and how the findings came together. Review
sources, particularly anonymous ones.
*Lawsuit waiting to happen: Think of every person in the story as a potential
lawsuit. Even peripheral characters can believe themselves defamed so they must
be treated with the same care as protagonists.
*Don’t fear the lawyer: Spending money upfront to review stories for defamation
and libel is a lot cheaper than going to court to fight defamation and libel.
*Building the team: Bring in graphics, online, video, photographers as early as
possible. Their questions and contributions can help shape the findings.
*Double check data and then double check data again: Go back to the original
tables to redo the queries for data findings. Check methodology with experts. Do
different queries to spot problems with the data. If findings are too good to be true,
they probably are.

Final: Bringing the project home
*Testing for proof: Do the facts support the master narrative? If not, be prepared
to pivot to where the story really is
*Coordinating text with graphics, online, video, photos: Enlist a copy editor
skilled in complicated subjects to handle all of the stories; Edit videos to cut out
those not central to your story; Coordinate what appears in social media
*Share findings: Be sure that confrontational interviews are done as early as
possible with time to fully present findings
*Making time: Insist on a line by line fact-checking system for each piece of the
story. Insure the process has sufficient time to double check names, titles, details,
facts. Assemble the team to review proofs. It’s amazing what you catch once story
is laid out with photos and graphics. Make sure you have time to make changes.
*One more try: Even when the subject has turned down repeated requests for
interviews, urge reporters to try again. Take written responses to questions if that is
all that is offered. Review questions for bias. If all fails, send certified letter that
lays out findings and make one last interview request
*Loaded language: Watch out for words that say more than you intended. Can
you defend it? Check display type
*Avoid editing in errors: Reporters need to see what’s been changed and to
rewrite, if needed
*Not there: Tell readers what you don’t know

