Examining Public Authorities and Local Development Corporations
Orlando IRE Conference, June 2011
Panel: “Uncovering Waste and Abuse in Local Government and Public Authorities”
David Andreatta
Rochester Democrat and Chronicle
585-258-2419
dandreat@democratandchronicle.com
Public authorities and other independent, limited-purpose units of local government, like local
development corporations, touch virtually every aspect of our lives. They supply electricity and water,
finance constructions of roads and schools, and manage public facilities like airports, housing for the poor
and waste collection. They are the fastest growing form of government in the country but remain the least
accountable, despite numerous reform efforts.
They are created by state or local governments to, among other things, “lessen the burden of
government,” and are run by boards of appointees whose loyalty often lies with the political officials who
appointed them.
Delving into one of these agencies can be daunting because their bureaucracies are complex and
their boards shun scrutiny. But those attributes coupled with the importance of the functions these
independent units of government serve make them fertile ground for stories with legs.
Here are a few tips to help you get acquainted with these entities and some advice on what to look
for when covering them:
1) Budgets, annual reports and meeting minutes: These documents are a roadmap for the
agency’s priorities. The financials reveal spending trends, while the minutes can provide valuable insight
into how vigorously boards of directors debate policy decisions. If the minutes are poorly detailed, ask
whether there is a video or audio recording available to you. (Be wary of boards that consistently speak
with one voice. While repeated unanimous votes suggest agency efficiency, they can also be an indication
that there is little independent judgment being exercised by board members.)
2) Internal policy manuals: Most agencies have over the years developed their own policies to
guide their business related to procurement, travel, ethics, investments, etc. that go above and beyond what
is outlined in their bylaws or the enabling legislation that created them. The policies are also written in
language that is much easier to follow than legislative mumbo jumbo. (Having a grasp of an organization’s
internal policies is essential to knowing what precise records may be available to you under open records
laws. For example, an internal policy on business travel should outline the process an employee would
follow to be reimbursed for travel expenses. Read it and you’ll know what to ask for.)
3) Know the board members, and what and who they know: Compile a list of board members
and create a bio for each of them. Some agencies offer board member bios on their websites that are filled
with fluff about their professional and civic lives. Dig deeper. Are they paid or unpaid? If they are business
owners, do their companies have contracts with the agency or the local government the agency is meant to
serve? Search land records in your county clerk’s office to see what property they own. Remember, in
almost all cases board members are appointed by a public official. How are the public official and the board
member connected? Check local and state elections filings for campaign donations. (You may never report
this information, but learning it will help you understand the motivation of board members. Many say they
are compelled by civic duty to serve. Altruism may be a factor, but it is usually not the only one.)
4) Expense reports and calendars: Where and when are agency employees and board members
traveling? Who are they entertaining? How are they entertaining? Who’s footing the bill? Are the expenses
appropriate? Agencies will typically pay for or reimburse employees and board members for businessrelated expenses. Employees and board members may be required to provide receipts for reimbursement or
have access to an agency credit card that will reveal expenditures. See Tip 2 to help guide you on what to
ask for. (Credit card statements for the Airport Authority in Rochester, N.Y., revealed that the executive
director spent tens of thousands of dollars on cigars that he claimed as business expenses.)
5) Bond offering statements: Many of these agencies issue bonds as a way to finance a project.
Bond issuances are accompanied by an offering statement that is loaded with information, including
detailed descriptions of the project, feasibility studies, contractors and conflicts of interest and “related
parties.” Borrowers are prohibited by law from misleading investors, so offering statements are a great way
to get the full picture of a project.

6) Search your state’s charities office: Many local development corporations are formed to
operate for “charitable purposes” under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. That means they
may be required to file paperwork with the state’s charities section. California, Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania and Washington are
some states with active charities sections that are stand-alone offices or part of another agency, like the
Department of State or Attorney General. These offices should keep incorporation papers, bylaws, tax
filings (if applicable), annual financial statements, meeting minutes and other pertinent documents.
Some agencies create related nonprofit corporations to limit their liability on certain projects (and
thus create another layer of bureaucracy for you to navigate). Housing Authorities, for example, often set
up related corporations that may be overseen by a board that is distinct from that of the authority.
Guidestar.org and Foundationcenter.org are also great resources to locate Form 990 tax filings for
nonprofits.
7) State auditor reports: Every state has a comptroller or auditor general who has the power to
audit public authorities. Their jurisdiction over local development corporations is less clear. If audits are
available, get them. They provide insight into internal control weaknesses that may or may not have been
addressed.
8) Review RFPs, bid documents, contracts and tabulation reports: Public authorities are
subject to public procurement laws that require certain contracts to be bid competitively. Local
development corporations, in many states, are not. The first step of competitive bidding is the issuance of a
request for proposal (or RFP), in which the agency invites prospective vendors to bid on a job. Issuing an
RFP often does not require approval by the board, so reviewing RFPs frequently can give you a sense of
what the agency is planning. (ie: Your local transit authority might issue an RFP for surveillance cameras
for buses, even before the concept has been discussed in a public meeting of the board.)
Once the RFP has been issued, companies will bid on the job by submitting bid documents that
state why they are the best qualified for the job and at what price they can perform the work.
When an agency receives multiple bids, it will evaluate which best suits its needs. A committee
will weigh each bid against the other and establish criteria that they want the bidders to meet. The result
will be a tabulation report that will show how the companies stack up to each other. Review these
documents carefully. Did the agency give more weight to local vendors? Did the lowest bidder get the job?
Agencies are not always obligated to select the low bidder, but if they don’t, find out why.
There are also many contracts that are never bid out because they fall under a certain dollar
threshold. Dig into these agreements to see whether the same vendor repeatedly gets work. There may be
some favoritism taking place.
Take special care to look at contracts that generate revenue for the agency. Agencies that manage
public facilities, like bus depots or airports, will have advertising, kiosks, and other services for the public
that require the vendors to pay the agency for space. Are they paying up? If not, why not?
8) Stay skeptical: Just because actions taken by an agency’s board or employees are reported
accurately in public records, and board members and employees defend those decisions vigorously, it does
not mean they are legitimate or not worth reporting. Don’t be bullied by the board. If you discover an
oddity (like charging cigars as business expenses) ask yourself: Does this make sense? Bounce your
findings off colleagues and editors to get a consensus. If after careful reporting something appears awry, it
will likely appear out of sorts to the public and you’ll have yourself a story.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
New York State Authorities Budget Office: New York, which has a long history with public
authorities, appears to be the only state with its own agency dedicated to monitoring public authorities. The
work of the New York State Authorities Budget Office will not apply to authorities and local development
corporations in other states, but reviewing its reports on various authorities will give you ideas of what to
look for inside authorities in your region. Visit the website at abo.state.ny.us.
Public Authorities Information Clearinghouse: Operated by the Government Law Center at
Albany Law School in New York, the clearinghouse provides information and analysis concerning the
practices of public authorities, mostly in New York. But the operation is working to catalogue information
relating to public authorities nationwide and internationally. Visit the website at publicauthority.org.
“Shadow Government: The Hidden World of Public Authorities,” By Donald Axelrod
(published 1992) and “The Machinery of Greed: Public Authority Abuse and What to Do About It,”
By Diana B. Henriques (published 1986). Despite being dated, the principles in these books are in many
ways still relevant today. They are both available through Amazon.

