Is your driveway covered with toxic waste?

Tipsheet for IRE 2011, Orlando
Robert McClure, InvestigateWest, rmcclure@invw.org/ 206‐718‐0340

For several decades, an industrial waste known as coal tar has been used in one of two major forms of
asphalt sealants used in the U.S. Coal tar – pretty much the same stuff as creosote – is a waste product
of the coking of coal, which is part of the steelmaking process. It is loaded with a class of chemicals
known as Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons, or PAHs.
Some of these chemicals are known carcinogens. Coal tar itself has been known to be carcinogenic since
the 1700s, when London chimney sweeps were observed to contract scrotal cancer in large numbers.
Studies by the U.S. Geological Survey have shown that the toxics in coal tar‐based asphalt sealants not
only do not stay put, gurgling away in rainwater runoff into nearby streams, but also that their toxic
components are getting into house dust as levels that concern government researchers. More research
is emerging that backs the USGS work, although industry alleges the science is not settled. (Surprise!)
The other form of asphalt sealant, which is asphalt‐based, has been shown to shed only tiny amounts of
toxics in comparison to coal tar‐based products. By comparison, in some cases the toxics turned up on
driveways sealed with the coal tar‐based products at levels that would require cleanup by moon‐suited
environmental technicians if discovered at a Superfund site.
Until the state of Washington banned these products last month, they were available in all 50 states.
Lowes and Home Depot have stopped carrying the coal tar‐based sealants, though they remain available
through smaller retailers. The coal tar‐based products have historically been more prevalent east of the
Rocky Mountains because of the presence of the steel industry in the east.
A number of municipalities have banned the coal tar‐based products, including Washington, D.C.;
Austin, Texas; Madison and surrounding Dane County, Wis.; and several in the upper Midwest. Earlier
this month Suffolk County, N.Y., banned them, too.

Should your state or city be considering a ban? Here are resources to help you
explore that question:
5/2/11 Video of Congressional briefing: http://bit.ly/kGAsEC (scroll down for video)

U.S. Geological Survey research: http://tx.usgs.gov/coring/allthingssealcoat.html (or Google U.S.
Geological Survey and coal tar)
USGS summary of research: http://on.doi.gov/mgtzXv (PDF)
USGS scientists Barbara Mahler and Peter Van Metre, the husband‐and‐wife research team who have
done much of the science. Mahler: 512‐363‐9192; Van Metre: 512‐698‐6719.
Pavement Coatings Technology Council Executive Director Anne LeHuray: 703‐299‐8470 (industry
perspective)
Congressman Lloyd Doggett of Austin is the lead proponent for a national ban. Press secretary Sarah
Dohl: 202‐225‐4865
Coal Tar Free America blog: http://coaltarfreeamerica.blogspot.com (a private blog by Tom Ennis, an
Austin public‐works official instrumental in the ban there, the earliest in the nation)
Environmental Energy Study Institute (organized Congressional briefing): Laura Parsons, lparsons@eesi
or (202) 662‐1884
InvestigateWest’s 1/12/10 story for MSNBC: http://on.msnbc.com/kBNuq2
Chicago Tribune’s 1/18/11 story: http://bit.ly/lwkMGT
Chicago Tribune’s 1/18/11 story on how you can tell if it’s on your driveway: http://bit.ly/iYjY0U
Map of 40 lakes studied nationwide: http://bit.ly/mmxJjK

