Covering natural disasters

Tipsheet for IRE 2011: Post‐disaster coverage*
Heart of Hurricane Country (Orlando) 2011
Robert McClure, InvestigateWest, rmcclure@invw.org/ 206‐718‐0340
+ First rule: Do *not* wait until the disaster to get ready. Learn who will be the key response officials.
Get to know those people and their staffs.
+Those personal contacts you made before the disaster will be the key to your coverage afterward,
because those officials know that, like them, you are personally concerned about how the recovery goes
forward. Get the mobile phone numbers of the top folks and their handlers.
+ Preferably before the disaster, learn where on the agency’s web site it plans to post news. Then: don’t
expect that it will necessarily be in that exact place. Stay alert to changes in agencies’ plans, which may
not be followed at all but which may turn into chicken‐with‐their‐heads‐cut‐off exingencies. Stay in
touch.
+Get familiar with your state’s emergency master plan, usually prepared by the department of
emergency preparedness or homeland security. Here in Florida, also be in touch ahead of time with the
regional water management district and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
+ If you’re covering hurricanes here in Florida, get to know the National Hurricane Center folks. The PIO
is Dennis Feltgen (mobile 305‐433‐1933, dennis.feltgen@noaa.gov) but definitely be ready to go beyond
him. Ahead of time, contact the guys in the “bullpen” – Dennis should be able to put you in touch with
them. Get the phone number of the bullpen and the folks who staff it. Get to know them, at least by
phone but in person if you’re ever in Miami. Especially when it’s not hurricane season.
+ Know which hurricane specialists have which specialties. Some are experts in storm surge (e.g. Jamie
Rhome), others in link to climate change (e.g. Chris Landsea – but be aware that this research still is not
completely conclusive as to a proven link).
+ After the disaster, ask: What could have been done ahead of time to reduce suffering? Were buildings
erected in known floodplains? Where storm surge was a virtual certainty? Where landslides were likely?
Where earthquake faults were well‐known? Be aware that human time scales – and the construction of
our buildings – tends to ignore these once‐rare events that increasingly seem to be wreaking havoc.
+ What are the impacts on surface water? Are wastes like manure ponds unleashed? Coal slurry or other
industrial‐waste ponds? These often have problems staying contained in a large rainfall – and are also
vulnerable to earthquakes.

+ What are the effects on drinking water supplies, either surface water or groundwater? Where are
hazardous wastes, sewage, and other gunk likely to be exposed to humans? Again, knowing the people
in your state and county emergency departments (and the websites where they plan to post updates)
will go a long way in helping with this.
+ Floods – look at what happened with the floodplain management program managed by the Federal
Emergency Management Program. A great example of this was Sara Shipley’s work for the St. Louis Post
Dispatch early last decade: http://bit.ly/kJ4iPU. This is ripe for work in many communities nationwide.
+ Tornados – Joplin presents a classic story: What’s wrong with the notification systems? What’s wrong
with the people who ignore them?
+ Don’t by any means miss the excellent two‐part series by Jim Schwab of the American Planning
Association for the Society of Environmental Journalists’ quarterly SEJournal emphasizing how to cover
response to disasters. His basic point is that (although the government largely doesn’t get this yet) not
the same as recovery. Response we (lately) do OK at, but recovery is a whole different and much richer
playfield for journos: http://bit.ly/ksE7wR and http://bit.ly/ksE7wR.
*With thanks to many members of IRE and the Society of Environmental Journalists who helped with
this tipsheet.

