Christopher Baxter, Staff Reporter
The Star-Ledger
cbaxter@starledger.com, (609) 989-0322
http://www.nj.com

2011 IRE National Conference
Orlando, Fla.
“How to find nonprofit leaders
lining their own pockets”

Communities large and small have nonprofits for everything from affordable housing to
development. Many of them do good work, but some don’t follow all the rules. Because nonprofits
registered with the federal government don’t pay taxes, they must follow rules about who can
benefit from their tax-free money. If they don’t, they can face penalties and lots of bad press. With a
little sleuthing, reporters can uncover the bad apples and tell donors where their money really goes.
1. First, know where to look. Every nonprofit must file an annual Form 990 with the federal
government. These usually have lots of information about an organization’s financial health,
where they get their money, who they pay, etc. They can be found for free at
www2.guidestar.org or www.eri-nonprofit-salaries.com/index.cfm. Depending on a
nonprofit’s fiscal year, annual filings come out at different times and can sometimes take a
while to be posted. Filings not posted can be requested from the IRS.
2. Form 990s can be thick, dense and confusing. For help understanding the most important
numbers, call a local accountant you trust and go over the document.
3. Become familiar with the tax code provision called “Excess benefit transactions for
disqualified persons.” In English, this tax rule means that someone with substantial control
over a nonprofit cannot receive benefits from the organization. The rule was created to
prevent nonprofit leaders from funneling tax-free money to themselves, rather than the
causes they purport to support. You can find more about the rule at
www.irs.gov/charities/charitable/article/0,,id=123303,00.html.
4. If nonprofits discover wrongdoing within their organization, they can self-report the benefits
and pay them back (plus a penalty). In these cases, you will find a filing in the Form 990
detailing the benefits, who received them, when, etc. Keep in mind that most bad groups
probably won’t fess up on their own. Use your sources if you’re hearing a nonprofit is not
above board. Call former employees, people who do business with the group, competitive
organizations, etc. Also, look at where the nonprofit leaders live, work, do business, etc.
5. You can also easily find out if the leaders of a local nonprofit make too much money. If a
leader makes far more than other leaders of similar groups in similar fields, that can be
considered an excess benefit transaction. Pull Form 990s from other organizations in the
area and compile a list of the highest paid leaders. Then compare them to some others in
nearby states to see how they rank.
6. Be curious. Don’t be afraid to look up a Form 990. For every 20 you read, maybe one will
be interesting. But that one may be the story you’re looking to uncover.

