IRE Orlando ‐ June 2011
Corey G. Johnson – California Watch
cjohnson@californiawatch.org

Measuring risk: From earthquakes to nuclear
plants, how to investigate community preparedness
Lessons learned from “On Shaky Ground,” a 19‐month investigation of the seismic safety of
California’s schools. Published in three parts April 7‐11, 2011. Available online at
http://californiawatch.org/earthquakes

Assessing whether a building is safe is an important and often fruitful area of inquiry
for reporting, no matter where you live. The task can be complicated, but exciting.
Here are a few tips to help make sense of it all.
The paper trail

“Document State­of­Mind” pt. 1 – inspection records
Generally, all buildings constructed with taxpayer dollars will have an inspector to
monitor the project. The inspector’s role is make sure the work is done according to
the approved blueprints, and safety standards—often described as the building
“code.” The inspector’s reports will be a crucial starting point for examining
whether the building has any potential safety hazards. If you’re looking at schools
or other public buildings, try your county or city building department and ask to
look at their file on the project. If your state regulates construction, find the agency
and ask for their records. Use your state’s public records law to gain access to them,
if necessary.
What problems surfaced? How did the problems get resolved? State regulators
and/or local building inspectors are supposed to make sure the construction flaws
were fixed before allowing occupancy. Did that happen? The inspection reports will
spell this out. If you want to take a broader look at construction and construction
oversight, ask for the state agency’s or local building department’s project database.

“Document State­of­Mind” pt. 2 ­ e­mails, meeting minutes
and correspondence
Next, you will want to look at emails, letters and meeting minutes between the
building inspector, the contractor, architect and owner. If you are investigating
schools, the state agency or local building department may have these. But often, the
local school district is a good starting point for these records. Ask their facilities or

maintenance department to help you track these down. As before, you may need to
invoke your state’s public records law to gain access.
Also, check in with the civil section of your local Superior Court. Many of these
documents get filed with the court during legal spats between the school district and
the contractors. Did the building contractor pursue an unapproved change to bring
down costs and maximize profits? Were installations or procedures overlooked
because of time pressures? How did the various players react when construction
flaws were identified? Did they pressure the inspector to ignore them? Offer a
payoff? Did they ignore the inspector? Many of the answers to these questions will
be contained in these records.

“Document State­of­Mind” pt. 3 – the telephone book and
organization chart
Armed with your now burgeoning array of inspection reports, emails, meeting
minutes and correspondence—you will need to know from top‐to‐bottom, who are
the players inside the department responsible for construction oversight. Ask your
building department or state regulatory agency for their telephone directory and
organization charts. In many cases, these may be online. If not readily found online,
a hard copy may be found in your county or state library. Try to get these
documents for as many years as you can—starting with the current year. Peruse the
directories in search of people who are no longer there, then track them down using
www.whitepages.com, Nexis‐Lexis or Accurint.

The people trails

Inspectors, Ex­Regulators and Experts
Although this is generally true of all investigations, this is doubly true when probing
construction related problems: the more one knows in advance, the better your
interviews will go. Millions may have been spent on one project. If something went
wrong, sources may believe your reporting will jeopardize their reputation and
livelihood. This fear may prompt some officials to avoid talking or worse, misinform
you during an interview. Others will feel freer to talk when you can demonstrate a
basis grasp of the building project. Before you attempt to interview the people
implicated in documents for possible wrongdoing, I recommend you consult with
the following:
•

Inspectors ‐Most inspectors, like investigative reporters, tend to see
themselves as watchdogs and really like to share what they know or have
seen. They can be extremely helpful in explaining technical language,
policies and procedures. An added plus: some inspectors take digital photos

or video of the problems—as they arise. You should ask for the photos. If the
project you’re researching has an inspector who may have engaged in
questionable behavior, try finding a “clean” colleague to get an outside
perspective, before interviewing.
•

Ex‐regulatory officials – These folks will typically be freer to talk and have a
unique perspective on events and personalities. Many can tell you about
policies and procedures that were contemplated, repealed or ignored inside
the organization charged with construction oversight. Your agency
telephone books will identify possible contacts. During “On Shaky Ground,” a
key former employee of the regulatory agency gave me with a computer hard
drive full of emails, confidential studies, surveys and reports—all of which
explained in detail how severe and systemic the breakdown occurred in
California’s school construction oversight.

•

Outside experts – Whether at a university or with a professional association
like the American Institute of Architects, experts can be extremely helpful in
understand the “big picture” issues regarding safety or community
preparedness. You can locate potential expert sources through previous
stories, Google or association websites.

You should share your findings and documents with the any cooperative inspectors,
officials and experts you’ve tracked down. Share your granular details with them.
Then pop your big “Is it safe?” question. Ask them to clarify, correct, confirm and
enlarge your understandings, prior to your final accountability interviews with
government and/or builders. In some cases, they will point you to other friendly
insiders who can help.
For more information, feel free to send an email at
cjohnson@californiawatch.org
Or call me at 916‐504‐4085 ext 202.
You should also follow me on Twitter at:
http://twitter.com/#!/CoreyJohnsonCW
Or friend me on Facebook

