Sam Roe
Chicago Tribune
IRE conference, Orlando, June 2011
sroe@tribune.com; 312-222-4418
Tip Sheet: Investigating Caregivers (Saturday, June 11, 3:40 p.m. panel)
Some stories about caregivers …
“Deadly Neglect,” two-part series in the Chicago Tribune on Oct. 8 and 10. www.chicagotribune.com/neglect. The
investigation into a Chicago nursing facility for children with developmental disabilities revealed 13 deaths due to
neglect or unexplained circumstances. Illnesses were ignored, life-support alarms went unanswered and children with
complex medical issues were left unattended. Instead of cracking down, lawmakers and regulators allowed problems
to worsen. In response to the Tribune stories, Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn and five state agencies took swift action to
safeguard the facility’s children, including announcing that authorities would take the rare step of shutting the home.
State officials also drafted legislation to improve care at all 300 Illinois facilities for people with developmental
disabilities – the most significant effort in a generation to reform care for that population. In May, the Illinois House
and Senate passed the legislation. It awaits the governor’s signature.
“Compromised Care,” a rolling investigation in the Chicago Tribune in 2010 that examined, in part, the misuse of
psychotropic medications in Illinois nursing homes. The series (http://tinyurl.com/3wlowew) explored how frail and
elderly residents often were pumped with powerful antipsychotic drugs without their consent and without a proper
diagnosis. The Tribune also teamed with ProPublica to detail how one of the nation’s most prolific prescribers of
psychiatric drugs provided assembly-line care for thousands of mentally ill patients housed in nursing homes – and
how a major pharmaceutical company catered to that doctor’s needs despite doubts about his credibility. Both
packages led to new Illinois state laws to protect nursing homes residents.
Some tips …
•
•

•

•

•

These stories are doable: Reporters could likely find questionable deaths of disabled children throughout
the country. The same is true for nursing homes needlessly drugging the elderly with anti-psychotics. Start
by reviewing state and federal inspection reports of these facilities.
Find benchmarks: There are all kinds of care facilities, and all kinds of things can go wrong. So try to find
a logical benchmark. Which nursing facility in your state has had the most serious violations? Which
facility caring for disabled children has had the most deaths resulting in citations? Which psychiatrist has
written the most Medicaid prescriptions? The answers might help you identify outliers.
Obtain underlying documents: If you find an especially intriguing inspection report, you might want to
request all of the underlying documents that were used to compile the finished report. An “official” final
report may only be a couple of pages long, but the underlying records might be as thick as a phone book.
These records might come to you heavily redacted, but the documents will likely disclose who was
interviewed and what they said as well as other useful information, such as phone numbers and addresses.
Such records helped us piece together a narrative of the final hours of a 12-year-old boy who died of
neglect.
Check out Medicaid & Medicare data: Medicaid officials are more high-tech than you might expect and
can answer questions like “which doctor in (state) prescribes the most (name prescription).” To report on
one Chicago psychiatrist, the Tribune and ProPublica’s Christina Jewett obtained data from Illinois
Medicaid, including every medication he prescribed, ages of prescribees, types and numbers of services he
billed for, number of patients he admitted to psychiatric hospitalization and comparative data for other
doctors, reasons his prescriptions were rejected by the system and reasons his bills for service were
rejected. Other useful data can be found at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which rates most
nursing homes on a 1-5 star system. Some experts call the rankings simplistic, but the site
(http://tinyurl.com/4ckbtj) is helpful.
Finding names can be tricky: Using state inspection reports, we were able to find unexplained deaths of
disabled children. But we still didn’t know their names. State records didn’t disclose their identities, and
death certificates are confidential in Illinois. Working with a government source, we eventually identified
victims by cross-checking death certificates with the dates of deaths listed in inspection reports. Then we
had another challenge: finding their parents, many of whom who had abandoned their kids. We ended up
making hundreds of phones calls and knocking on doors across northern Illinois. Several parents were
tracked down in prison. Some said they did not know that regulators had issued citations in the deaths of
their children until informed by the reporters.

