Jeremy Finley
Investigative Reporter
WSMV‐TV
Investigating After Weather Disaster ­
BEFORE THE DISASTER:
1. Every region of the country is prone to certain weather ‐ so become the expert on how your region has planned for disasters. Get the
emergency response plans from the city/emergency responders, so you can quickly determine if procedures were followed, and if they
city is even prepared for certain disasters. Talk to the Army Corps of Engineers, the National Weather Service, Homeland Security, and
ask they what they worry about the most in terms of handling a disaster. You will shine in your newsroom, because every News
Director/Editor loves a reporter who can "break news" on disasters.
For Tornadoes: How often have your tornado sirens been tested? What are the most recent test results for those sirens? Are there dead
zones (meaning places that can't hear the sirens ‐ there are often pockets of rural counties that aren't covered by sirens).
For Floods: How up to date is your flood indicators along the rivers in your area (meaning the markers along the river the National
Weather Service uses to gauge flood levels? When was the last time the levees were inspected? How dated/outdated are your cities flood
maps (in terms of which homes lie in flood plains?) At what water level at your area dam does the Army Corps of Engineers start to get
worried about having to dump water through the dams? How will the National Weather Service convey to people that their
neighborhoods could flood (this is often not easy for people to understand).
WHEN THE DISASTER HITS
1. GET ON THE FRONT LINES! Push your other investigative projects aside and jump in. Get out there and see for yourself the disaster,
talk to the people, the emergency crews, write general assignment stories. Don't wait for the great investigative stories to slowly rise to
the surface, be there to find them first. No one likes to see the investigative types in our offices working on a spreadsheet when everyone
else in the newsroom is soaked and worn out.
2. Pass out your business cards to everyone, tell them you do investigations and you're willing to listen or help if they run into trouble
with aid, their insurance companies, looters, etc. Do the same with cops, firefighters, rescue organizations. And get their cell numbers
and follow up contacts and call them ‐ it will build loyalty to your news organization and let viewers/readers know you are invested in
covering their recovery.
3. Undoubtedly, some sort of screw‐up will arise on the part of local authorities ‐ this often happens just because of the human condition,
people panicking, making bad decisions in a tense atmosphere. Expect it to happen. We had local authorities with our city‐owned bus
service send workers out a raft while workers were trapped in a building instead of calling for help ‐ and workers took pictures ‐ and
then gave those photos to us. Talk to your local and federal lawmakers and their staffs, ask them what problems they are hearing from
their constituents.
4. MOVE FAST: I say this because after three days of total destruction coverage, your bosses and your colleagues will be worn out and
this is when you can fly in and save the day (at least in a news sense). When everyone else is doing their 500th cleanup story, if you can
break a story about complaints/lousy response/problems then you will lead the pack. There are hundreds of stories that be investigated
after a disaster.
INVESTIGATING THE FUNDRAISING AFTER THE DISASTER
1. Again, do your homework in advance. Everyone loves the Red Cross because of the great initial response they give during disasters, but
they're done after the disaster is over. It's the churches and the non‐profits who are left with the responsibility of helping people rebuild
their lives. Who are these organizations and what funds do they have in place before hand? Ask yourself, if there were big fundraisers for
the Red Cross, was all that money spent on the disaster? Sometimes, the Red Cross hangs on to some of that money and plans to use it for
the next disaster.
2. Keep a close eye on the time frame. Disaster victims have no patience, and no one can blame them. But non‐profits often have a chain
of command and a procedure in place to distribute funds, and that can take time. Find out their time frame and hold them to it. Insist on
transparency, good non‐profits want the public to know where the money is going.

3. Create spreadsheets that will track the spending and offering of these organizations. Question their numbers, don't accept them on face
value. Insist to see what they spent money on, supplies, other fees, etc.

