Finding and using health care data
Investigative Reporters and Editors 2011
June 9, 2011
Charles Ornstein
Charles.ornstein@propublica.org * Phone: 917-512-0222
There is an oft-repeated maxim, and it’s especially true in health care coverage:
The plural of anecdote isn’t data. While heart-tugging stories certainly grab our attention,
it’s important to find the statistical context to see whether these tales are anomalies or
actual trends. This tip sheet will direct you to several trustworthy databases about the
quality of health care delivered by hospitals, transplant centers and nursing homes. If you
are interested in the oversight of health care professionals, my colleague Tracy Weber
will discuss this during a session Friday afternoon.
All databases have shortcomings. Some hospitals and nursing homes argue that
federal statistics do not adequately account for their patients’ illnesses. And there is
always the potential that information has been entered incorrectly or left out entirely.
That’s why it’s important to follow up and attempt to interview everyone involved before
you publish a story based on figures. You don’t want to run a story that either lacks the
proper context or includes information that turns out to be wrong.
SOURCE: Hospital Compare (www.hospitalcompare.hhs.gov or
www.HealthCare.gov/compare)
WHAT IT IS: Run by the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the
site reports data on the performance of individual hospitals in every state. These include
data on patient survival, patient satisfaction and whether hospitals follow national
standards in treating certain conditions.
WHY THIS IS HELPFUL: You can download data for all hospitals in your
region and find the best and worst on each measure. Many of the measures are so-called
process measures—whether a hospital provided generally accepted treatments for
patients with specific illnesses. These include heart attacks, heart failure, childhood
asthma, pneumonia and preventing surgical infections. These measures tell you such
things as whether hospitals administered appropriate medications to patients or whether
they provided proper discharge instructions, among other things. The site displays the
average rates for each state and the United States, as well as the rate achieved by the top
10% of hospitals that submitted data.
Data on mortality and readmissions are known as outcomes measures. Hospital
Compare currently provides data on whether patients died within 30 days of receiving
treatment for heart failure, heart attack and pneumonia at a hospital or whether they had
to be readmitted to the hospital during that window.
Users can find whether a hospital’s rate is better than expected, as expected or
lower than expected. Raw data also are available. The data are risk adjusted to take into
account the severity of patients’ illnesses and other characteristics. Beware: Nearly all
U.S. hospitals perform within expected ranges, so this information may not tell you all
that much.

Patient satisfaction data assess patients’ experiences at the hospitals. Patients are
asked whether nurses communicated well, whether their pain was controlled, whether
bathrooms were clean and whether their room was quiet at night. In addition, they are
asked for an overall score for the hospital and whether they would recommend it to a
friend. (Those last two are the most cited fields.)
Additional data are available on the use of medical imaging (tests like
mammograms, MRIs, and CT scans). Finally, CMS is in the process of adding statistics
on hospital-acquired conditions (such as foreign objects left in patients) among Medicare
patients. For now, you can download that data at
http://www.cms.gov/HospitalQualityInits/06_HACPost.asp.
All of the data sets are updated periodically and can be downloaded:
http://www.medicare.gov/download/downloaddb.asp. Archived files are available here:
http://www.cms.gov/HospitalQualityInits/11_HospitalCompare.asp.

JUST CAN'T GET ENOUGH
VISUALIZING THE DATA: NetDoc takes Hospital Compare data and mashes it
with Google Maps to allow you to compare hospitals on a map. This is a really cool
feature and it is available at http://www.netdoc.com/hospital-rankings/. (Note: the
statistics appear to be somewhat out of date.) It might give you ideas for your own
website.
COMPARING HOSPITALS OVER TIME: The Commonwealth Fund offers a
Web site (www.whynotthebest.org) to compare hospitals over time and against
benchmarks. Because the site is not automatically intuitive, it’s worth spending a few
minutes to watch the demo on the home page.
HANDS-ON WITH THE DATA: The Association of Health Care Journalists has
created an excellent primer on how to use the data on patient satisfaction
(www.healthjournalism.org/secondarypage-details.php?id=275) and
mortality/readmission (http://www.healthjournalism.org/resources-datadetails.php?id=7). It includes links to Excel files that include up-to-the-minute
information on every hospital in the country. Unlike the Hospital Compare site, you can
examine all hospitals in your area and you can examine hospitals over time. (You must be
an AHCJ member to access this information.)

SOURCE: Nursing Home Compare (http://www.medicare.gov/nhcompare/)
WHAT IT IS: Also run by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, it
includes data on the quality of nursing home care.
WHAT YOU CAN FIND: Using a star-system (in which one star is much below
average and five stars is much above average), the site details a home’s record of health
inspection deficiencies, staffing, quality measures and fire safety violations.
WHY THIS IS HELPFUL: It’s helpful to evaluate whether a nursing home is
providing adequate health care. You should also check out the government’s Special
Focus Facility list of homes that have not improved despite repeated violations,
https://www.cms.gov/CertificationandComplianc/Downloads/SFFList.pdf.

HOW TO FOLLOW UP: You can learn more about the deficiencies cited by
health inspectors by contacting your state health department or CMS. Inspection reports
are public record and are fairly easy to get. Also, if you find a report that interests you,
file a request for the back-up investigative notes, an often blunt and detailed account of
what went wrong. For a list of state or regional contacts, go to
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/SurveyCertificationGenInfo/03_ContactInformation.asp.
All of the data sets are updated periodically and can be downloaded:
http://www.medicare.gov/download/downloaddb.asp.
SOURCE: Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (http://www.srtr.org)
WHAT IT IS: Data on all U.S. transplant centers, including survival rates,
characteristics of patients who receive transplants and those who die on the waiting list.
Transplantation is one of the most-advanced areas of medicine when it comes to
collecting and releasing information about the quality of care provided to patients.
STEP BY STEP: Each organ is listed in a separate report here:
http://www.srtr.org/csr/current/Centers/Default.aspx. Click on an organ (kidney, heart,
lever, etc.) and you will find a list of transplant centers that perform that operation. You
will see that survival rates are characterized as expected, lower than expected or higher
than expected. For additional details, click on the Report hyperlink for each center. In the
dropdown box, Table 11 gives details on patient survival and Table 10 gives details on
graft survival (this looks at whether the organ survived; a patient may remain alive but
need another transplant.)
Archived reports for each center can be found here:
http://www.srtr.org/csr/archives/default.aspx.
ADDITIONAL DATA ON TRANSPLANTATION: Can be found on the website
of the United Network for Organ Sharing,
http://www.unos.org/donation/index.php?topic=data.

