IRE Hands On:
Public Spending Data in Tableau
Getting the Data
1. Open the file Seattle City Budget.csv on your desktop
a. If there is no file… go to: http://data.seattle.gov/dataset/2011-2012Proposed-Budget-Expenditures-Allowance-b/55z8-f4gi
i. Click Export (CSV)
2. Open Tableau Public (Icon on your desktop)
3. Select Data -> Connect to Data -> Text File
4. Browse and select the data you just opened, click OK

Creating the first sheet
1. Select “Department” and “Proposed 2011 Expenditure” using CTRL + Click and
then click “Show Me”

2. Click Pie
3. Click “Show Me” again – Select Bar
4. Click to swap rows and columns
5. Click to sort

6. Right click on Proposed Expenditure allowance (Under “Measures” on the left
hand side) and go to Field Properties ->Number Format
i. Change the type to currency
ii. Decimal Places

7. Click and drag Expenditure allowance onto Label
8. Click on the blue box to the right of Color and select orange
9. Change Name of Sheet to “Expenditures by Department” by double clicking on
the “Sheet 1” at the bottom
10. Make the bars slightly larger by dragging the slider to the right
11. Add borders by clicking on the word “Color” and selecting a shade of grey in that
menu

Creating the detail…
1. New sheet (click on the workbook button
on the bottom)
2. Drag Departments and BCL Names to Rows (one at a time)
3. Drag 2011 Expenditure to Text
4. Name the Sheet Expenditure by Type by double clicking on “Sheet 2” at the
bottom of the view
5. Sorting…
a. If we sort on department, it will sort by department

b. BUT, sorting by BCL name does the same- it sorts regardless of
Department
6. Use CTRL + Click to select Department and BCL Name at the same time
a. Right click
b. Create Set
7. Drag between Department and BCL

8. Sort by clicking on the drop down on the Set
a. Select Sort
b. Descending by the Sum of Proposed 2011 Expenditure
9. Click on the drop down on Set again
a. Select Show Header

Percent of Total
1. New sheet – Percent of Total
2. Drag Proposed 2011 Expenditure onto rows
3. Lets disaggregate by dragging Department on Level of Detail
4. Click on the drop down on 2011 Expenditure and select “Quick Table
Calculation”
a. Select % of total
b. Use CTRL to click and drag this from Rows to Label (this will copy)
c. Click on Label and Select Highlight
5. Turn on borders and color to orange (just like we did in the first sheet)
6. Sort Department Descending on % of Total

Combing the three together
1. Create a new Dashboard by clicking on the dropdown in the top left hand corner

2. Change the size of the dashboard to Exactly-> 600X800 by clicking on the blue
Edit button at the bottom left hand corner
3. Double click on Expenditures by Department (top left hand corner)
4. Drag and drop Expenditures by Type underneath it
5. Drag and drop Percent of Total to the right of expenditures
6. Click on Expenditures by Department and then use the drop down at the top to
select “Fit height”

a. Select fit width for Expenditures by Type
7. Click Edit->Actions-> Add Action -> Filter
a. Uncheck Expenditures by Type and Percent of Total under Source Sheets
b. Check only Expenditures by Type under Target Sheets
c. Click “Select” under Run Action On

8. Click Edit->Actions-> Add Action -> Highlight
a. Uncheck Expenditures by Type and Percent of Total under Source Sheets
b. Check only Percent of Total under Target sheets
c. Click “Select” under Run Action On
9. Double click on the titles to format them
10. Click Edit->Tooltips to change them
11. Double click on Title under Objects

Save to the web & publish
1. Save to the web
2. Main menu: File Æ Tableau Public Æ Save to web
3. Follow the prompts
4. Do not select “show sheets as tabs.”
5. Publish
6. Click “Share” in the lower left
7. Copy the embed code and paste into your web page

