NICAR Hands-On:
Census Data with Tableau Public
Get your data together
1. Gather your data. You’ll need:
a. 2010 and 2000 census data for place (with population > 2000)
b. Annexation data by place, from a state agency
c. Lat/ long of the census district
2. Make sure your data is in the right format
a. Your workbook should have two sheets: one with the data, the second with lat/long
b. Header row is row 1
c. No blank rows or columns
3. Connect to the census data.
a. Open Tableau Public and Click “Open Data.”
b. Choose Excel & find your file
c. Select “Single table” and find your sheet with the census data and lat-long
d. You know you’ve done it right when all your fields show up in the Data Window on the left hand
side of Tableau.
e. Make sure your latitude and longitude fields are correctly geocoded. (They must be numbers to
do this.) To make sure your latitude field is geocoded:
i. Right click on field in the data window  Change data type to Number
ii. Right click on the field again  Geographic role = Latitude
iii. Repeat for Longitude

Create map view for Major metro area.
o
o
o

o
o

o

In the Data Window, ctrl-click on latitude, longitude and city and click “Show Me”
Drag the 2010 census population from the Data Window to the Size Shelf
Create a calculated field on % change from last census to this
 Right-click on 2010 Census  Create Calculated Field
 Enter this formula. The formula language is similar to SQL or Excel.

When you are done, the %Change field should show up in the Data Window.
Decide whether you will show absolute change or % change on color. Here we show % change. Drag “%
Change” from the Data Window to the Color Shelf:
Format the colors. On the color legend, click Edit Colors and select Advanced button.
 Choose orange-blue diverging color scheme
 Center at the 0
 Set min to near your min value and max to (in this case 100%) after inspecting your data so that
there is a good color range in the middle of your data.
 On the Color Shelf, add a grey border and 80% transparency. This will help your marks show up
better when they overlap.
Drag “% Change from the Data Window to the Label shelf. Open the label drop-down and select “Selected.”
This means the label will show up only when the mark is selected.

o
o

Rename this sheet “Metro.”
Click the Zoom icon on the toolbar and select the area in your major metro. Your sheet should look like this:

Create detail view
o

Create a new sheet.

o

o
o
o
o

Add
 Measure Names to Columns
 City to Rows
 Measures Values to the Text Shelf
You should have a text chart. Remove from the Measure Value shelf any values you don’t want
and reorder them as you wish.
All your percentages will show up as 0. Click each in the Data Window  Field Properties
Format Text and choose Percentage.
Rename this sheet “Detail.”
It should look like this:

Create the dashboard
1. Create a new dashboard
2. Size it to your page size: click :”Edit” in the size section in the lower-left of the dashboard. This will help
you avoid scrollbars and make sure the viz looks good in your page.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Add the map and detail views by dragging them onto the dashboard, or just double-clicking them
Arrange and lay out the views by dragging them
Change and edit titles by right-clicking on the title and choosing “Edit”
Add any explanatory text by selecting “Text” from objects and dragging onto the screen
Add a Quick Filter on City
a. Click on the top right corner of any view __> Quick Filters  City
b. Make it a compact list
c. Make it global
8. Add a highlight action: highlight on the toolbar, select City
9. Edit your tooltips for each view.
a. Select the sheet
b. On the main menu, select “Edit  Tooltips.”

c. Repeat for the other sheet

Test the interaction
1. Click around and see how it works
2. Fix the size legend so that cities keep their sizes as you change from one to another

Your dashboard should look like this:

Then take it to your graphics dept…. discuss the colors, layout and information presentation with them.

Save to the web & publish
1. Save to the web
a. Main menu: File  Tableau Public  Save to web
b. Follow the prompts
c. Do not select “show sheets as tabs.”
2. Publish
a. Click “Share” in the lower left
b. Copy the embed code and paste into your web page

Ambitious step
On your map view:
1. Drag “Measure names” to filter
a. Show Quick filter—make it a compact list
b. Customize the filter—don’t allow “all”
2. Drag “Measure values” to label and to size shelves

Now your users can select which measure is shown on the map. On the dashboard,
- Remove your size legend
- Make sure the measure names quick filter is showing.
Your dashboard will look like this:

