ELEVEN TIPS ON SUCCESSFUL
BUSINESS INVESTIGATIONS
Walt Bogdanich, The New York Times, and John Fauber, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
“How to Win a Barlett & Steele Award – 10 Tips for Successful Business Investigations”
2011 IRE National Conference, Orlando, Fla.
June 10, 2011

Tips from Walt Bogdanich:
1.

REGULATORS: You can’t cover companies without scouring the agencies that
regulate them. Don’t call regulators only when news is breaking. Visit – don’t just call -when neither you nor they are on a deadline. Start with the big picture and ease into
specifics. Periodically read enforcement records looking for patterns.

2.

HEARINGS: Attend Congressional hearings. Get to know the players, the staffers.
Most reporters rush in and rush out to file their daily stories, leaving many good leads on
the cutting-room floor. “Work” the room. You can’t do that watching a live feed or video.
Sometimes the best hearings are those where you don’t have to write a story.

3.

INTERVIEWS: Always ask: “How do you know that?” Who told you, when, and
under what circumstances? Who else might verify what you are telling me? Any records
back up what you say? In most interviews, you have two goals: a) gather facts and
figures; b) get good quotes. Make sure you have both. At the end of a long interview, it
helps to ask: “So what is the most important thing I should take away from this
interview?” Often, you will get a good, concise quote.

4.

CONVENTIONAL WISDOM: It may be more fun to run with the crowd, to be
an insider, but often the best stories start with having the courage to think independently.
Question your assumptions. For example, it isn’t possible to find good investigative
stories in the newspaper. Nonsense. Read stories carefully to the end. Reporters on
deadline focus on the who, what, where and when. You should focus on the why.

5.

DATABASES: Spend more time learning how to build databases and less time using
Twitter. If you don’t know how, find someone who does. Good investigative reporting
focuses on the barrel, not the apple.

6.

TRANSLATORS: If your story takes you overseas and you can’t speak the
language, tape your first interviews and double-check the translations when you return
home.

Walt Bogdanich

The New York Times

waltbog@nytimes.com

212-556-1234

Tips on investigating drug companies from John Fauber:
Drug companies are among the most profitable corporations in America. That success is due in
part to their ability to exploit relationships with doctors, medical schools and the Food and Drug
Administration. Reporters investigating the pharmaceutical and medical-device industry might
consider these resources.
7. FDA Advisory Panel hearing transcripts: Before a drug or device is
approved, the company must come before one of these panels. Hearing transcripts largely are
ignored by reporters, but they contain a wealth of information.
8. University outside-income disclosure forms: Most medical schools
require that doctors file annual forms reporting the outside income they receive, including
any work for drug or medical-device companies. If the medical school is part of a public
university, these forms most likely are available through a state records request.
9. Payments to medical schools by drug companies: Drug companies
often fund medical school activities, such as continuing medical education courses for
doctors.
These drug company-funded courses are often more marketing than education. The money
can amount to millions of dollars a year.
10. Get to know some doctors at your local medical school: Records
are useful, but insiders know what really is going. A simple tip may lead to a blockbuster
story.
11. Drug company websites: Several drug and medical-device companies now list
payments to doctors on their websites. This is a great place to start any medical conflict-ofinterest story.

John Fauber

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel jfauber@journalsentinel.com

414-223-5479

