Tip Sheet: Covering a corrupt state agency
Marcella Bombardieri, Boston Globe
bombardieri@globe.com
IRE National Conference 2011, Orlando
In 2010, the Boston Globe Spotlight Team published a series about patronage and
mismanagement in the state probation department. It led to an overhaul of the agency and
ongoing state and federal grand jury investigations. You can see our work at
boston.com/probation.
Our four-person team had to be creative in investigating a highly secretive agency
exempt from FOIA laws, where any worker could get fired for talking to reporters and
the commissioner refused interviews and data requests. Some of what worked for us may
help you in reporting on your state government:
--State payroll: useful not just to know who works for an agency but to follow an
individual’s promotions and pay raises as well as bureaucratic growth over time.
--State campaign finance records: Much of our data work involved matching payroll to
contributions to see whom state workers donated to and when – often just before or after
they were hired or promoted. Look for patterns among contributors – are dozens of state
workers giving on the same day because their bosses have (illegally) asked them to?
--People-finder resources: We had to prove that certain probation workers were related to
politicians or the department’s top brass, and we had to prove that the “John Smith” who
worked for probation was the same person as the “John Smith” who donated to Rep. Soand-so. (Massachusetts law requires campaigns to collect the occupations of their donors,
but they routinely flout this rule.)
Many of our leads came from our human source. For confirmation, we relied most on
Accurint, a subscription service that vacuums up data from many sources, sometimes
including occupation and possible relatives – possible is a key word. We also used
anything else we could think of including Facebook, college yearbooks, alumni
newsletters, and even archival death notices in which two probation-connected relatives
might be listed among surviving family members.
--Vacuum up lawsuits against the agency and complaints to your state’s antidiscrimination authority. Ask attorneys if they will share depositions.
--Union grievance files and arbitrators reports can be very revealing.

--If you suspect that an agency is skewing its statistics, look for points of comparison
with other, more-credible departments or other states. For example we were able to prove
how inflated Probation’s caseload was by showing that while its rosters supposedly
quadrupled, no more people were arraigned statewide. Similarly, we found that
Massachusetts had more electronic monitoring staff than any other state.
--Often, we prefer to keep our investigations quiet as long as possible. Unfortunately, that
secrecy can cut us off from great sources who don’t know we are looking for them. If you
are having trouble getting traction, consider putting out the word that you care about the
topic by breaking off a small piece of news and soliciting tips at the bottom of the story.
We developed some excellent sources this way.
--Reach out: Sometimes the targets of our patronage inquiries were willing to confirm
friendships or family relationships, or did so inadvertently if we asked the right question.
In cases where we were highly confident but not 100 percent certain, we might consider
silence a final confirmation. For example, if we were pretty sure that Pat and Kevin
Horne were siblings, we might leave them each a message saying, “We plan to publish a
list of relationships within the department, and we will include you and your brother
Kevin. If you would like to talk about this, please call me.”
--Direct observation: If you are covering an agency that doesn’t allow any access to its
programs or staff, is there a way to slip inside unnoticed? (Without misidentifying
yourself.) One day I arranged with the driver of a community service van to come along
with the probationers, put on an orange vest and picked up trash on the side of the
highway. I tagged along with an offender to meet with his probation officer, where I was
presumably taken for a friend or girlfriend. (But the second time I tried it I was asked
who I was – and they weren’t too happy when I told them.)

