Policing the police: Uncovering law enforcement
Ziva Branstetter / Tulsa World Enterprise Editor
Ziva.branstetter@tulsaworld.com

Informants:
What is your department’s policy for handling informants?
Do they have to be registered?
Are there different kinds of informants? CIs vs. RCIs
How much freedom are they given?
What kinds of deals are they getting?
Are they paid? If so, who tracks that?
How much is your dept. spending on informants and what kinds of expenses are there?

Search warrants and seizures
Examine a random sample or group of search warrants turned in by police for a given
period. Is the same language used in all or most??
What happens to search warrants in cases where charges are not filed? Why weren’t they
filed and are the same officers requesting those unsuccessful warrants?
What is your department’s policy for handling seized cash, drugs?
Are there written procedures for handling evidence? What are they?
What if drugs are destroyed at the scene by field tests or suspects?
Does more than one officer take part in counting seized money and turning it in?
How much does your department seize and how often does it file charges in those cases?

Disciplinary actions
Regularly request disciplinary actions against police, other law enforcement officers.
If an officer is disciplined for lying in court or in police reports, does he continue serving
as a witness in future criminal cases?
Do law enforcement officers convicted of crimes get to keep their pensions in your state?
Internal affairs complaints
How many are filed, of what type and what happens to them?
Is there a tracking system for officers who rack up a lot of complaints? How does it work?
Are the same officers the target of multiple complaints?

Lawsuits and court procedures
How often is your department sued for civil rights violations? (Check federal and state
court.)
What is the outcome of those suits?
Is there a tort claims process where the city can pay off claims before they reach the
lawsuit stage? If so, ask for records.
How often are charges thrown out due to officer misconduct, lying etc? Get the transcript
of the hearings and see what the judge said.
Are there officers who are known to have “Brady-Giglio” issues and can’t be called as
witnesses? Does your department keep a list?
Do officers get added to reports for doing little just so they can show up and claim
overtime for court?
Who are the top overtime earners? Check a few court transcripts to see if they really
testified for the length of time they claim.

Sourcing
Take the collect calls from the jail. Listen to those who complain about police
misconduct and check it out.
Have sources on both sides: defense and prosecution.
Keep your communication professional and netural. It may get subpoenaed.

