Pulling off the Undercover Investigation
2011 IRE Conference – Orlando, FL
Joel Grover – KNBC, Los Angeles
Cindy Galli – Inside Edition
Angela Hill – ABC News
Andy Siegel – CBS Law

Going undercover sometimes gets a bad rap or is frowned upon. But there are times when
a journalist must go undercover. In those cases, it’s important to thoroughly and
strategically think through your approach and all the implications.

Things to consider:
-

Why is there a need to go undercover?
Is what you’re trying to capture an important element of the story? Will you see
something that’s worth the potential risk?
Will the story uncover criminal activity, wrongdoing or ethical violations?
Have you considered all the options? Is going undercover the only option?
What are the ethical and legal implications of your strategy and the impact on the
final story?

Preparing for an Undercover/Hidden Camera Operation
Do your homework.
Yes, you know your state is one-party consent. But that doesn’t mean it’s a hidden
camera free-for-all. Are there are criminal peeping statutes that might affect
surveillance? How about trespass laws? Privacy concerns may affect hidden camera
investigations in the workplace in some states. Know the intricacies before you go.
Consider the ethics.
Simply ask yourself if this is the best way to expose the issue. Are there alternatives (ie.,
obtaining surveillance video)? Look to the professionals for advice: The Society of
Professional Journalists and The Poynter Institute are just two organizations that have
good tip sheets on hidden camera ethics.
Be friends with your legal team.
Seriously. We’ve found that even in dicey undercover situations (shooting at a school, in
a hotel, etc.), they’re open to ideas on how to do it within bounds and will come up with
ways to make you happy editorially – yet protect you legally.

Dress the part.
That hidden camera is only as good as the attire you wear with it. If you’re shooting in
an office environment where everyone is wearing suits, your jeans and t-shirt will only
bring more scrutiny – and more opportunity for someone to spot a lens or a curious bulge
in your jacket. Blend in so your subject is focusing on what you say, not how you look.
Get your story straight.
Know “who” you are and “why” you’re there. (Your cover story, that is.) Rehearse all
potential questions you might be asked and know exactly how you’ll answer them. If
you’re undercover with other people, make sure you’re all on the same page about your
roles and who will be doing the talking.
Don’t lose control of your cameras.
Sure, it can make for a great shot if you leave a purse or water bottle camera stationary on
a table in order to get yourself on camera. But turn your back for a second and a nosy
subject can – and will – pick it up, leading to you getting made or your camera getting
damaged. Someone has to see only one loose wire that has come untucked for your cover
to be blown.
Know your limits.
How far are you willing and/or allowed to go? If the subject wants to take you to a
second location or meet again, do you agree? Weigh the risks and the benefits
beforehand. Anticipate being asked to sign documents while undercover (ie. job
applications, contracts) and consider how you’ll deal with that, since, depending on
what’s in the fine print, you could open yourself up to civil or criminal violations.
Be committed.
Example: if your undercover project requires you to count how many alcoholic drinks a
court officer is having at lunch before returning to work, make sure you know the entire
story. You know what time he’s sat down, how many drinks he’s had in what amount of
time … and then you witness him going back to work and being “on the job.” If you take
your eyes away for a second or don’t follow through until the end, you’re no longer
reporting accurately. Not only is this crucial for accuracy, but it will provide you with
numbers to present them with later in an interview or confrontation.
Relax … but not so much.
These days, cameras are small enough that it’s easy to forget you’re wearing one. This is
not advisable. Next thing you know, you’re taking off the jacket that is wired to your
pants or saying something totally inappropriate to be forever caught on tape. Stay
relaxed so your subject is as well – but also stay alert, paranoid and ever mindful of what
you’re up to.
It’s kind of a sit-down interview.
Meaning … not only are you looking for a nice shot, but you are trying to get usable
sound out of your subject. Just as you would in a sit-down interview, do NOT talk over
someone. If he’s just about to spill the beans, you saying “Mmhmmm, sure…” right over

his big revelation will do you no good. Besides, silence can sometimes be so much more
telling.
Undercover doesn’t always mean hidden cameras.
Yes, we’re TV people and need the visual. But if for some reason you don’t have the
resources or legal parameters to use hidden cameras, remember that we are journalists
first and foremost. Sometimes just getting the information will supplement the story
nicely in track.
Have an escape route.
Okay, so you just got made … maybe. How do you get out of it? What do you say
(hopefully without lying) to get out unscathed and without revealing your purpose for
being there? Think it through before you go in. The more dangerous the situation, the
more you also want to know where entrances and exits are. If you have a crew waiting
for you on the outside, know precisely where your meeting spot will be when you’ve left
so you can walk out with purpose, not confusion.
Always, ALWAYS expect the unexpected.
What will happen if one (or more) of your cameras goes kaput mid-shoot? Have a plan
in mind of where you might go should you need time and privacy to do impromptu
repairs. And don’t forget to always carry back-up batteries and tapes if you’re in for the
long haul.
Be redundant.
Whenever possible, have a second hidden camera rolling. If you're wearing a camera, put
another one in a bag. If you have the resources, take advantage. One may go down and
you need the back-up … or you simply may be able to get two really great shots at once.
Keep your mouth shut!
This always bears repeating. Remember that anything you say can be used against you
later if those tapes are subpoenaed. Wait until you’re powered down to talk about what a
stupid scam artist that guy was. That goes for anyone with you, especially if you’re
wiring a house for a sting where you’re apt to have more people there helping out. Put
someone in charge of passing the word when you either start to roll or power down.

Preparing to go Undercover Without a “Cover”
Setting up your own undercover operation with hidden cameras is no longer the only
option – we’re relying more than ever on other sources to catch something in the act. If
you choose to use tourist cams, flip cams, etc., don’t forget to consider the following:
-

Equipment: try to match your gear to the situation so you don’t stand out.
Approach: how/where will you use the cameras? What is your cover story if a
nosy bystander approaches you while you’re shooting?

-

Access: how far will you get with the camera out in the open? Will there be
situations when you have to power down and/or put it away? Can you do with
some degree of stealth?

And if you don’t already use these resources, use them now:
The Poynter Institute: http://www.poynter.org/
The Society of Professional Journalists: http://www.spj.org/ethicsresources.asp
The Reporters’ Committee for Freedom of the Press: http://rcfp.org/

