Higher Ed: Following the money on campus
IRE Conference – Orlando, June 11, 2011
Holly Hacker
Dallas Morning News
hhacker@dallasnews.com
214‐977‐8749

Erica Perez
California Watch

eperez@californiawatch.org

510‐809‐3179

Ben Protess
New York Times
ben.protess@nytimes.com
212‐556‐5289

WEB RESOURCES
Commercialization of university research
Association of University Technology Managers – www.autm.net
Annual survey of licensing activity – see how many patents your university obtained, licensing
revenue it received, etc.
General U.S. higher ed data
U.S. Department of Education – Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) –
www.nces.ed.gov
University revenues and expenditures, assets and indebtedness, state funding per student, student
financial aid, and much more.
Pro: Good for comparing universities.
Con: Lags a year or two behind.
IRS non­profit filings
Foundation Center – www.foundationcenter.org/findfunders/990finder/
(goes back further for free than Guidestar.org does)
Lobbying data
Open Secrets – www.opensecrets.org
Find out how much public and private universities spent lobbying elected officials, who the lobbyists
are, what issues they lobbied on, and more.
Philanthropy
Voluntary Support of Education – an annual survey by the Council for Aid to Education –
www.cae.org
Covers about 85 percent of private giving to colleges and universities in the U.S. Use the Data Miner
for data on endowments, total donations, percent of alumni who donate, sources of giving
(corporations, foundations, alumni, etc.) and more.
Public company filings
Securities and Exchange Commission – http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
Good for examining for‐profit colleges.
Example from Bloomberg:
Strayer Education Inc., a chain of for‐profit colleges that receives three‐quarters of its revenue from
U.S. taxpayers, paid Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Robert Silberman $41.9 million last year.
That’s 26 times the compensation of the highest‐paid president of a traditional university.
Research grants and spending
National Science Foundation – https://webcaspar.nsf.gov/
Tracks annual research & development spending at colleges and universities
Student financial aid
Student loan defaults
U.S. Department of Education – federalstudentaid.ed.gov/datacenter/

Data by campus on students who default on their federal student loans. Colleges with consistently
high default rates risk losing access to federal financial aid. This has been a particular issue with for‐
profit colleges – some receive up to 90 percent of their revenues from federal student‐aid programs.
Pell grants
U.S. Dept of Ed – www2.ed.gov/programs/fpg/
See how many low‐income students attend your colleges and universities
State higher ed data
Example: Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board
http://www.txhighereddata.org/Interactive/Accountability/
Campus‐level data on tuition and fees, research spending, state appropriations, operating expenses,
revenues. Look at totals and per student, per faculty member, etc.
PUBLIC RECORDS
Contracts
Example from Dallas Morning News
http://www.dallasnews.com/news/education/headlines/20110605‐several‐texas‐colleges‐are‐
using‐private‐recruiters‐for‐online‐classes.ece
State universities contract with for‐profit companies to recruit students for online programs.
Companies get to keep up to 80 percent of student tuition revenues.
Example from California Watch:
http://californiawatch.org/dailyreport/uc‐davis‐gives‐us‐bank‐marketing‐access‐perks‐exchange‐
royalties‐3686
UC Davis’ contract with US Bank shows the university earned cash for every student account opened
in exchange for a slew of perks for the bank and its executives.
Correspondence
E‐mails and memos at public universities are public records. Request administrators’ emails on any
topic you are investigating for deeper insight.
Expenses
Expenses for board meetings, housing for chancellors or presidents, administrators’ travel and
lodging. Do university employees and trustees abide by policies regulating spending? Are any
employees or trustees traveling excessively?
Financial disclosure forms
Example: California’s Form 700
http://www.fppc.ca.gov/index.php?id=500
Requires employees at state and local government agencies (including public universities) who make
or participate in making decisions that could affect their personal economic interests to fully disclose
their personal assets and income.
Vendor records
Example from California Watch: http://californiawatch.org/750‐contractor‐big‐donations‐
questioned‐performance‐wins‐community‐college‐projects
A contractor that community college district officials had said was doing an “absolutely awful job”
was awarded the most contracts and gave more money in campaign contributions to the bond
measure than any other contractor.
Affinity Agreements
Tips for tracking affinity agreements from your local college:

1. Call the school's press office and ask for the director. Tell them you are working on a story
about college credit card agreements and want a copy of their school's contract or "affinity"
agreement with a credit card company. Explain that these contracts are now public records, even at
private universities, under the new credit card laws that went into effect Feb. 22, 2010.
2. Follow up with an e­mail detailing your request. The school should preferably send you the
documents electronically so you can easily post them online. Here's a template for the e‐mail:
I'm working on a story about agreements that colleges have with credit card companies ­­ contracts
that are now public under the new credit card laws that took effect in 2010.
I'm looking for all of the school's contracts or agreements (sometimes known as "Affinity Agreements")
made with credit card companies. I also want to make sure we have all the up­to­date contract info, so
please include any cover letters, attachments, addendum or amendments that reflect the current terms
of the contracts. If the school no longer participates in certain aspects of the agreements, please specify
the changes.
Finally, if the contracts are through the alumni association, please send me the contract and any
memorandum of understanding between the school and the association.
Under the Truth in Lending Act §140(f)(1), implemented by Regulation Z § 226.57(b), as an institution
of higher education you are required by law to publicly disclose any and all credit card marketing
contracts or other agreements made with card issuers or creditors for the purposes of marketing credit
cards to students. For your reference, I'm including a link to the legislation at govtrack.us:
http://www.govtrack.us/congress/billtext.xpd?bill=h111­627 (see sections 304 and 305).
My deadline for this is [date] and the new credit card regulations require a prompt response. I would
prefer an electronic copy (PDF) of the documents. Please let me know if you have any questions, and
thank you for your help.
3. Be Persistent.
• Many schools will stall if you don’t repeat your request several times. If possible, contact the school
every other day; the law requires disclosure in a "reasonable time frame."
• If the press office is not being helpful, contact the school's budget office or government affairs
office.
• School officials might say they can't provide the contract because it is administered through the
alumni association. Don't worry. Although the rules on this are not entirely clear, the law requires
schools to disclose contracts administered through "alumni groups." If they refer you to an alumni
association official, resubmit the request to both parties, emphasizing the disclosure rule.

