Downloading the Data on Teachers
IRE 2011
6/10/11 8:30 - 9:30am Oceans Ballroom 09
A Tipsheet by
Jason Felch, Staff Writer, Los Angeles Times.
jason.felch@latimes.com
@jasonfelch
213 237-7061

Crunching teacher performance data is one of the hottest -- and most controversial -- areas in
education reporting right now. In our “Grading the Teachers” project, we’ve ranked 11,500
teachers by their ability to raise student test scores, analyzing the patterns and dispelling many
common myths about what matters in public education. You can find the series here:
www.latimes.com/teachers
But grading teachers it is only one possible use of so-called “value-added” analysis, which
measures students year to year improvements on standardized tests. Most school districts now
keep longitudinal data that links students to teachers. If you can get your hands on it, there are
endless possible angles to pursue. Education data lets you cut through the rhetoric and
anecdotalism and dig for surprising facts that often districts themselves have overlooked.
Here are ten other ways to use standardized testing data:
1. Grading the Ed Schools: Once you know who the most effective teachers are, you can find
out which local ed programs are training them. This is a hot topic right now, as the key to better
teacher quality inevitably leads back to teacher education.
2. Evaluate the new curriculum: Did they just bring in a new reading curriculum to your
district? Trying to figure out whether its any better than the last one? Data can help, especially if
the new curriculum was phased in over time. Compare the performance gains of students who
got the new curriculum with those who stuck with the old one. Value-added will help you control
for the demographic variables.
3. Busting the myth of class size: Does class size really matter? Don’t believe the hype, test it
yourself. Many states (like Florida) rolled in class size reductions slowly over time. That gives
you various cohorts to compare in your analysis.
4. Does PD really work?: Many districts spend millions on one-size-fits all professional
development. Does it work? Check how teacher effectiveness changes in teacher who attend.
Then compare it to similar teachers who skipped it.
5. Language Learners: Is your district leaving English language learners in the dust? How do
their gains compare to native speakers? Because value-added compares students to their own
prior performance, its well suited to these questions.
6. Fact check your district’s evaluation tool: Districts across the country are implementing

value-added models to measure teacher performance. But these models are complex and
depend on a series of judgement calls. For example, should you control for racial differences
among groups, which effectively lowersthe performance bar for some students? The answer
could have a significant impact on teachers’ scores. By crunching your own data, you’ll become
familiar with these issues and give teachers and the public an alternative set of numbers to ch

7. Higher Ed credits: Most school districts give teachers a bump in pay for accumulating higher
ed credits. Often those classes have nothing to do with the teacher’s subject area. In LAUSD,
25% of teacher salaries goes toward these bonuses. Yet many studies show the classes have
no impact on teacher performance. How much money would your district saved if it found a
smarter way to reward teachers?
8. Catch the Cheaters: Did a local school recently show amazing gains? Do you suspect
someone was fiddling with the test scores? With student level data, you can dig deep into “
“miracle turnarounds.” You can also find teachers whose students make improbable gains.
9. Shift the conversation to growth: Much of public education is a self-fulfilling prophesy: poor
schools do poorly, rich schools excel. The problem isn’t with the tests, it’s with how we used test
score data. We’ve been focused on achievement levels, but students with a head start in life will
always finish that race first. Value-added shifts the focus to growth: how much progress did a
student make compared to his own prior performance? This levels the playing field between rich
and poor and gives us a fairer metric to measure student learning.
10. Grade the Principals/District: Accountability has recently been focused on teachers. But
value-added can give us a good tool to hold administrators and the board of ed accountable too.
Did the new Sup promise to raise student performance? Use value-added to give her a report
card.

