YEAR IN CAR

Doug Haddix & Mark Horvit
Investigative Reporters and Editors

Orange County Register
DATA / DOCUMEN TS: Census Public Use
Microdata from 1970-2008
FINDINGS: Immigrants in California have
filled most of the new jobs since 1970;
foreign workers have become the primary
outside source of labor. Immigration
enforcement policies have been ignored for
decades, so “the odds of an illegal
immigrant being detained at work were 1 in
1,300.”

The Dallas Morning News
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills scores, other education
and financial data
FINDINGS: An occasional series exploring growth of charter schools. Includes pieces on
academic performance and standards; nepotism and six-figure salaries; and ties to
religious organizations.

The Washington Post
DATA / DOCUMENTS: The analysis was conducted
using a little-known database maintained by
Virginia State Police called the Criminal Firearms
Clearinghouse that tracks guns recovered by local
law enforcement officers across the state. The
Post obtained the database to circumvent a
congressional ban on the release of federal data
about guns recovered by law enforcement officers.
FINDINGS: “The Hidden Life of Guns” tracks how
weapons move easily through society. Stories
examined which gun retailers sold the most
weapons recovered after crimes; analysis of NRA
campaign contributions; how cop killers got their
guns; U.S. guns tied to Mexican drug war; impact of
assault-weapons ban.

The Los Angeles Times
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Database of individual students’ test scores (no names)
FINDINGS: Los Angeles school officials failed to measure the performance of classroom
teachers. The Times applied a method called gain-score analysis to a huge database of
individual students’ test scores and their teachers, identified the most and least
effective teachers based on how much the students’ scores improved. The Times hired a
national expert in gain-score analysis to do the data crunching, but also did additional
statistical analysis to identify high- and low-performing schools and otherwise verify their
findings. The paper identified and rated 6,000 teachers by name.

Scripps Howard News Service
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Computer records of 525,742 homicides from 1980 to 2008. The
FBI provided most of the data. But Scripps supplemented these using the Freedom of
Information Act to obtain detailed records of 15,322 killings that local police did not
disclose to the federal government. The resulting database - the most complete
accounting of U.S. homicide victims ever assembled - was created to determine if serial
killings could be identified among the nation's 185,000 unsolved homicides.
FINDINGS: Authorities in Indiana and Ohio have launched investigations into suspected
serial killings after the investigation found alarming clusters of unsolved homicides of
women across the nation. Also, police in Nevada confirm for the first time that they are
hunting a likely serial killer who has targeted up to seven women, mostly prostitutes,
and has scattered their partial remains across three states.

KNXV-TV Phoenix
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Collision logs, police reports, spending records
FINDINGS: Simple mistakes and disregard for traffic signs posted near the Valley’s twentymile light rail account for most of the collisions recorded during its first year of service.
The ABC15 investigators uncovered many of the drivers made the same, avoidable
mistakes and at least 11 percent of the accidents happened at the same Phoenix
intersection.

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Milwaukee
Water Works data. Underlying Census
data. Multiple regression analysis.
FINDINGS: An analysis during a recent
two-year period shows that the lower
the income in a neighborhood, the
more water was used on average in
single-family homes. The newspaper's
analysis also found that
neighborhoods with larger minority
populations tend to use more water on
average. The culprits? Outdated
plumbing and water fixtures.

National Public Radio
DATA / DOCUMENTS: U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration data
FINDINGS: Citations for safety and health violations by operators of underground coal
mines have increased by nearly a third since 2006, with federal mine inspectors
focusing about equally on three main types of mining hazards. The analysis found that
three categories of problems — fire and coal dust issues; ventilation problems; and
electrical issues — each made up about a quarter of the violations found by inspectors
nationwide. Includes interactive timeline of Massey Energy’s mining problems.

The Charleston Gazette
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Used a Hex Editor
(free version) to track changes in a Word
document to show who actually wrote a
grant application: a state official steering
work to her son.
FINDINGS: A mess hangs over Workforce
West Virginia, the state's employment
training office. An ongoing Gazette
investigation shows that a state official
funneled grant money to her son's
computer firm – even after the son was on
his way to prison for making lavish
purchases on the Internet with stolen
credit card numbers.

USA Today
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Census Bureau redistricting data
FINDINGS: Rolling release of data, graphics, visualizations for all 50 states.

California Watch
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Since
March 2010, we have collected
912 documents and broken them
down into 2861 excerpts.
FINDINGS: Politics Verbatim
collects and categorizes the
promises, proposals, arguments
and attacks made by the two
major-party candidates for
governor in California. Our site
allows voters to drill down on
issues and hold the candidates
accountable.

McClatchey Newspapers – CAL
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Pension
plan valuation reports
FINDINGS: Escalating annual
pension payments barely touch
the looming shortfall: $28
billion in unfunded liabilities at
the 80 largest city and county
governments in California. On
top of that, those cities and
counties owe about $8 billion
in pension-related bond debt –
all in a time of shrinking
budgets. In many areas, the
total pension shortfall is more
than the annual payroll; in
some, it is more than the
general fund budget. Spread
that debt evenly, and it comes
out to about $4,000 per
household in those cities and
counties.

ProPublica and The Seattle
Times
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Random
sample of 1,200 foreclosures
in 3 cities; collected 60 data
points on each one.
FINDINGS: Conventional
wisdom about foreclosures is
often wrong. The analysis
found that half of the
foreclosures affected people
over 40; three in four loans
were not “predatory”; and more
than half of the foreclosures
led to people being able to
keep their homes.

Sarasota Herald-Tribune
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Financial
documents of more than 100
insurance companies. Created
scores for the companies.
FINDINGS: The series exposed
companies that continued to sell
policies when they had no way to
pay claims; revealed company
owners who demanded rate hikes
while secretly siphoning profits
from their struggling businesses;
revealed how insurers and
reinsurers manipulated the
market to overcharge
homeowners and maximize
profits.

WBEZ Chicago
DATA / DOCUMENTS: USDA
data on vendors approved
for food stamps
FINDINGS: Parts of
Chicago are food deserts
– places where there are
few grocery stores with
fresh produce and meat.
Often, low-income families
who rely on food stamps
shop at liquor stores, gas
stations and dollar stores.
A WBEZ investigation
found that these retailers
make up 30 percent of the
food stamp providers in
Chicago.

The New York Times
DATA / DOCUMENTS: President Obama’s proposed 2012 budget
FINDINGS: Interactive allows readers to explore in depth.

KIRO-TV Seattle
DATA / DOCUMENTS:
State Park Department
data, internal memos, emails
FINDINGS: After state
officials changed rules
requiring an opt-out of a
$5 park fee instead of an
opt-in, those paying the
fee – largely unknowingly
– jumped from 3 percent
to 50 percent. Those in
poor counties were paying
a disproportionate share.
State collections went
from about $50,000 a
month to about $1
million.

The Seattle Times
DATA / DOCUMENTS: 15,000
pages of documents,
including internal e-mails
from state agencies.
Computer databases and
thousands of pages of
disciplinary actions from the
state. Created a custom
database of adult family
home enforcement actions
from 1995-2009. Also used
a state database of death
certificates and a state
database of hospital
admissions (Comprehensive
Hospital Abstract Reporting
System).

FINDINGS: A rolling investigation finds extensive
problems in Washington’s system of adult family
homes. Topics included exploitation by owners, lax
state regulation/enforcement, neglect and abuse of
seniors, and hidden costs to families.

Winston-Salem Journal
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Built spreadsheets to track Court of Appeals decision. Database
from program administrators.
FINDINGS: North Carolina’s satellite-based monitoring of sex offenders program may
create a false sense of security. Legal challenges may reduce the number of offenders
who will have to enroll. GPS monitoring was overturned in more than half the cases. Also,
41 percent of enrollees were being tracked but had no restrictions on where they could
go. Built an interactive map of distribution of GPS-monitored sex offenders using the
Geocommons map builder.

The (Bergen, N.J.) Record
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Federal Superfund records and data;
state environmental records and data.
FINDINGS: New Jersey has more than 20,000 contaminated sites, including the most
Superfund sites in the nation. Many sit untouched year after year because of government
inertia and court battles with polluters. “Toxic Landscape” is the newspaper’s ongoing
effort to track the pollution and its impact. With an interactive map, readers can find
contaminated sites near them and get information about their status.

Detroit Free Press
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Inspections and other
records from the federal Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.
FINDINGS: More than two dozen pipeline
accidents have occurred in Michigan in the
past decade. There are no federal regulations
on how far major pipelines should be from
homes, schools or businesses. A 1929
Michigan law requires only that companies
make a good-faith effort to minimize the
physical and economic impacts of pipelines.

Center for Public Integrity and News 21
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Thousands of pages of documents, reports, accident &
investigation data, National Transportation Safety Board & federal regulatory agencies.
FINDINGS: This investigative package was conducted by journalism students from 11
universities participating in the Carnegie-Knight Journalism Initiative in partnership with
the Center for Public Integrity. Their work is being published by MSNBC.com and The
Washington Post. The 23-story package investigates the state of travel in America,
uncovering a breakdown of safety systems across the board. Safety recommendations
from the National Transportation Safety Board are taking more than 5 years to
implement.

ESPN
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Local health
department inspection reports
FINDINGS: At 30 of the venues (28
percent), more than half of the concession
stands or restaurants had been cited for at
least one "critical" or "major" health
violation.

KING-TV Seattle
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Spreadsheets created with
payroll records, time sheets and other data and
documents from Washington State Ferries.
FINDINGS: The rolling investigation uncovered
serious problems within the country's largest ferry
system - the Washington State Ferries. State
employees ignored millions of taxpayer dollars in
questionable spending. There was practically no
internal review or accountability. The head of the
state ferry system has vowed to make changes
and address questionable but deep-rooted
practices. Gov. Christine Gregoire has called for an
audit of the ferries including an expert panel to
conduct a management review.

The Wall Street Journal
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Data from the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management,
Regulation and Enforcement
FINDINGS: Surprise inspections of
deepwater drilling rigs in the Gulf of
Mexico dwindled to about three a year
over the past decade, even as
exploratory drilling far from shore
increased. And since 2004 federal
authorities haven't made a single
surprise inspection on any of the 50 or
so deepwater natural gas and oil
production platforms in the Gulf, despite
a law requiring periodic unannounced
inspections. Like rigs, these semipermanent structures are at risk for oil
spills and worker fatalities.

WTVF-TV, Nashville
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Nashville Police crime
stats, FBI uniform crime stats, Tennessee
Bureau of Investigation crime stats
FINDINGS: Nashville Police are “fudging the
stats” when it comes to crime. WTVF found
burglaries being disguised as “vandalism” and
rapes being hidden as “matter of record”
reports. Plus, police had made crimes more
difficult to report, forcing citizens to wait
longer than ever to talk to an officer. Despite
claims to have one of the best clearance rates
in the country, the number of unsolved
homicides has skyrocketed. Mayor Karl Dean
ordered an audit.

Raleigh News & Observer
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Reporters reviewed more than 15,000 pages of documents
detailing crime lab protocol and practices. Many investigative files are not public, but
they analyzed dozens of cases through court files and lawsuits.
FINDINGS: State Bureau of Investigation agents have cut corners, bullied the
vulnerable, and twisted reports and court testimony when the truth threatened to
undermine their cases.

The Kansas City Star et al
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Issues surveys, campaign
finance data, key votes
FINDINGS: The Midwest Democracy Project,
launched in July 2010, aims to combine
traditional journalism techniques with the latest in
multimedia and social media to create a rich,
diverse source for citizens of Missouri and Kansas
to get the information they need to make
informed decisions. The vision: open-source
approach to election and campaign news and
information.

KHOU-TV, Houston
DATA / DOCUMENTS:
Thousands of state
laboratory tests from water
providers across Texas,
from the Texas Commission
on Environmental Quality.
FINDINGS: Hundreds of
water providers around the
Gulf Coast region are
providing their customers
with drinking water that
contains radioactive
contaminants that raise
health risks.

Rocky Mountain Investigative
News Network and the INN
DATA / DOCUMENTS: NASA
federal air safety reports and
FAA data
FINDINGS: Colorado’s air traffic
controllers reported more
serious safety concerns last
year than they had in the
previous five years combined.
And the number of near mid-air
collisions in Colorado since
2000 may be as much as three
times higher than the FAA
publicly reports.

Toronto Star
DATA / DOCUMENTS:
Toronto Police “contact
card” data
FINDINGS: After a
seven-year FOI battle,
the Star found that
police are 3 times more
likely to stop blacks
than whites, and that
the trend holds in
neighborhoods
throughout Toronto.

GET THE PRESENTATION
¾www.mediafire.com / haddix

