Using testing in your stories
IRE Conference 2011 - Orlando
Ellen Gabler
Chicago Tribune
egabler@tribune.com

Joanna Lin
California Watch
jlin@californiawatch.org

Andrea Rock
Consumer Reports
rockan@consumer.org

Finding ideas
A story can be based entirely on testing or testing can be used as a small
element to bolster an existing story. Many consumer-focused or science
stories make good testing stories. Donʼt be afraid to give it a try and see
what you find.
Some examples of testing in stories: Lead/cadmium in toys and jewelry;
salmonella in chicken; mercury in cosmetics; bacteria in tap beer; BPA in
products; mercury in sushi and fish; pesticides; decibel levels at concerts;
heavy metals in nutritional supplements; pharmaceuticals in water.
Determining what to test on how to test for it
• Answer the question “What am I testing for?” Do not think of your
story in terms of “Letʼs test water or “letʼs test toys.” Instead think:
“Letʼs test water for pharmaceuticals” or “letʼs test toys for lead.”
• Know the regulations inside and out. Which agency regulates the
substance or product you want to test? What is the specific
regulation that applies to what you want to test? Find it and read it.
• Know the exact methodology regulators use when testing. (Ex. EPA
Method 200.9) If regulators wonʼt tell you, file a records request. This
is crucial because you need the results to stand up to criticism.
Regulators may attack your methodology so make it the same as
theirs.
• Understand what your lab tests can and cannot tell you. For
example, some tests will tell you how much lead is in a product but
cannot tell how much lead leaches out. That is important to know
because the lead that comes out is what is a concern for consumers.
Do your research before testing
Testing can be expensive so it is best to learn as much as you can about
what you might test before you hire a lab.
• Use government data and academic studies to see what has already
been found. What are the trends? What might still be a problem?
• Study other scientistsʼ methodology. Read the footnotes. Call the

scientists and ask them how they did it.
Choose your lab or testing device carefully
• Donʼt screw this one up. Choosing a good lab is crucial to your
testing success.
• Make sure the lab you pick is accredited to test what you are testing
for.
• Talk with the lab director and understand exactly what methods will
be used for your samples. A good lab director will explain the
science and will happily provide documentation about their testing.
Holding down costs
• University labs will sometimes test for free or discounted rates.
• Commercial labs might offer discounts if your newsroom establishes
an “account” with them, using the lab for future projects. (But make
sure to only use a lab if it can do the proper method. Never sacrifice
quality for cost.)
• See if thereʼs a less expensive test you can use to “screen” products
before doing a more expensive test. One example is using an “XRF
gun” to see if products contain lead or cadmium. The gun can give a
basic screening to tell if something contains lead but for the true
amount of lead that comes off the product, a lab test must be done.
• Get a price estimate early on. Some elements are extremely cheap
to test for - $10 a test. Some chemicals can be $400-600 for a test.
How many samples to test
There is no one size-fits-all formula but here are some basic rules:
• The more variability among samples of the same product, the more
samples you need to test. Three samples is generally the minimum
that might be sufficient to compare the performance of standardized
manufactured products such as vacuum cleaners or drills. But if you
wanted to determine what percentage of chicken nationwide is
contaminated with a pathogen such as salmonella, youʼd need to
test hundreds of samples to account for variables: numerous
brands, dozens of processing plants, thousands of retailers and
farms where chickens are raised.
• Making a statement about the prevalence of a contaminant
nationwide requires testing more samples than an assessment of
products in a smaller geographic area, or providing a snapshot of the
marketplace that doesnʼt draw conclusions about a specific product

or brand.
• If you are differentiating by brands and your results reveal a safety
problem with one or more of them, test additional samples in case
manufacturers challenge your conclusions.
Ask the experts
Experts of all kinds can help you along the way with your testing stories.
• To more precisely determine how many samples you need to test
and what conclusions you can draw from the results, consult a
statistician. The American Statistical Association has a database of
members with expertise and experience who have volunteered to
serve as sources for media.
• Talk to the person who heads the regulatory office that oversees
whatever you are testing.
Hold people and companies accountable
• Understand how often regulators are supposed to do their own
testing. Are they doing it? FOIA to find out.
• Remember that regulators arenʼt always right. Are the regulations
too loose? Are credible scientists worried about loose regulations?
• If you find that something is wrong with a product, trace back to the
company responsible for the contamination.
General tips
• Stay organized. Meticulously label your samples and keep a detailed
spreadsheet so you donʼt get confused about what was tested and
which company/source it came from.
• Photograph the products before testing. In some cases, testing
destroys a product.
• Donʼt get tripped up by the science. It sounds a lot more complicated
than it actually is.
• Know when to stop. Testing can be a little like gambling – it is fun
but gets addictive.
• Be transparent about the methodology and lab you used. Your work
should stand up to scientific scrutiny.

