http://www.washingtonpost.com/guns
DAY ONE Maryland gun store tied to 2,500 crime guns A Post investigation breaks
years of secrecy on where region’s crime guns are sold and how they move through
society. How politics protect gun dealers Why we know less about crime gun sales than
we did 10 years ago.
DAY TWO Store’s guns moved quickly to crime D & R Arms had few gun traces for its
first 10 years of business. But starting in 2004, traces surged.
DAY THREE Firearms watchdog on short leash ATF’s resources, reach are limited as
the gun lobby wields its influence. How cop killers get their guns
DAY FOUR Surprising patterns found in an unprecedented investigation of more than
500 police officer deaths.
DAY FIVE The Post tracked two guns from entry into the U.S. through to recovery at a
murder scene. Both changed hands multiple times before being used to kill a police
officer.
DAY SIX U.S. guns tied to Mexican crime The Post has uncovered the names of the top
12 U.S. dealers of guns traced to Mexico in the past two years.
DAY SEVEN Sellers shut down by ATF find other ways A new name on a license can
mean business continues as usual, even after the ATF revokes or denies a license.
DAY EIGHT NRA-led gun lobby's powerful influence The NRA-led gun lobby has
consistently outmaneuvered and hemmed in the ATF, using political muscle to erect
barriers to tougher gun laws.
INTEREST GROUPS – Selected Source List to get started
•

•

•

PRO GUN
National Rifle Association – widely considered one of
the most powerful lobby groups in Washington. Andrew
Arulanandam, director of public affairs (703) 2673820.
Gun Owners of America, http://gunowners.org/ which is
generally to the right of the NRA and only has
endorsed Republicans (cannot find evidence of a
Democratic endorsement.)
The National Shooting Sports Foundation
http://www.nssf.org/ is the trade association for the
firearms industry, representing 6,500 manufacturers,
distributors, firearms retailers, shooting ranges,

•
•

•

•
•
•

•
•
•

sportsmen's organizations and publishers. Its mission
is “to promote, protect and preserve hunting and the
shooting sports. Spokesman Ted Novin, tnovin@nssf.org,
often more accessible than NRA.
Fraternal Order of Police – leans toward NRA on many
if not most gun issues. James Pasco, executive
Director jpasco@fop.net
Gary Kleck, Florida State University, has argued that
gun ownership reduces homicide rates
http://www.criminology.fsu.edu/p/faculty-garykleck.php
ANTI-GUN
Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence – original antigun group, founded as Handgun Control Inc., it took
the name of James Brady. The group is actively legally
in lawsuits to defend gun laws and pursue gun dealers.
Caroline Brewer, 202-289-5769, cbrew@bradymail.org
Violence Policy Center -- Kristen Rand, 202-822-8200
x102, krand@vpc.org
Coalition to Stop Gun Violence, Ladd Everitt, 202-4080061 x1003, leveritt@csgv.
Mayors Against Illegal Guns – founded by NYC Mayor
Michael Bloomberg as a pro-police counterbalance to
the NRA. Very effective with the media. Filed dozens
of lawsuits against gun dealers and conducted
undercover operations to make straw purchases.
Police Executives Research Forum
http://www.policeforum.org/ -- police chiefs’ policy
research arm
International Association of Chiefs of Police
http://www.theiacp.org/
Garen J. Wintemute, gjwintemute@ucdavis.edu

FORMER EMPLOYEES AND RIVALS.
•

•

Former gun industry and NRA lobbyist Richard Feldman
has soured on the NRA and written a book, “Ricochet,
Confessions of a Gun Lobbyist," published by John
Wiley & Sons in October 2007. He has founded a rival
to the NRA called Independent Firearms Owners
Association (IFOA) He is pro-gun, but anti-NRA
http://www.independentfirearmowners.org/
Gun Owners of America, http://gunowners.org/ which is
generally to the right of the NRA and only has
endorsed Republicans (cannot find evidence of a
Democratic endorsement.)

•

The ATF Association (ATFA) was established in 2007.
Its purpose is to bring together former and current
ATF colleagues. http://www.atfassociation.org/ James
Cavanaugh, a former ATF special agent-in-charge, Jim
Cavanaugh jimcavanaugh@comcast.net
JAMES V. GRIMALDI grimaldij@washpost.com
http://www.facebook.com/wpjamesvgrimaldi Follow me @jamesvgrimaldi

