Doug Haddix & Mark Horvit
Investigative Reporters and Editors

Sarasota Herald-Tribune
DATA / DOCUMENTS:
Financial documents of more
than 100 insurance companies.
Created scores for the companies.
FINDINGS: The series exposed
companies that continued to sell
policies when they had no way to
pay claims; revealed company
owners who demanded rate hikes
while secretly siphoning profits
from their struggling businesses;
revealed how insurers and
reinsurers manipulated the
market to overcharge
homeowners and maximize
profits.

The Post and Courier
(Charleston, SC)
Findings: The Probate Court was
set up in part to protect the elderly,
but sometimes it turns on a
financial faucet that helps drain the
estates of people it’s supposed to
guard. The financial drain on the
estates occurs mainly when
Charleston's Elder Support asks the
Probate Court to protect the person.
In some such cases, court-approved
fees for attorneys, guardians and
conservators help bleed an estate
empty within a year or two.

CNBC

Findings: A 10-month CNBC
investigation revealed thousands
of complaints and more than 75
lawsuits stemming from alleged
inadvertent discharges from the
Remington 700. At least two
dozen deaths and more than one
hundred injuries have been
linked to a possible design flaw in
Remington's 700-series boltaction rifle. Remington stands by
its rifle, and maintains it is safe
and reliable and that the
accidents are a result of improper
maintenance and unsafe
handling.

Los Angeles Times
Findings: Beginning in the spring of 2010, the Times published a series of stories
exposing officials' exorbitant salaries and financial misdeeds in the small workingclass town of Bell. The rolling investigation led to criminal charges against eight
current and former city officials, as well as millions of dollars in tax refunds to
residents. The stories sparked legislative reform efforts aimed at public pay and
pension abuses, including a bill that would require California's city, county and
schools officials to disclose their compensation online.

Investigative News Network
and NPR

Findings: A six-month
examination of more than 150,000
reports filed by pilots and others
in the aviation industry over the
past 20 years reveals surprising
and sometimes shocking safety
breaches and close calls at local,
regional and major airports
throughout the country. The
investigation was a collaboration
between members of the
Investigative News Network and
National Public Radio. Data for
this project was provided by the
National Institute of ComputerAssisted Reporting (NICAR).

St. Petersburg Times

Findings: The U.S. Navy Veterans, a
nonprofit organization that the IRS
certified as a tax-exempt charity, lists
85 officers in its national
headquarters and state chapters, but
the Times could only find one of
them, Bobby Thompson, who
operated out of a duplex in a lowincome area of Tampa. From the
same location, Thompson had offices
for a political action committee called
NAVPAC. The Navy Veterans charity
maintains an extensive website, has
filed scores of tax returns and state
registration papers with the IRS and
state regulators, but the newspaper
found that the Navy Veterans
nonprofit is all but invisible.

The Daily Helmsman / University of Memphis
Findings: The investigation focused on funding for Registered Student Organizations.
Each year University of Memphis students pay tuition, but some might not know their
money also pays for the tuition for officers of the Student Government Association and
Student Activities Council. Five students all receive full tuition. Students pay half of
another officer’s tuition. The money comes from the Student Activity Fee, a mandatory
charge included in student tuition.

International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists with the BBC
Findings: A global network of lobby
groups has spent nearly $100
million since the mid-1980s to
preserve the market for asbestos, a
carcinogen now banned or
restricted in 52 countries. Scientists
say asbestos may cause up to 10
million deaths by 2030, with a
mounting toll in the developing
world.

Las Vegas Sun
Findings: The newspaper obtained a record of every Nevada hospital inpatient visit
going back a decade — 2.9 million in all. The information, coupled with interviews with
more than 150 patients and health care insiders, yielded a sweeping and detailed portrait
of hospital care in Las Vegas. Revealed are the dangers patients have unknowingly
encountered as they enter delivery rooms, surgical suites and intensive care units,
including thousands of cases of injury, death and deadly infection associated with stays
in Las Vegas hospitals.

WFAA-TV, Dallas / Fort Worth
Findings: A lack of regulatory oversight of natural gas lines across Texas has
created ticking time bombs under houses. Gas line explosions have killed and
injured unsuspecting victims. The investigation focused on faulty couplers linked
to many of the accidents. The series forced state officials to order the oil and gas
industry to spend $1 billion to dig up and replace aging lines and couplings.

The New York Observer
Findings: According to an
extensive review of the
mayor’s financial records
by The Observer, even as
Bloomberg was trying to
counter the loss of taxes and
other income from the richest
New Yorkers, the foundation
he controls was in the process
of shuttling hundreds of
millions of dollars out of the
city and into controversial
offshore tax havens that would
produce nothing at all for the
city in terms of tax revenue.
By the end of 2008, the
Bloomberg Family Foundation
had transferred almost $300
million into various offshore
destinations—some of them
notorious tax-dodge hideouts.

The Washington Post
DATA / DOCUMENTS: The analysis was
conducted using a little-known database
maintained by Virginia State Police called the
Criminal Firearms Clearinghouse that tracks guns
recovered by local law enforcement officers across
the state. The Post obtained the database to
circumvent a congressional ban on the release of
federal data about guns recovered by law
enforcement officers.
FINDINGS: “The Hidden Life of Guns” tracks how
weapons move easily through society. Stories
examined which gun retailers sold the most
weapons recovered after crimes; analysis of NRA
campaign contributions; how cop killers got their
guns; U.S. guns tied to Mexican drug war; impact
of assault-weapons ban.

Center for Public Integrity and News 21
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Thousands of pages of documents, reports, accident &
investigation data, National Transportation Safety Board & federal regulatory agencies.
FINDINGS: This investigative package was conducted by journalism students from 11
universities participating in the Carnegie-Knight Journalism Initiative in partnership
with the Center for Public Integrity. Their work is being published by MSNBC.com
and The Washington Post. The 23-story package investigates the state of travel in
America, uncovering a breakdown of safety systems across the board. Safety
recommendations from the National Transportation Safety Board are taking more than
5 years to implement.

CBS News

Findings: Keeping American weapons
from getting into the hands of Mexican
gangs is the goal of a program called
"Project Gunrunner." But critics say it's
doing exactly the opposite. ATF
managers allegedly made a controversial
decision: allow hundreds of weapons,
including assault weapons, on the
streets. The idea, they said, was to gather
intelligence and see where the guns
ended up. Insiders say it's a dangerous
tactic called letting the guns "walk.“ One
agent called the strategy "insane."
Another said: "We were fully aware the
guns would probably be moved across
the border to drug cartels where they
could be used to kill."

ProPublica
Findings: Despite
massive expense by
U.S. taxpayers,
Americans endure
some of the worst
outcomes for dialysis
care in the
industrialized world.
One in five patients
dies each year. Those
that survive often
grapple with frequent
hospitalizations and
poor quality of life.

The Seattle Times
DATA / DOCUMENTS:
15,000 pages of documents,
including internal e-mails
from state agencies.
Computer databases and
thousands of pages of
disciplinary actions from the
state. Created a custom
database of adult family
home enforcement actions
from 1995-2009. Also used a
state database of death
certificates and a state
database of hospital
admissions (Comprehensive
Hospital Abstract Reporting
System).

FINDINGS: A rolling investigation finds extensive
problems in Washington’s system of adult family
homes. Topics included exploitation by owners, lax
state regulation/enforcement, neglect and abuse of
seniors, and hidden costs to families.

KHOU-TV, Houston
Findings: Hundreds
of water providers
around the Gulf Coast
region are providing
their customers with
drinking water that
contains radioactive
contaminants that
raise health risks,
according to state lab
results and public
health scientists. The
revelations came to
light during a fourmonth KHOU-TV
investigation, which
examined thousands
of state laboratory
tests from water
providers across
Texas.

The New York Times
Findings: A rolling investigation uncovers new avenues for error with medical
radiation equipment — through software flaws, faulty programming, poor safety
procedures, or inadequate staffing and training. Installments also examined X-rays
and unshielded infants, X-rays and kids visiting the dentist, health problems for stroke
victims getting scans, and inadequate safeguards in using sophisticated equipment.

Youth Radio and NPR

Findings: The Youth Radio
investigation draws on interviews,
eyewitness reporting, and Oakland
(Calif.) city records to piece
together what life is like for girls
when they become trapped by
pimps -- and how law enforcement
continues to criminalize girls the
state legally defines as sexually
exploited victims. In addition to
the broadcast stories, Youth Radio
has published interviews with high
school students currently working
in the sex trade in California and a
handwritten pimp "business plan"
provided by prosecutors, and
delved into the controversy of
whether some Bay Area hip hop
music glorifies sex trafficking.

WTHR-TV, Indianapolis
Findings: A new audit of Indiana's job creation programs confirms what WTHR has
been reporting for the past year: tens of thousands of new jobs promoted by state
leaders have never come. State leaders boast of 100,000 new Indiana jobs in the past
five years, but an Eyewitness News investigation finds many of the state's "economic
successes" are actually empty fields and deserted factories where thousands of
promised jobs never showed up.

California Watch
Findings: State regulators have routinely failed to enforce California’s landmark
earthquake safety law for public schools, allowing children and teachers to occupy
buildings with structural flaws and potential safety hazards reported during construction.
California Watch determined that roughly six out of every 10 public schools in the state
have at least one uncertified building project. Inspectors have been missing from
construction sites at key moments and have been accused of filing false reports – but that
has not stopped them from getting more work.

Bradenton Herald
Findings: The $433,000 salary of a local public health agency executive led the
newspaper to dive deeper into the Manatee County Rural Health agency. The
newspaper uncovered conflicts of interest, excessive spending and questionable
contracts. The investigation produced results: Several board members resigned, new
rules for contracts were put into place, and fresh oversight of the agency was put
into place.

Rocky Mountain Investigative News Network
Findings: A loophole in Colorado’s medical marijuana rules means thousands of
pounds of surplus marijuana are left to feed the black market here and in
neighboring states. The constitutional amendment that legalized medical marijuana
in Colorado a decade ago allows caregivers to have three mature plants and two
ounces of usable marijuana per patient. But under ideal growing conditions, the
yield can reach more than a pound per plant. That means every grower could have
surplus marijuana that’s legal while growing on the plant, but illegal the moment it’s
harvested.

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Findings: From a violent patient
allowed to roam free to a pregnancy
case that violated policy at every turn
and nurses who falsified documents to
cover their mistakes, the newspaper’s
investigation exposed a raft of problems
at the Milwaukee County Mental
Health Complex, home to the county’s
most vulnerable residents. Lax
oversight allowed a patient with a
history of violence, including sexual
assault, to repeatedly find new victims,
including one who became pregnant
and another he is charged with sexually
assaulting. Staffers repeatedly allowed
the patient to leave the secure ward,
including overnight visits to a group
home, at times signing charts to say he
was being checked every 15 minutes.

ABC News

Findings: Millions of Americans live near oil refineries with aging equipment that’s
improperly maintained. In addition, the industry relies on a dangerous chemical,
hydrochloric acid, rather than safer alternatives that are more expensive. Inspection
and accident reports show that some companies have known about serious deficiencies
for years.

The Miami Herald
Findings: In its “Neglected to Death” series, the newspaper revealed that caretakers
in assisted-living facilities across Florida were neglecting patients of proper medical
attention and basic care. The improper care has led to the deaths of dozens of
residents. The Herald obtained confidential records from the Department of
Children & Families that documented the deaths of 70 people in the past eight years
from the actions of their caregivers. Many of the cases are overlooked, and the
caretakers are rarely held accountable for the deaths of the residents.

Scripps Howard News Service
Findings: In one of the fastest
growing forms of identity theft, crooks
are using a stranger’s Social Security
number and other personal
information to fool the Internal
Revenue Service into diverting the
person’s rightful refund to the thieves’
pockets, according to a Scripps Howard
News Service investigation. The
volume of tax- or wage-related identity
theft complaints to the U.S. Federal
Trade Commission more than tripled
from 2005 to 2009 according to a
Scripps analysis of more than 1.4
million ID theft records in the agency’s
Consumer Sentinel database. SHNS
pinpoints the national hot spots for
identity theft and offers an interactive
map of complaints by ZIP code.

WTVF-TV, Nashville
DATA / DOCUMENTS: Nashville Police
crime stats, FBI uniform crime stats,
Tennessee Bureau of Investigation crime stats
FINDINGS: Nashville Police are “fudging the
stats” when it comes to crime. WTVF found
burglaries being disguised as “vandalism” and
rapes being hidden as “matter of record”
reports. Plus, police had made crimes more
difficult to report, forcing citizens to wait
longer than ever to talk to an officer. Despite
claims to have one of the best clearance rates
in the country, the number of unsolved
homicides has skyrocketed. Mayor Karl Dean
ordered an audit.

National Public Radio

Findings: NPR spent the past
several months analyzing
hundreds of pages of campaign
finance reports, lobbying
documents and corporate
records. What they show is a
quiet, behind-the-scenes effort
to help draft and pass Arizona
Senate Bill 1070 by an industry
that stands to benefit from it:
the private prison industry.
The law could send hundreds of
thousands of illegal immigrants
to prison in a way never done
before. And it could mean
hundreds of millions of dollars
in profits to private prison
companies responsible for
housing them.

Dallas Morning News

Findings: UT Southwestern Medical Center and Parkland Memorial Hospital are known
for their contributions to medical research and public health. But have those
accomplishments come at a cost to patients? The Dallas Morning News investigates
allegations of lax supervision of doctors in training, patient harm, and billing fraud at the
publicly funded teaching hospital.

USA Today
Findings: A USA Today investigation documented 201 criminal cases across the nation in
which federal judges found that prosecutors broke the rules. The abuses have put
innocent people in prison, set guilty people free, and cost taxpayers millions of dollars in
legal fees and sanctions. The newspaper documented 201 criminal cases in which judges
determined that Justice Department prosecutors — the nation's most elite and powerful
law enforcement officials — themselves violated laws or ethics rules.

Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism
Findings: At least 45 registered sex offenders living among other nursing home
residents, according to a Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism review of
addresses for the state’s nearly 20,000 registered sex offenders and 399 licensed
nursing homes. But unlike many other sex offenders, most of those in nursing
homes live unnoticed by their neighbors: State and federal laws don’t require
background checks of residents or notification to the vulnerable people who live,
work and visit with them.

The (Bergen, N.J.) Record
Findings: Forty years ago, New Jersey officials promised to clean up an environment
tainted by generations of dirty industry and illegal dumping. Yet the contamination
persists. The state has more than 20,000 contaminated sites, including the most
Superfund sites in the nation. Many sit untouched year after year because of government
inertia and court battles with polluters. “Toxic Landscape” is The Record's ongoing effort
to track the pollution and its impact on our environment. With an interactive map, you
can find contaminated sites near you, and get information about the status of attempts to
clean them up.

Detroit Free Press

Findings: Despite hundreds
of oil and natural-gas
pipeline accidents in the last
decade, there are no federal
regulations governing how far
major pipelines should be
from homes, or schools or
businesses. Even in the 1929
Michigan law that governs
the location of oil pipelines,
there is no mention of how
far they should be set back
from such structures. The law
requires only that companies
make a good-faith effort to
minimize the physical and
economic impacts of
pipelines.

