The art of the interview
James Grimaldi, investigative reporter, The Washington Post

Columbus, Ohio -- May 21, 2011

Otterbein University Department of Communication
Co-sponsored by SPJ-Central Ohio Chapter

PREPARE
Do your homework. Read the clips. Read their reports,
essays, studies, research papers, books – or as much as you
can before you talk to them. Refer to it when you talk to
them. If you’re impressed, say so. If you learned something
you didn’t know, start with that.
WRITE OUT YOUR QUESTIONS
Make a list of questions, especially for complicated
subjects. If the person or organization is the subject of an
investigation, this could take up pages. If it is a short
interview done on the fly, it might just be one-word
reminders.
STRATEGIZE
Think through the entire interview. Know what the possible
range of answers could be and be prepared to know what the
question would be for each answer. In every interview, there
are a handful of questions that are junctions – which could
lead in one direction, or another, like branches on a tree.
Consider diagramming the interview questions.
ASSEMBLE YOUR EXHIBITS
Organize your documents. Bring the key ones. I covered the
Microsoft antitrust trial and I once asked government lawyer
David Boies how he sorted through millions of documents.
Boies said that every case boils down to a dozen documents
that make the case. Get your top 12 documents and bring
copies of them.
IMITATE
Study interviewers who are good. Read lots of depositions –
especially good ones by good lawyers. There’s nothing like a
trial lawyer who is on her game in a meaty deposition or a
brilliant cross-examination. Watch how they catch

contradictions, how they assemble their questions, how they
have a command of the facts.
REHEARSE
Go over your questions with a colleague, spouse – or dog.
Practice asking the questions out loud. You’ll find better
ways to say it and to hone it down to the bare essence.
You’ll be less likely to speechify and get to the point.
MAKE A CONNECTION
Find something you have in common and discuss it. Oh, you’re
from Kansas City? So am I. What part of town are you from?
What’s your favorite barbecue joint? You have no connection?
Ask about the weather. I hear you got a foot of snow in
Boston today. Yes, it is small talk, but it makes you human
– important for phone interviews so that you’re not just a
voice on the other line.
GET INTO THEIR HEADS
This is all working up to understanding the subject of the
interview. Empathy is important. It will help you understand
your subject’s point-of-view and make him feel at ease.
LISTEN AND DON’T ARGUE
You can challenge your subject without arguing. Remember,
you have the final say, so make sure your subject has her
say. But, also don’t apologize before you ask a question.
Don’t say: “I’m sorry to ask you this, but…” That just makes
them guarded. Silence can be golden for you: Let them fill
the void.
GET THEM ON THE RECORD
If they want to do a “background” interview (not for
attribution), tell them you’ll ask them later to put
something on the record. Take good notes and then read back
the ones you want to use. More often than not they will say,
sure, go ahead and use it.
USE AN AUDIO (TAPE OR DIGITAL) RECORDER – OR NOT
Recording is case-by-case. For many if not most of my
interviews, I do not use a tape recorder. For the most
important ones, of course, I do. A tape recorder might be
good for combative or contentious sources in case they later
try to challenge a quote. Also, listening to yourself on a
recording is a great way to learn how to be a better
questioner. (Shut up, Grimaldi, and let him talk.)
A PRINT REPORTER’S EXPERIENCE WITH VIDEO
Unlike a print interview, where you might be focused on
taking notes, in a video you have to really focus on what
the subject is saying. Video is much more about a narrative
than it is about extracting certain bits of information.

