Money and Politics
WHO’S GIVING
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS. Track federal campaign contributions by individual,
company or industry at www.opensecrets.org, the Web site of the Center for
Responsive Politics. It is free and accurate. CRP codes donations to make them more
accessible than they are on the Federal Election Commission site, www.fec.gov. You
can also search by individual donor or employer at the FEC Web site:
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/disclosure_data_search.shtml. And if you
want total control over the data, you can download all the campaign data and create
your own database: http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftp_download.shtml.
Another site, http://moneyline.cq.com requires paid registrations. Organizes
material a little differently than CRP. Generally charges for additional information,
but might give free pass or special deal for smaller news organizations or students.
FECinfo also has reliable lobbying information. Selected state information at The
Institute on Money in State Politics http://www.followthemoney.org/ The
Campaign Finance Institute provides statistics and historical campaign finance
information. http://www.cfinst.org/
Fundraisers – The very best thing ever done by the Sunlight Foundation, Party
Time http://politicalpartytime.org is a crowd‐sourced project to track parties for
members of Congress or congressional candidates that happen all year round in
Washington, D.C. and beyond. Sources send invitations involving members of
Congress to Party Time, but since this is all voluntary, the information contained in
this database is by no means complete. Searchable by member, committee, etc.
527 Groups ­ IRS Data. The IRS has made the disclosures filed by section 527
organizations—the independent political committees that can raise money in
unlimited amounts from any source—searchable, albeit with a cranky, complicated,
squint‐inducing interface. You get raw data from the search, but right now it’s the
best thing going on 527s. The data is available here:
http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoBasicSearch.action http://for
ms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoAdvanced8871Search.action
Web site with political consultant information from the 2003‐2004 campaign:
http://www.publicintegrity.org/consultants/search.aspx). The data is out of date,
but you can cross reference the names of consultants in the Center’s database with
expenditure from House or presidential campaigns at OpenSecrets to find out where
they are today.
PRIVATELY FUNDED CONGRESSIONAL TRIPS, FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES,
STAFFER SALARIES. The Center for Responsive Politics has a link on site to
estimate members personal wealth. www.opensecrets.org/pfds/overview.php
Also, the very useful Web site, http://www.legistorm.com/ has information on
congressional trips, the raw financial disclosure forms and congressional staffer
salaries. Legistorm pretty much took over where others left off, such as the Center
for Public Integrity which had Medill’s database of trips from 2005 and updated it a

few years ago (but not lately): http://www.publicintegrity.org/powertrips/. The
Center for Responsive Politics also tracks trips at
http://opensecrets.org/travel/index.asp.
TRIPS. Reports of certain expenditures for all official foreign travel by Members and
staff of the U.S. House of Representatives are filed publicly under law. Reports from
1994 through the current quarter are printed in the Congressional Record and can
be searched here: http://clerk.house.gov/public_disc/foreign/index.aspx
Lawmakers trips found on CQ PoliticalMoneyLine, http://moneyline.cq.com –
formerly www.fecinfo.com – also has analyzed privately funded travel from 2000
to 2006 as disclosed by members and senators.
WHY THEY ARE GIVING
LEGISLATION – Thomas http://thomas.loc.gov/ From the Library of Congress.,
full text access to current bills under consideration in the U.S. House of
Representatives and Senate, the U.S. Code, Congressional Record, and more. The
Washington Post has a database of all congressional votes:
http://projects.washingtonpost.com/congress/112/
LOBBYING. Find lobbying reports at
www.senate.gov/legislative/Public_Disclosure/LDA_reports.htm. Click on
search the Lobbying Database and go here
soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfields Updated in recent years, it
contains reports filed on amounts of money paid to lobbyists, the issues on which
they lobbied, sometimes the agencies they lobbied and who hired them. DOJ’s
Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) web site can provide information on the
names of lobbyists for foreign entities. www.fara.gov
The Center for Responsive Politics maintains a lobbyist database that is vastly
improved in recent years: www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.php. It is making a
strong run at the former leader in the field, the FEE‐based service CQ Moneyline,
moneyline.cq.com.
Washington Representatives, which also has a web site,
www.lobbyists.info offers an up‐to‐date site of registered lobbyists. Lacks
historical data. Paid site but offers free, 5‐day trials. Often includes more timely
information than SOPR because they fact‐check the Senate filings.
EARMARKS. Taxpayers for Common Sense, www.taxpayer.net, has a well‐earned
reputation for tracking earmarks. You can download their full detailed excel
spreadsheets, which lists the earmarks in all appropriations and authorization bills
and includes the Congressional sponsor for each earmark, the amount and the
recipient. In 2008 (ONLY), the Sunlight Foundation and Taxpayers for Common
Sense posted a wiki version of the database for the 2008 fiscal year at
earmarkwatch.org.
Sunlight also has an experimental site for analysis of legislation by tracking bills, try
www.MAPLight.org, which provides the support and opposition bills garner from
interest groups and the campaign contributions given by those interest groups to
members of Congress and for the state of California. Currently track money and

influence in the U.S. Congress and the California legislature, with more states to
come.
CONTRACTS. www.Fedspending.org – a project of OMB Watch – combines data
from the Federal Procurement Data System and the Federal Assistance Award Data
System to create a free, searchable database of federal government contracting and
spending. The database allows users to search contracts and grants by state,
congressional district, contracting agency or type of award, and shows where the
money is being spent and whether it was competitively bid. The Contractor
Misconduct Database can be useful when looking for information on federal
contractors. The government awards contracts to companies with histories of
misconduct such as contract fraud and environmental, ethics, and labor violations.
The Project On Government Oversight (POGO) tracks misconduct on the top 100
contractors: www.contractormisconduct.org. Www.GovTrack.us is a user‐friendly
version of Thomas, the Library of Congress’ site for information on Congress.
GovTrack.us centralizes information on the legislative process into a Web site that
can actually be searched. Also, the Federal Contracts Database is sold by IRE. You
can search for federal contracts awarded to a particular business: a great place to
start when looking at contracts awarded to companies in your area, or work being
performed there. You can also search all contracts at a new government site,
http://usaspending.gov.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 required that a website be
created to "foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of funds made
available in this Act.” www.Recovery.gov is supposed to give taxpayers user‐
friendly tools to track Recovery funds ‐‐ how and where they are spent‐‐‐ in the
form of charts, graphs, and maps that provide national overviews down to specific
zip codes.
Government Documents– a project of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in
Washington (CREW) (http://citizensforethics.org/) – is an online, searchable
compendium of documents acquired from government agencies through the
Freedom of Information Act by CREW, Sunlight, the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
the Project on Government Oversight and Public Citizen.
http://www.scribd.com/citizensforethics Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in
Washington (CREW) has thousands of documents responsive to many Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) requests from GovernmentDogs.org on Scribd.com. Look up
the congressional correspondence logs, which Sunlight Foundation started
acquiring from federal agencies in 2008.
TRADE PRESS AND NEWSLETTERS. Most industries have a trade magazine,
newspaper or newsletter covering them and the regulators that regulate them.
Many of these can be found on Nexis or Factiva sites, or are kept in agency libraries.
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS. Nearly every industry has a trade group or
professional association, often based in Washington and state capitals, to represent
the industry’s interests. Find the group and get their publications. Many are online.
The American Association of Association Executives has a Web directory of
associations at www.asaecenter.org takes you to the site of each association (about
6500 of them).
LAWSUITS. Key documents to find a company’s disputes with creditors, employees,

rivals, etc. Can be windows into a company. For our SunCruz story, “Untangling a
Lobbyist's Stake in a Casino Fleet,” found at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp‐
dyn/content/linkset/2005/06/22/LI2005062200936.html
www.washingtonpost.com/abramoff, we looked at thousands of documents in
bankruptcy and state court. The SunCruz case led to Abramoff’s unraveling.
COMPANY OFFICIALS. The company’s public affairs officers and public officials.
Outside public affairs officials who represent the company. Use discretion
depending on the angle of the story. If you can’t reach them at work, you can call
them at home. Get company official names from web sites and from SEC (see below).
Also, Leadership Directories, publisher of government “Yellow Books,” public
executive listings. The web site is http://ldi.bvdep.com and lists the executives at
every company. It's expensive but worth it if you can afford it.
FORMER EMPLOYEES AND RIVALS. Employees who have sued the company,
though they have an ax to grind, can often provide inside information. Check
lawsuits, get internal directories, get names off web sites and Google searches.
LABOR UNIONS. Often know more about a company than the company officials,
where the bodies are buried. But they also sometimes have an interest to keep the
secrets secret. Union officials can put you in touch with employees.
REGULATORS. Rule‐making, fines, citations, policy agendas ‐‐ often everything
important runs through the federal, state and local agencies that regulate industries.
Check rule dockets, warning letters, enforcement actions, file public‐record requests
for meetings with officials. e.g., EPA, USDA, OSHA. EPA dockets are found at the
rulemaking “gateway” ‐‐ http://yosemite.epa.gov/opei/RuleGate.nsf/
LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES. Find out which legislative and congressional
committees have jurisdiction over the industry. Look at legislation, appropriation
bills, hearing reports, investigative reports. FOIA lawmaker correspondence with
regulatory agencies.
NON­PROFITS. Many lawmakers have close affiliations with nonprofits. The 990 tax
forms for tax‐exempt, nonprofit organizations are available on Guidestar at
www.guidestar.org . Free, registration required, and for advanced version, you can
get an IRE discounted rate. Guidestar’s arrival in many ways superceded the widely
used California AG’s Registry of Charitable Trusts site at
http://caag.state.ca.us/charities/. It is still good at some of the harder‐to‐find
stuff. The Foundation Center www.fdncenter.org has tax returns and financial info
on charities/trusts. Click on Foundation Finder,
http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder.html, which has details and tax returns on 70,000
private and community foundations, or to the 990 search engine,
http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder_990.html Economic Research Institute for
nonprofit searching; has nonprofit executive pay searching: http://www.eri-nonprofitsalaries.com/index.cfm?FuseAction=NPO.Search
LAW FIRMS AND LAWYERS. For a nationwide search, try Martindale‐Hubbell at
www.martindale.com. Lawyers pay to be listed in Martindale.
James V. Grimaldi, investigative reporter The Washington Post
grimaldij@washpost.com IRE Watchdog Columbus, Ohio May 21, 2011
Otterbein University Department of Communication -- SPJ-Central Ohio Chapter

