34 S. 3rd St., Columbus, Ohio 43215

Alan Miller, managing editor / news
amiller@dispatch.com
614-469-6290
Randy Ludlow, senior reporter
rludlow@dispatch.com
614-559-1752

Public access: It’s really quite simple
`Give us everything we want, and we’ll all get along fine’
(And other tips for winning access to public records and meetings…)
The federal government used the fallout from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks as an
opportunity to clamp down on access to public information, and local officials have followed its
lead. But they haven’t beaten us, and by no means do their actions suggest that we should give
up. Now, more than ever, reporters and editors need to fight for access to records and meetings –
because we need them for our work and because the public depends upon us to do it.
Have a public-records frame of find. They’re just not for projects anymore. They should
be at the core of most of what you do. They’re not just paper, but also video, audio, still photos,
evidence in a closed criminal case. Don’t quote a public official and leave it at that. Request the
public records underlying their statements. Ask to see the contract. Seek the emails and other
communications. Records seldom lie. Bureaucrats do.
Here are some tips about how to deal with reluctant and/or ignorant public officials:
1. Know the law and be prepared to argue it. Educate yourself. You should know the
state access laws better than any public official so that you know exactly where you
stand. Do your research and be prepared to cite the provisions of the Ohio Public Records
Act (149.43) and case law (such as Ohio Supreme Court precedents) in defense of your
request for records or meeting access.
2. Always assume that you are right and they are wrong – that everything you seek is
public. Question those who refuse access. Force the offending public official to explain
why the meeting or record isn’t public. Law requires the denial of records to be made in
writing, with specific citation of the law(s) that make the material exempt from release.
Take copious notes. (You will need them later. See tips Nos. 9 and 10.)
3. Don’t go into the situation assuming the worst. Most public officials and bureaucrats
are going to be helpful. If you go in with a chip on your shoulder, you set yourself up for
a potentially long, ugly and costly fight. Be charming. If you were born without charm,
recruit a naturally pleasant person from your staff to help you. Try to keep things
informal. Requesting records verbally often keeps the government lawyers out of the mix,
where a written request can seem adversarial and seemingly beg for legal review.

4. Be nice – at first, anyway*. In Ohio, the state law says you don’t have to tell the public
official who you are or why you want access to a meeting or record. But it doesn’t
prohibit you from giving that information. When possible, which would be in most cases,
identify yourself and your company, and give the public employee at least some idea
about the topic of your story. At least, it might be a topic that interests the lonely
bureaucrat behind the counter and give them a bit of ownership of your story. That person
might actually want to help you! And, remember, if you need to see records in a hurry,
request them in person. Law requires each office to maintain their records in which they
are readily accessible and to provide them for immediate inspection upon request. If you
request copies, public offices are permitted a reasonable amount of time to make copies,
which could delay the receipt of information by days.
*Be cautious about telling schools and colleges much detail about your story.
Some will use the information you provide to withhold information based on their
interpretations of federal student privacy laws. (See details in the Epilogue.)
5. Don’t go fishing unnecessarily. Few government agencies are sympathetic or have
patience for reporters who go on fishing expeditions by asking for hundreds or thousands
of pages of records. If all you want is the phone records for the mayor, then don’t ask for
phone records for the entire city government. If that much is needed, then by all means,
ask. But if you don’t know how much is needed, start small. Make the request as narrow
as possible. Bureaucrats have become fond of arguing that requests are overly broad to
deny access to records.
6. Beware of costs involved in asking for records. In Ohio, the law says officials can
charge only the cost of copying a record, generally 5 cents or less per page. But the laws
are different in other states, and some are allowed to charge more per page, and some
allow charging for time spent pulling and redacting records. So, if you put in a records
request, always ask for an estimate of cost before they start any work on pulling or
copying records. (University of Maryland estimate to fulfill one of our requests: $35,000.
We declined.)
7. Don’t give up easily, Part I. Before you are forced to leave a meeting or a clerk’s office,
politely ask for a second opinion from a higher-ranking official about the decision to
close access to a meeting or record. Often, cooler heads prevail and the second opinion
will go in your favor.
8. Don’t give up easily, Part II. When seeking records, determine whether another office
keeps the same information or may have received it from the office denying your request.
If so, pursue it there. If you are asked to leave a meeting because of an “executive
session” or any other reason, find a reliable “friend” in the meeting who can give you
details later. And stick around for the end of the closed meeting to quiz officials about
what they did. If you are asked to leave a court hearing, politely stand up and ask the
judge for a recess so that you can call your lawyer to protest the closure. (See attached
boilerplate language for making such a request.)
9. Put your request in writing. If asking verbally, and nicely, doesn’t get you the records
you seek, file a public records request so that you document the specifics of your request
and the date you made it. (A written request isn’t required under Ohio law. A paper trail
is helpful if you end up suing, but it also can be used against you when other media ask
for your records requests and end up with the same records.) You might consider taking
that request with you so that you can leave it immediately upon being denied. (See
attached copy of a boilerplate letter.) If you believe you are illegally denied access to a
meeting, consider writing a letter to the offending officials stating the details so that you
have a record of it.

10. Keep track of your requests and follow up. Create a spreadsheet or file to list all
requests and record the status of them. Keep copies of your paper requests and paper
copies of any requests sent via email on file in your office. Monitor them for compliance.
At a big paper, it’s easy to have dozens of requests in play at any given time. Some
agencies count on us forgetting about the requests and won’t respond unless prodded.
Keep on them!
11. Give the offending party one last chance to relent. Let the responsible officials know
that you plan to write a story whether or not they comply. In the case of records, tell them
that they can either provide the information you seek or they can provide a quote for the
story explaining why they are breaking the law by withholding public records. Be
prepared to negotiate, cajole and badger. Keep them talking.
12. Write a story. Anytime someone violates the law by refusing access to public records or
meetings, write a story about it. Exposing their transgression to the world, in many cases,
is likely to cause the offenders to rethink their position. We are quick to think we should
call a lawyer to help us out in such cases, and we often forget that our best weapon in
such battles is a story.
13. Don’t make it a media issue. When writing about public access, focus on what the law
says about keeping access open to everyone. Avoid making it a story about the media vs.
a public agency. Readers have little sympathy for what they see as nosey reporters trying
to get information about them or their neighbors. You are fighting for the public’s right to
know – not your self-serving interests as journalist. Communicate the same.
14. Be prepared to sue. A lawsuit should be the last resort. If you file the request or a protest
and it does not result in action, be prepared to file a lawsuit. It can be expensive. And
while Ohio law allows those who have been wronged in such cases to seek attorney’s
fees, there’s no guarantee you will win or that you will win fees. If you file a lawsuit,
you will need copies of the request letter and typed copies of your notes about how the
situation unfolded. And, pick your shots carefully. As the saying goes, “Good facts make
good law.” Carefully assess the facts and case law with your lawyers to determine you
have an excellent chance of winning. Filing an iffy case is likely to lead to a denial that
builds case law that could later hamper access to records.

Public access epilogue: Be alert for cheats
Preserving public access is more difficult now than ever. Some public officials take full
advantage of the fact that public sentiment is against us. Some of our colleagues have tarred us
all by committing sins against the profession, and a growing number of people see us as vultures
trying to snoop in their personal lives.
With that in mind, be aware that some public officials are playing dirty tricks to skirt or
violate the laws. Here are a few to watch for:
1. Sorry, no records of that: Some public bodies purposely keep scant meeting notes
so they can avoid putting sensitive material on the record. If such a board is in your
jurisdiction, you might have to camp out at meetings for a while so they know you are
serious about covering them. Public officials also have become increasingly leery of
access laws and seek to thwart them by simply not creating records. But, there’s
generally something to be found somewhere. Think outside the box.

2. Why hold meetings when we have email? Despite outlawing “round-robin”
telephone conversations amongst public officials to discuss public business, the Ohio
Supreme Court decided it would be OK for officials to talk amongst themselves via
email. The reasoning was that emails of public officials are public record, so therefore
we can ask for the emails and see what they are talking about. But some public
officials are now using personal, non-government-issue email accounts to do their
online chatting, and it’s not clear that we can force officials to give up email in those
accounts.
3. We can’t help you because you told us too much: One very large Ohio university
has been playing games with reporters and editors by using their own words against
them. The university routinely denies access to records by saying it would be
violating the Federal Education Rights and Privacy Act because any shred of detail
might possibly, somehow allow someone to piece together enough information to
identify a student. Still, polite and seemingly helpful college officials say: “Please tell
us what you’re working on so we can best help you find the records you’re seeking.”
And then, when we tell them what we’re working on, even in a vague way, they
respond by saying: “Sorry, because we know what you’re looking for, we can’t give it
to you because someone, somewhere might possibly piece together enough
information to identify a student.”
4. Those crime details are secret: Some law enforcement agencies have been advised
that they can keep details of crime reports from the media by keeping them out of the
public “incident” report and putting them instead in the nonpublic “investigatory”
file. The courts have ruled that incident reports are public and that investigatory files
are not. When we determined that a state police agency was using that tactic, we
called the head of the department, who quickly told his troops to return to putting
details that should be in incident reports back on the public record. Remember, police
incident and offense reports – and any underlying statements – are public records and
no information may be redacted – including the names of uncharged suspects.
5. Our lawyer has the records, so they aren’t public: Some public agencies have tried
to hide records by asking their lawyers or search firms to keep the records. We’ve
seen several school districts try this with settlements of lawsuits and resumes of
candidates for superintendent in particular. Under Ohio law, a government office
cannot delegate possession of public records. They must remain under the control and
custody of the public office.
6. You didn’t ask for that file: When reporters asked to see the personnel files of a few
employees of a large school district, the reporters found no records of disciplinary
action – even though it was well known that the employees had been in trouble.
Probing further, a reporter found that the district has created a second file for each
employee: The disciplinary file. While dubious about the motives behind the school
district’s action, we now know what to ask for – even though state law requires them
to maintain only one file. If you want to know what records an office keeps, they are
required to have record-retention schedules that list every record they keep and when
it is scheduled for destruction. Obtain such lists and see what each office compiles so
you may request the records.
7. We don’t think you should have that: The Morrow County prosecutor said that
about 911 tapes in a murder case, so we sued him. Sometimes, there’s no alternative.
Good news is that we won the case and attorney fees. And when he went to the
county commissioners with hat in hand seeking funds to pay our attorney fees, they
told him to take a hike. That example has helped unlock records in many other places
since then.

Public records/open government resources:
Ohio resources:
The 2011 Sunshine Laws Manual (aka “Yellowbook”):
http://www.ohioattorneygeneral.gov/YellowBook
The Ohio Public Records Act (Ohio Revised Code):
http://codes.ohio.gov/orc/149.43
“Your Right to Know,” Randy Ludlow’s blog:
http://blog.dispatch.com/know/
Open Government Guide, The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press:
http://www.rcfp.org/ogg/index.php?op=browse&state=OH
The Legal Handbook for Ohio Journalists (Ohio State Bar Association):
http://www.ohiobar.org/Pages/staticPageViewer.aspx?articleid=104
Access with Attitude, by David Marburger and Karl Idsvoog:
http://www.ohioswallow.com/ (search for title)

Other resources:
National Freedom of Information Coalition:
http://www.nfoic.org/
First Amendment Center:
http://www.firstamendmentcenter.org/
The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press:
http://www.rcfp.org/index.php
Federal Open Government Guide (RCFP):
http://www.rcfp.org/fogg/index.php?index.html
State Open Government Guide (RCFP):
http://www.rcfp.org/ogg/index.php
Student Press Law Center
(Check the “FOI letter generator” and info on FERPA)
http://www.splc.org/
Sunshine Review:
http://sunshinereview.org/core/home

Objection to courtroom closure:
(You should run this by your company lawyer before you use it.)

If it appears that a court proceeding that you are covering may be closed to the public, ask
the court for permission to make a brief statement and read the following into the record. If
possible, notify your editor before the hearing on whether the proceeding will be closed, and, in
any event, notify your editor as soon as possible of the outcome. Read the second paragraph only
if you have first discussed the proceeding with your editor and he or she, in consultation with the
editor, has authorized you to do so.

Statement:
My name is __________________________________________, and I am a reporter for
(name of your company here) . On behalf of (the newspaper, radio station, television
station) and the people of the State of Ohio, I would like to object to the closure of these
proceedings. Under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, there is a strong presumption
that court proceedings will be open to the press and to the public. That presumption can be
overcome only upon a showing that there is a substantial probability that higher values will be
prejudiced by publicity that closure would prevent, and that there are no reasonable alternatives
to closure that would adequately protect those values. In addition, the court must make specific,
written findings that this standard has been met. Based on this standard, I respectfully request
that the court hold this proceeding open to the public.
[If the court believes that closure may be appropriate based on the facts of this case, I
respectfully request that the court recess this proceeding until such time as lawyers for (name
of your company here) can present argument.]

Sample Ohio public records request
(Put this on your company letterhead.)

Date

Dear

:

This is a request for access to public records under section 149.43 of the Ohio Revised Code,
the Open Records Act. Under provisions of that statute, we are requesting:

(Insert request. Be specific.)

If there is any information that will be excluded or any materials that will be redacted
pertaining to our request, we want to know those categories and under what privacy law or other
provisions they are withheld or redacted.
Should any portion of this request be denied, in part or in whole, Ohio law requires written
justification for its denial, along with a citation of the appropriate Open Records Act exemption
that applies for each record, or portion thereof, that is withheld.
If any of the records requested are under seizure by another agency, we request copies of the
receipts and/or inventories provided by the seizing authority.
As you are probably aware, the Open Records Act requires you to promptly prepare the
records we are requesting and to make them available for inspection at all reasonable times
during regular business hours.
We thank you for your prompt attention to this request. If you have any questions, I may be
reached at (_____insert phone number____).
Sincerely,

