Access errors: Mystery solved
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE
Jaimi@ire.org

Microsoft Access is a rare breed of software, in my opinion, because the error messages actually help
you determine what you’ve done incorrectly. I’ve compiled a list of some common Access errors you’ll
come across while writing SQL. Once you understand the error, you can begin to easily trouble shoot
your query. If you come across an error that isn’t on this list, please send it to me.

If you get an error in Access then close that window, pay attention to the cursor on your screen. Access
will typically use the cursor to highlight part of the SQL where there is the problem or part of the SQL
near the problem. This can get you headed in the right direction.
One last tip – if you’ve tried and tried to make your query run and you know that you’ve done it
correctly, just start a new query and paste in the SQL you used. Sometimes Access doesn’t work and it
isn’t necessarily your fault.

Errors in Access

Any time you start a new query, Access adds a semicolon to the end. Semicolons, in Access, signal the
end of the query, but they aren’t necessary. Because of that, if you don’t delete the semi colon and
write part of your query after it, you’ll get this error. Solution: Delete the semi colon.

1
©2011 – Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

The “Enter Parameter Value” error is very common. It means that you have a spelling error – essentially,
you’re asking Access to query a table for a field that doesn’t exist. Whatever field name that is popping
up in the error box is likely the field that is misspelled. Look back at the table you’re querying from to
make sure you have all field names spelled correctly throughout the query.

This error is alerting you to a typo as well, but not the typical misspelling. If you look hard at your query,
you’ll see that you’ve entered a space or a character such as a parenthesis or a period where one
shouldn’t be. Double check your query and make sure nothing is out of place.

This error means you need to add a group by line. If you’re counting or summing, make sure that all
other fields (not the count(*) and sum()) show up on your group by line. Typically, the field that is listed
in the error window is the field that is missing on the group by line.

2
©2011 – Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Access is very picky. This error typically suggests that you’re missing a simple character that’s necessary
for the query to operate. Check to make sure you have commas, equal signs and parenthesis where you
need them. (Remember, you must close every parenthesis you open.)

This error is a bit trickier. It could mean that you have an error in the FROM clause such as an extra
character, etc. Keep in mind, though, that it often mean s there is an error near the FROM line. For
example, you might have written “GROUP B” instead of “GROUP BY”

3
©2011 – Duplication prohibited without permission from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

