Predicting the News
MaryJo Webster
St. Paul Pioneer Press
mwebster@pioneerpress.com
@mnDataMine

Predicting what might happen if...
A suburb of St Paul was considering an ordinance
prohibiting where sex offenders could live.
Could we figure out whether there would be
anywhere for them to live if this took effect?

Predictive index
At USA Today, I helped create an index that attempted to
predict which player had the best chance at winning an
upcoming PGA tournament. (We re-ran it for each tournament
during the season)
Top 100 players, ranked by 5 stats. Rankings were weighted
based on the difficulty of the upcoming course (so, if scrambling
was particularly important on this course, we'd give that the
highest weight)
Bonus points for being a "hot" player and previous wins or top
10 finishes at this tournament

Regression analyses
● School test scores
● Standardized test cheating
● Racial profiling
● Predicting who will win the Super Bowl
● Do ice cream sales rise along with the
temperature?
● Any time you want to find out if there's a
relationship between one or more variables and
something else

Predicting Super Bowl
Which elements of a Super Bowl have the greatest
impact on the difference in the game's final score?
The analysis was based on 32 team statistical
measures for Super Bowls I through XXXVI. These
stats ranged from total penalties and fumbles to
passing and rushing yards. Only 10 of these measures
had a statistically significant effect.
Factors ranked by which has the greatest impact on the margin.

Five factors leading to a nail-biter
● Pass completions: 33
● Yards per play: 5
● Total offensive plays: 126
● Own fumbles recovered: 2
● Penalty 1st downs: 3

*stats are combined team averages from past Super Bowls

Five factors leading to a blowout
● Passing yards: 435
● Pass attempts: 65
● Rushing yards: 245
● Pass completion percentage: 57%
● Fumbles lost: 4

*stats are combined team averages from past Super Bowls

Schools that work
Main idea: How would test score results look if we removed
poverty from the equation? Are schools in wealthy areas doing
a better job or do their students have inherent advantages?
What the regression does:
● Determines whether there is a relationship between test
scores, poverty and other variables (limited English
proficiency, special education)
● How strong (or weak) that relationship is
● Allows you to generate an "expected" average score, which
you can compare to the actual average score

How we turned it into a story
We decided to focus on the high-poverty schools that were
doing significantly better than expected (positive rather than
negative)
Asked experts what practices would be considered praiseworthy, then visited the schools to see if they were using those.
The answer: Definitely, yes.
Focus of the stories: Give readers a positive takeaway -- what
things schools can do to beat the odds
Presented results online, but didn't RANK schools in any way

If you're going to try it...
● Find one or more experts to help (I liked having two)
● Give yourself lots of time to do the analysis, and
repeat it at least once before embarking on
reporting/writing
● Use the results as a starting point, not the main point
of the story
● Avoid the details for readers (regression doesn't need
to show up in your story)
● Write a methodology. Even if it doesn't get printed, it'll
help you make sure you covered all the bases.

Get this presentation online:

tinyurl.com/MJPredicts
mwebster@pioneerpress.com
@mnDataMine

