RECENT HISTORY

Saturday, February 25, 12

SECURITY IN CONTEXT

Convenience

Security

Saturday, February 25, 12

I've been giving a simpler talk than Steve's in a few places, but he's covered some pretty
thorough ground there, so I'm throwing that talk out and instead looking at some of the
recent history that suggests this is more than a theoretical risk.
But the first thing I always want to emphasize is that security is not always absolute . I don't
use PGP to email my grandmother. I don't need a lot of security for reporting US election
results. But if I were a national security reporter... Or if I were posted overseas to some
hostile regime...
I'm not trying to make you paranoid, but I want you to take prudent precautions if you are
working with sensitive materials

"We don’t need to
ask who you’re talking
to. We know."
"A High-Tech War On Leaks" http://nyti.ms/xVfCJm
Saturday, February 25, 12

I don't want to make you paranoid, but statements like this one from an anonymous official
certainly gave me pause.
We all remember

WHO ARE 'WE?'
• National security agencies hacking you for the country
• Law enforcement hacking you for the law
• Private investigators hacking you for business clients
• Foreign regimes hacking you to monitor your coverage
• Foreign hackers hacking you for their country
• Anarchic script kiddies hacking you for the lulz
Saturday, February 25, 12

Depending on your work, the 'we' that might target you or your sources might vary. Be aware
of the risks.

Saturday, February 25, 12

The tools for flagging and recording Internet traffic have become commodity infrastructure.
This is from a brochure from a French company that wanted to help Libya keep track of its
dissidents. Similar systems exist in many of the world's worst spots, either off-the-shelf or
built from scratch. Of course, the NSA doesn't have brochures and they aren't supposed to
spy on Americans legally...

I AM NOT A
LAWYER...
Saturday, February 25, 12

Of course, I feel obligated to mention this. I am not a lawyer. I have informally talked to some
lawyers about these issues and I'll mention that, but it's always best to talk to your
newspaper's legal counsel if you have real questions.

...but I know the
Espionage Act is
pretty scary.
Saturday, February 25, 12

Being a journalist will not protect you here. Read about it.

THE STERLING CASE
• Jeffrey Sterling was a CIA analyst who leaked to James Risen

for his book "State of War"

• Triggered by the government intercepting "interstate emails"
• Risen was subpoenaed in 2008 (expired in 2009)
• Current administration renewed the subpoena in 2010,

currently being fought in court

• Sterling was indicted under the Espionage Act in 2010
• Risen's affadavit (PDF) http://bit.ly/mpI6A4
Saturday, February 25, 12

What's interesting about the Risen case is that the government still needs evidence from
Risen for their case. Hence the subpoena. I like the insistence of interstate emails as part of
the federal involvement. Except for your intranet, I can't imagine any emails that AREN'T
interstate.

THE DRAKE CASE
• Thomas Drake was a senior NSA analyst
• Blew the whistle of the NSA's costly and failed Trailblazer

project to Siobhan Gorman of the Baltimore Sun in 2005

• Raided by the FBI in 2007 where his computers were seized
• Charged in 2010 for willful retention of classified documents

(another Espionage Act clause), not leaking them

• Charges dropped in June 2011 on the eve of the trial
Saturday, February 25, 12

There was a great New Yorker piece on this case I'd recommend reading. What's interesting
about this case is that he was charged under the Espionage Act just because he had classified
documents on his computer.
I know of journalists who keep documents on their machines. Heck, they'll even leave
printouts on their desk.

THE KIRIAKOU CASE
• CIA analyst who leaked to several journalists about the

capture and interrogation of Abu Zubaydah

• Case based on "e-mails recovered from search warrants

served on two e-mail accounts associated with Kiriakou."

• Charged under the Espionage Act on January 24, 2012
• The government has not subpoenaed any journalists this time;

the electronic trail is enough.

Saturday, February 25, 12

And this is the latest one. What's different about this case is that the Govt. isn't bothering to
subpoena the journalists. They feel they have enough. That's the context of the cocky quote I
led off with.
What strikes me about these cases too is that these aren't naive leakers running up against a
security apparatus they had no idea existed. They ARE the establishment; they know what
tools the CIA, NSA has; they still got caught.

ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
• Hushmail (Stumbo case)
• IM chat logs from hard disk (Manning case)
• Twitter direct messages (Wikileaks investigation)
• Gmail / Facebook (Wikileaks investigation)
• Skype chat logs (Megaupload Case)
• Can you be forced to give decryption password? Unclear.
Saturday, February 25, 12

Hushmail - email in 2007 in a Chinese Steroids case
Manning - 2012 (from his machine)
Wikileaks investigation - 2011 (only Twitter revealed court order)
Megaupload - 2012 case; unclear how govt obtained Skype logs; Skype denies cooperation
Password - In Fricosu case, 10th circuit refused to decide appeal on 21st; Yesterday the 11
circuit decided for defendant in a child pornography case; I don't know if the evidence is for
prosecuting someone else.

NOW WHAT?
• Electronic Communications carry risks. Be aware of them.
• Adopt a policy of destroying electronic records when done

reporting or on a scheduled basis.

• Strengthen your passwords; use SSL or anonymity wisely.
• Stop forwarding your email to gmail.
• Publish a public PGP or GnuPG key, so people can use it. But

best for people to not email you encrypted documents.

• Read more https://ssd.eff.org/
Saturday, February 25, 12

