Network Analysis For News
CAR meeting, St Louis, Feb 23 2012

Peter Aldhous

peter@peteraldhous.com

Peggy Heinkel-Wolfe

pheinkel-wolfe@dentonrc.com

What is network analysis?
Visualizing and quantifying connections between people, organizations etc.

Graphs consist of edges (the connections) and nodes (the entities connected)

Who uses network analysis?

Researchers in almost every
discipline – it is being used to
study everything from how
networks of genes and proteins
influence our health, to how
connections between multinational
companies affect the stability of
the global economy:

OK, that sounds cool, but how can it help me?
Do any of these phrases sound familiar?
•It’s not what you know, it’s who you know

•The problem with this city is that it’s run by X’s cronies
•Contracts in this town are all about kickbacks

Network analysis provides a means to display these and other
connections in a way your readers (and your editors) can
easily understand.

A classic example

Data: Built database of George W.
Bush “Pioneers” – those who raised
more than $100,000 to his 2000
presidential campaign.
Findings: Network showed who were
the key Pioneers in the Bush
campaign, who they were connected
to, and what each Pioneer gained, if
anything, from his or her association
with Bush, such as ambassadorships
and other federal appointments. Bush
raised $96.3 million, a record at that
time. More than 100, about 40%, of
the Pioneers received some federal
appointment after the election.

Is it difficult?
At its simplest level, network analysis is very intuitive.
Some basics:
Networks can be undirected (e.g. X and Y went to the same school) or directed
(e.g. donor X gave money to candidate Y).
Network theorists have devised layout algorithms to draw network graphs; you
can also lay out your network manually.
Clustering algorithms can be used to group similar nodes together, based on
their pattern of connections – you can think of them as “clique finders.”

The science bit: network metrics

Degree is a simple count of the number of connections for each node. For directed
networks, it is divided into In-degree, for the number of incoming connections,
and Out-degree, for outgoing connections.
Eigenvector centrality accounts not only for the node’s own degree, the also the
degrees of the nodes to which it connects.
Betweenness centrality essentially reveals how important each node is in
providing a “bridge” between different parts of the network. It highlights the nodes
that, if removed, would cause a network to fall apart.
Closeness centrality is a measure of how close each node is, on average, to all of
the other nodes in a network. It highlights the nodes that connect to the others
through a lower number of edges – think Kevin Bacon Game.

NodeXL: a simple tool for network analysis
Download the template from NodeXL site, then open:

Type in an edge list, and calculate network metrics

Add more data: a new column for the gender of each friend

Incorporate attributes from the data into the network graph

The resulting friends network:

Learn NodeXL at NICAR 2012
DEMO: 9am Friday
PowerPivot and NodeXL: This is not your father’s Excel
HANDS-ON: 11am Friday
Network analysis with NodeXL

Our story’s main characters

The grand jury

Basic demographics

The first network graph

The first network graph we showed
to the editors

The second network graph we showed
to the editors

The published network graph

Example: citations in stem cell research

Network analysis of online social media

NodeXL can query APIs of online social media and import data

Example: Occupy vs Tea Party on Twitter

Example: Occupy vs Tea Party on Twitter

Learn more
Tutorial: Analyzing Social Media Networks: Learning By Doing With NodeXL

Book: Analyzing Social Media Networks with NodeXL: Insights From A Connected World

Network Analysis For News
CAR meeting, St Louis, Feb 23 2012

Peter Aldhous

peter@peteraldhous.com

Peggy Heinkel-Wolfe

pheinkel-wolfe@dentonrc.com

