INFECT THE CMS

Friday, February 24, 12

No code here. This is a philosophy talk about a common mistake we news app developers
make about the CMS
This is a lightning talk, so I'm not going to explain what a CMS is, but I'm assuming that most
of you are exactly like me AND so you're naturally inclined to hate the CMS. Why?

No.
Friday, February 24, 12

It starts with a single word.
The problem with the CMS is that while it can do articles and slideshows reasonably well,
that's all it can do. No to your cool app ida. No to your HTML5 maps. And a big HELL NO to
you hacking new features into the CMS.

Friday, February 24, 12

I don't really blame the CMS people. They have a site to run. They have content to produce.
They can't let the likes of me gum up the works.

Friday, February 24, 12

And so, we news app developers stay outside the CMS. We make bespoke apps. We provision
our own stacks. We're not producers, we're coders dammit.

Friday, February 24, 12

What could be wrong with that?
Here is one of the first major projects I contributed to at the Times, the election guide for
2008. For the first time, we'd have all this data like polls, ads, campaign finance, etc. in their
own rich web apps. Sounds amazing right?

TYPICAL LIFECYCLE
OFF HOMEPAGE

WOOO!
LAUNCH!

Friday, February 24, 12

The problem was, nobody cared. We'd see a huge bump if it was an election night and we
were on the homepage, but otherwise nothing. And if we weren't linked from the homepage,
we were invisible.

Friday, February 24, 12

Don't get me wrong, it's nice to make the meat store you always wanted to make. And you
will get customers for that.

Friday, February 24, 12

But think about all the people you aren't reaching, wandering the aisles where all that CMS
content goes.

Friday, February 24, 12

For instance, most users of the NYT site into politics read the articles. They may not have
been to the NYT site when the election results were live, so catch them when they read the
article the next day. Imagine widgets for other data that might come up in articles like
campaign finance, political ads, polls.
You might have seen other projects do similar techniques. We've been experimenting with
this approach.
If you can convince your CMS team to let you embed some JS on certain pages, then you've
already won.

Friday, February 24, 12

Here's a larger widget on the Politics section front. Nice yeah, but I think most readers just
think the C column is ads at this point.
To get in the A column on the left you need to be rankable in the CMS. We need to try to get
in there.

Friday, February 24, 12

Get that shit into your mobile apps

Friday, February 24, 12

We are totally failing in Site Search right now. That's something else you often get for free in
the CMS. Try to get your stuff in there

INFECT THE SYSTEM
Homepage Links

Site Search

Article sidebars

Content Syndication

Rankable elements

RSS feeds

Embedded widgets

Mobile applications

Text tickerization

Editorial workflows

Topic pages

Twitter/Facebook/etc

Friday, February 24, 12

The point is, your news site's CMS has all sorts of inputs and all sorts of outputs, and in many
cases, your stuff needs to be there. Figure out how to get in there.

SUCCESS

WE DID IT!!

WOOO!
LAUNCH!

Friday, February 24, 12

This won't solve all your problems, but it can never hurt to find more readers. Thank you.

