How to use PDFTOTEXT to convert PDFs into text
Jeff Porter
IRE and NICAR
jeff@ire.org
You’ve seen the Acrobat files containing columns and rows of numbers and other
information, waiting to be analyzed. The problem: Acrobat files – ending with .PDF –
can’t be directly read into spreadsheet or database software. Now, there’s a tool to
make a PDF into formatted text, ready to import.
How to ‘install’ the software
Make a folder on a hard drive of your machine. For our example, we’ll call it c:\xpdf.
The Web page to download this file is http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/download.html.
If you’re a typical Windows user, scroll down to “Precompiled binaries” and you’ll
see a paragraph starting with “x86, DOS/Win32.” Choose the first download link that
that paragraph.
Download that file into your c:\xpdf folder. Unzip the file as you would unzip any
compressed file. It will place it in a subfolder under your c:\xpdf folder like this:

For simplicity’s sake, move all the files inside the subfolder called xpdf-3.00-win32
into the main folder your created earlier: c:\xpdf. It should now look like this:

That’s it – the software is “installed!”
How to use PDFTOTEXT

Find the PDF you want to convert. Ideally, the file is simple a table of columns and
rows; not that PDFTOTEXT can’t handle it other types, but that will save some
cleanup later. For example, you can download this PDF file about homeland security
grants: http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/interweb/assetlibrary/Grants-ODP-04.pdf. Save
it in the same folder you created: c:\xpdf.
Now, you’re ready to convert. Go to Start > Run… and when you get that Run
window, type in cmd and hit OK.

You’ll get this little command window (yours might look a little different):

You’ll need to navigate to the right folder. If you start on the same drive, but have
some folders identified as the example above, type in cd .. and hit Enter. Do it until
you get this:

Now change your directory to c:\xpdf with another “cd” command. Your screen
should look something like this:

Now you’re ready to run this simple command. Type it in just like this and hit Enter:
C:\xpdf>pdftotext –layout Grants-ODP-04.pdf

Let’s parse that out: The first part (c:\xpdf>) simply identifies the folder you’re
looking into. The next word (pdftotext) is the name of the program you’re telling the
computer to use. The next (-layout) is telling that program to use an option to retain
the appearance, spacing and all, of the PDF file you’re converting. The last part
(Grants-ODP-04.pdf) is the name of the file we downloaded.
When it’s done, you’ll get back to the c:\xpdf> line. Type “exit” and hit Enter.
Now, go to that folder and there you’ll find a text file named Grants-ODP-04.txt.
Open it up with Notepad.
Compare the PDF with the text file, and you’ll notice that the layout is quite similar.
For using it in Excel, you should run the import wizard three times, since each page is
structured slightly differently.
In other examples, especially if the PDF has lots of blank spaces, you’ll get few
numbers slightly off-kilter. A text editor like Notepad, or even a word processor like
Word, can help you fix that type of problem. For more heavy-duty text editing,
consider using one like UltraEdit (www.ultraedit.com) or VEdit (www.vedit.com).
A few more caveats
It won’t work at all if the file is a scanned image (for example, a 990 form from
www.guidestar.org).
If the file is encrypted, PDFTOTEXT won’t convert it.
The more complicated the layout, the more text editing you’ll need to do later.
Always print out at least part of the PDF so you can easily compare the two.
More details
For the ultra-geek information, read the accompanying text file called
PDFTOTEXT.TXT, located in your c:\xpdf folder. Note that you can tell
PDFTOTEXT to start and stop at certain page numbers in the PDF.
Now, importing the text file
Close the Notepad file and start Excel. Navigate to the correct folder and go File >
Open … and choose Text under the dialog box of Files of Type. Identify your file and
tell Excel to open. That’ll start the Import Wizard.
Excel should guess correctly that it’s fixed width. Note that below, it’ll ask you where
to start your import. For reading in those PDFs, you’ll often choose another row to
start with. In this case, let’s choose to start at row 4, where the headers of the data
begin. Click Next.

That takes you to a new dialog to let you choose to make, delete or adjust columns.
Before you click Next, scroll down entirely. You’ll catch a couple of problems. First,
note that one of the “state” names, Northern Mariana Islands, is too long. Click on the
break line and move it to position 24. Second, note below that, there are two other
sets of numbers. For now, ignore them. We’ll have to deal with that material in two
more imports. Now, click Next.
We’re almost there, and it’s tempting to just click Finish. Resist the temptation and
review a couple of things. This is the section in which you can made decisions on
whether a column is text, numbers or a date. “General” means you’ll allow Excel to
guess. It’s correct most of the time; it’ll guess correctly that the dollar amounts listed
are numbers. It’ll also correctly guess that the state names are text. If there is any
question, you can change it by click in any column and choose a specific format.
Now click Finish, and you’re almost there.
Scroll down to row 62, and you’ll see that the second set of numbers is formatted
differently. So let’s get rid of those by click on the number 62 itself and, still holding
the left mouse button down, scroll down until you get the bottom of the file,
highlighting each row.

Go Edit > Delete, and the problem rows will disappear. You’re done! Now, start
another worksheet, use the Import Wizard again, choose row 71 and bring in the next
set of numbers, then make one more pass to capture the third set. After you’re
finished, you’re a true expert!

