Finding the holes in economic impact studies
Prepared by reporter Daniel Connolly of The Commercial Appeal in Memphis,
Tenn. for the 2012 IRE national conference panel “Incentives and subsidies: Investigating
economic development claims.”
The co-panelists are Greg LeRoy of Good Jobs First, David Cay Johnston of
Reuters and Jim Heaney of Investigative Post.
Contact Daniel Connolly at 205-807-0608 or danieljamesconnolly@gmail.com
Economic impact studies are common
When people want to build a stadium, change a government regulation, promote
tourism or bring a factory to town, they’ll often cite an economic impact study.
Questions to ask about the study
-Who paid for it? Often, it’s a group that has a vested interest in making a project happen
or supporting an industry. When it comes to estimates of economic impact, there’s no
right or wrong answer, and the person doing the study may be influenced by who’s
paying.
-What is the reputation of the person or organization that did the study? One firm that
was hired to study the economic impact of the Super Bowl had little background in doing
such work.
See: http://www.wfaa.com/news/investigates/Bowling-for-Dollars-93640164.html
-What time period does the study cover? Five years of operation? The initial construction
of a stadium or factory?
-What numbers in the study are real? What numbers are based on estimates or
assumptions?
-Ask about multipliers. Creation of a stadium or similar project can create new jobs at
businesses such as local restaurants. Studies often use numbers called multipliers to
estimate the impact.
For example, one study about a new Electrolux kitchen appliance factory in Memphis
made this calculation:
1,240 new jobs at the Electrolux factory times a multiplier of 2.3196 = total new
employment of 2,876.
The obvious question is where the multiplier in the study comes from. You can
compare the multipliers in a study to those that the federal Bureau of Economic Analysis
uses.

-Did the study weigh benefits such as new jobs against the costs of government subsidies,
or did it simply celebrate the benefits? For an example of a study that only looked at
benefits, see http://www.commercialappeal.com/news/2011/sep/18/cost-memphistennessee-taxpayers-electrolux-deal/
Doing your own analysis
-If the government is paying subsidies to create jobs, figure out the per-job costs.
-You can also calculate how long it would take for the government to earn back enough
tax money to equal the total subsidies.
-Most studies will say that the economic impact is some huge number - $250 million, for
instance. You can put that number in perspective by comparing it to the size of your local
economy. The federal Bureau of Economic Analysis can provide you with your area’s
personal income, which is one estimate of the size of the local economy. At the state and
metropolitan area level, the Bureau of Economic analysis will provide estimates of gross
domestic product, which is the total value of goods and services produced in the area.
Take the economic impact that the study reports and divide it by personal income or GDP
for the area you’re considering. Does it seem right that the project or industry would
account for that percentage of economic activity in the area, or do the numbers seem
skewed?
- If government subsidizes a project that will produce jobs that pay a median wage of $15
per hour, how does that compare to typical wage in your area? Find out by using numbers
from the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Further resources:
-Bureau of Economic Analysis. http://www.bea.gov/ or call the media office at 202-6069900.
-Bureau of Labor Statistics. http://www.bls.gov/newsroom/mediacontacts.htm or call the
media office at 202-691-5902.
-For more practice in analyzing these studies, take the excellent self-guided online
training course at the Donald W. Reynolds National Center for Business Journalism
called “How not to be bamboozled by local economic studies.” The instructor is Sarah
Cohen, Knight journalism chair at Duke University.
The link: http://businessjournalism.org/2012/02/16/how-not-to-be-bamboozled-by-localeconomic-studies-self-guided-training/
I thank Cohen for granting me permission to use some of her material in this tipsheet.

