#3704
Alison Young
USA TODAY
ayoung@usatoday.com
www.alisonyoungreports.com

Using Online, Tablet and Mobile Platforms
For Better Investigative Storytelling
Gather the right content from the start – and lots of it (even before you have a digital plan)
Video, audio, photographs (including those that can be annotated with text).
Data – and think how it may be used eventually. Does it need to be geocoded from the start?
Documents (upload and annotate in DocumentCloud as you go, www.documentcloud.org)
Brainstorm with developers throughout the reporting process
As the reporting progresses and storylines take shape, what are the digital opportunities? How do
they mesh with the available content?
Is the digital concept going to be fully integrated with the investigation’s findings? Or supplemental?
Focus on content – and how readers will want to use it in each platform. What will they want to do
with the information? What might they want to share with others?
How will content be promoted between platforms – so readers know all that’s available to them?
If investigative stories reside outside an interactive, can readers easily find them?
Get SEO and social media input early.
Increase the frequency of team meetings as development work intensifies. Short, daily meetings in
the weeks before publication can help keep things on track.
Consider how the project will roll out on each platform
If it’s a two-part series in print, does digital content roll out on separate days? Or all at once?
When does digital content go live? What impact does it have on the print package and any
partnership embargoes? Are there competitive issues for separate publication timetables?
Is it OK for digital content to be published ahead of findings revealed later in a series?
Create an editing form for digital content
To allow for easy updating of content in the “Ghost Factories” interactive, USA TODAY database
editors built an editing application and put it on an internal server, allowing reporters and editors to
write and edit content outside of the interactive. A database editor wrote a Python script to generate
one JSON file out of the database for each of the 230 factory sites in the interactive.
Make sure you have a system for line editing, copy editing and lawyering all interactive content – as
well as flagging changes that need to be fact-checked.
Consider designing for flexible assets, allowing as many interactive elements to be displayed as
are available.
Set realistic deadlines, manage multimedia demands on reporters
Storytelling on multiple platforms takes a lot more time – and the reporter(s) can become a
bottleneck in the development process because they are the subject-matter expert and are needed
to advise other members of the team (developers, designers, animators, video editors, web staff,
print line editors, etc.) as they all seek to make deadlines.
The project editor (or project manager) can help keep things flowing by tracking and staggering the
needs of video editors, interactive designers, animators, web staff, print line editors, etc
More on the USA TODAY “Ghost Factories” interactive: http://www.ire.org/blog/on-theroad/2012/05/24/ghost-factories-behind-story-and-interactive/

ghostfactories.usatoday.com

