#3706

Consumer Investigation Tip Sheet
IRE 2012 – Boston
Hagit Limor
Investigative Reporter
WCPO-TV
(513) 305-0090

Cindy Galli
Producer
ABC News Investigative Unit
(212) 456-2068

Jennifer Savio
Special Projects Producer
WHDH-TV
(617) 248-5521

You can master consumer investigations whether it’s your regular beat or an area in which you
dabble on occasion. The key is knowing where to look and how to organize.
The best consumer stories marry a compelling subject or victim with key documentation and CAR
reporting.
Below you’ll find some tips we’ve learned along the way and links to help you on your way.

Tips for finding – and keeping – a good consumer story:
Find the experts.
Attorneys, former judges, clerks.
Regulators – remember, they can be sources but also “targets”. Are they effective?
Legislators
Auditors
Trade Groups
Consumer Groups (BBB and state/local consumer affairs offices, special interest groups)
Consumer reviews (Amazon.com) and court sites yield names of sources and experts.
Go to consumer advocate gatherings. At the risk of now bumping into all of you at the same
conferences … this is actually a great tool for source-building and story ideas. These are people
who are hearing from disgruntled consumers directly and have the power to link you with them.
Get them comfortable with you – investing the time to cultivate the relationships will only help you
long-term.
Find the unusual sources. Liquidators are on the legal end of the con artist’s journey. Former
police officers-turned-private investigators become great ongoing sources.
Get to know who runs the big complaint websites and blogs. Most sites don’t include the
identity or contact information for a complainant. If you’re friendly with the site administrators,
many times they’ll pass along information to you when asked – or will reach out to a complainant
on your behalf.
Find insiders. Past or present, that is. Websites such as GlassDoor and Jobitorial can give
you an idea of what employees are saying about the company. Also, a Pacer search of the
company will turn up employment complaints (read: disgruntled employee who might spill the
beans). Hint on Pacer: look for “nature-of-suit” code 442.
Make friends with consumer attorneys and plaintiff’s attorneys. Some of the best cases
(victims) come from them, so familiarize yourself with those who specialize in various industries
(e.g. debt collection, mortgage fraud, cruise lines). Check in with them periodically as you would
with other sources. Yes, they have an agenda – but so do you, right?

#3706
If you MUST post on a public message board looking for complaints, watch what you write!
It’s not the best option, but yes, sometimes it’s the only way to find victims. Just keep in mind that
not only is your competition likely reading those same message boards, but the company may be
monitoring them as well. Keep it simple so you don’t get yourself into a legal pinch.
When pulling inspection reports keep in mind:
Bad inspection reports beg the question of regulatory follow-through. Has the problem been
addressed? If not, why not?
No inspection reports could mean a bigger story. Why aren’t inspections being done or
recorded? Is the public at risk?
Forge alliances with other reporters, within your group and without, not only for story ideas, but
for help shooting when your travel budget is limited.
Don’t discount your tip line. Be it a phone line or online, check often. Yes, you’ll sift through
some loony stuff, but many viewers feel that you are their best option and all it takes is one great
lead. If using an online tip line, design a format that includes the information you want that
viewers may forget to include: phone numbers, email address, requests for documents, etc.
Don’t forget to look at the regulating agency. Is the office charged with overseeing the
business you’re investigating doing all it can? Has it looked the other way? Is there a cozy
relationship that needs further scrutiny? If you can’t fit it all in one piece, that’s a great follow-up.
Background, background, background! We always remember to background individuals,
right? So don’t forget to put together a full picture of the company you’re investigating. Liens,
judgments, licensing, pending court cases, bankruptcies, SEC filings are all vital in putting
together a complete picture. Plus, you might come up with some interesting documents to help
your story. (see below for tips on backgrounding a business or person)
Daily vs. Long-Form. Use feeds to “feed” the daily beast and garner research time for the
investigations you want to nurture.

Organization:
This is key to your consumer investigation.
Start with a worksheet.
Headline it with a sentence summarizing the story’s thesis, what you hope to find. This does not
mean you’re limiting yourself to what you write. It’s a starting point from which to build.
Below the thesis, list the type of contacts you want to “people” your story, the documents you
need to get, databases to create or mine, etc.
Starting with this helps to organize your investigation. Now you just fill in your worksheet with
contacts, names, numbers, websites, etc.
File FOIAs early and often. It’s like voting in Chicago in the old days.
Separate what’s on the record, off the record. Keep in mind that your work product can
become part of a court case. Keep your worksheet “clean.” Understand your employer’s policy
regarding document retention.
Online calendars help teams keep shooting schedules on track and help you track your own
progress, your deadlines etc. They are invaluable to the planning process.

#3706

Helpful Links:
Consumer World – links hundreds of consumer sites www.consumerworld.org
Consumer Product Safety Commission www.cpsc.gov
Federal Trade Commission www.fcc.gov
Government Made Easy www.usa.gov/topics/consumer.shtml
National Consumers League www.natlconsumersleague.org
National Consumer Law Center www.nclc.org ; www.consumerlaw.org
Quackwatch www.quackwatch.com
Scam Busters www.scambusters.com
Ripoff Report www.ripoffreport.com
Consumer Federation of America www.consumerfed.org
Consumer Watchdog www.consumerwatchdog.org
National Council on Consumer Interests www.consumerinterests.org
Consumer Affairs www.consumeraffairs.com
National Association of Attorneys General www.naag.org
HSBC Watchdogs & Consumer Advocates http://HSBCwatch.com/
Reporter’s Desktop http://www.reporter.org/desktop/
Nexis, accurint, pipl www.piple.com
Social Media search http://www.whostalkin.com/search?q=layaway
Consumer Reports www.consumerreports.org ; www.consumersunion.org
Product Reviews other than Consumer Reports www.consumersearch.com
And http://www.reviewfinder.com/ ; consumer-driven: http://www.epinions.com/?sb=1
Recall Warnings http://recalls.justia.com/ ; www.recall-warnings.com
National Fraud Information Center www.fraud.org
National Association of Insurance Commissioners www.naic.org
Private membership sites like Angie’s List www.angieslist.com
Bad Dealings http://www.baddealings.com/
Frugal Corner www.frugalcorner.com

#3706

Backgrounding a business:
Troll the website. Look through EVERYTHING on it – which includes press releases, employee
profiles, etc. You never know what you’ll find.
Accurint and SearchSystems.net. They’ll give you a thumbnail sketch of where the company is
located and who the principals are.
Use Edgar. Search the database at the Securities and Exchange Commission for any and all
financial filings on the company.
Pacer, Pacer, Pacer. If you don’t have a subscription, get it today. Lawsuits are great – but
you’ll also have access to bankruptcy filings, which can be very telling.
State and local offices. Do a full records search at the county level – not just for lawsuits but for
anything that may be kept at the recorder’s office – liens, judgments, mortgages, etc.
Check with the attorney general in the state where the company is located to see if there are any
past or present investigations. And search the secretary of state’s website to see who
incorporated the business and if all required paperwork is up to date (note: some states, like
Florida, give you access to annual reports in PDF, where you can see changes in company
management, etc., over the years).
And check to make sure professional licenses are up to date. Check with state medical boards,
state bars, etc. Some states (e.g. California) will include documents from any disciplinary actions
taken, so make sure you cover this base.
Whois can tell you who has registered the company’s website and where, etc.
Search the individuals. If you know the CEO of the company is involved in the scam firsthand,
be sure to do a full workup on him as well – that includes lawsuits he’s named in, etc.

Backgrounding a person:
Use a checklist that includes:
Criminal background check
Association records
Civil lawsuits
Competitors
Lexis/Nexis
Former associates or employees
Corporation records
Divorce records

#3706
Additional ideas:
Test the effectiveness of regulations:
- Check local laws governing products/services and then see if they’re being followed
(e.g. are minors tanning without parental permission?).
- Does your jurisdiction not require licenses that others do? If it does not require the
same licensing, are people getting better/worse service?
Consumer story starting points:
- What are people doing now? What will they be doing in three months (e.g. seasonal
activities)?
- What are the new trends? Are there any fast-growing new products/services people
may not understand?
- Look around the home. Any traps for the unwary?
Once you have an idea…
Follow it through fully. Are there any other complaints relating to your story? Any
other complaints relating to the same players? The local secretary of state’s office can
help you find other companies associated with the same people.
Look at other angles. Are there other risks people face?

