#3707

TIME IS MONEY – AND I’M OUT OF IT!!!
In an ideal world (or newsroom) we all have plenty of time to research, write and report.
However, the reality is that sometimes we have to ‘feed the news beast’ and turn investigative
work very quickly. Maybe you just don’t have enough staff to cover daily news AND
investigate. So here are some strategies for daily, “down and dirty” digging! Who knows,
maybe these quick-turns will buy you some time to work on the bigger stories when you find
them.
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Investigate Daily News – Is the top story today about crime? Run the name of the victim
and suspect through your local criminal case search database. Cross reference the
address of the crime scene with property tax assessments. Search your station archives
too. You may find a compelling rap sheet or a history of violence. Maybe there’s a trail
of civil litigation, like bankruptcy.
Think about tomorrow’s story TODAY – Oh no! We just had an earthquake! As soon as
‘the dust settles’, homeowners will have questions about insurance and how to avoid
getting ripped off. --- Someone just won a huge Powerball jackpot! What happened
with the tax revenue the last time one of our viewers got lucky? Did the state just put it
into the general fund?
Who pays the city’s bills – and when? In some cities, like Baltimore, the Board of
Estimates meets weekly to finalize all expenditures. This is basically where the bills get
paid and it’s a great place to find questionable expenses – along with the city officials
who can give you quick comment for your story. Then go find the people or places
affected.
Who gets tax breaks in your area? – The good thing about a bad economy is that it
generates good stories about money. Does your local government give TIFS or other tax
breaks to developers? Who gets them and why? Is it money well spent?
Get to know your local auditors – Do you have an Inspector General or Auditor? It’s
their job to investigate too. Find out what they’re working (it should be public record)
and then put together your story to complement the next audit they release. They’ll
provide the numbers, you provide the context and perspective.
Keep a standard FOIA form on hand – submitting a Freedom of Information Act request
can take months, but sometimes the information is available much faster. Have a
standard form that you can easily and quickly ‘tweak’ to make it specific to your story. If
you get the information, great! If you don’t, you can turn a quick story whenever you do
receive it. In the meantime, you can also report that you are looking into the situation
and that may put the agency on point to produce the goods faster!

#3707

