#3708

IRE Boston Conference—2012

Managing Multimedia Projects
Rose Ciotta—The Philadelphia Inquirer; rciotta@phillynews.com
Anthony DeBarros—USA TODAY; adebarros@usatoday.com
Sarah Moughty—Frontline; sarah_moughty@wgbh.org
1) Getting started before you get started
Ending up with a rich multimedia project requires as much attention as possible to these at the
beginning:
Finding the right idea — Think as early as possible about a central idea for the multimedia portion of the
project. It can be as simple as, “We want to map every location where X happened” or “We want a video
interview with each main character in the narrative.”
Finding the right elements —Build on the basic idea to find a solid direction for the multimedia.
Basic map? Map plus stats? Map plus stats plus video?
Finding the right people — Start considering who’s available to code, shoot, draw, write and research all
the pieces.
With collaborations, make sure to iron out at the front end that editorial and production needs are
aligned even if each member tells the story in its own format. Also on collaborations, talk about your
expectations up front — deadlines, branding, publishing strategy, sharing material, etc.
2) Keeping the train running on time
Setting deadlines — Whether you hold meetings or require memos, keeping track of progress is
essential when dealing with multimedia. Because one feature often depends on the completion of
another feature, it is critical to stage each piece of the presentation and set deadlines for completion.
Avoid heaping duties on one staffer to reduce bottlenecks at crunch time.
Managing people — Multimedia usually involves many people who contribute specific skills. As manager
you must keep track so every person’s contribution comes in on time.
Measuring progress — Know when something just isn’t going to make it. Depending on deadline
pressures you may face the prospect of not doing something you’d like to do just because it is too
complicated and work didn’t start early enough
Maintaining momentum — This is especially challenging during a long-term project. Know that the
multimedia presentation evolves so getting people working together as early as possible has a payoff in
a more creative outcome.
Make time for web development — There is nothing like space to create the best interactive
presentation of your findings once stories are near final form. If a story took weeks to write and edit, the
web presentation should get sufficient time to develop including across platforms
Keep media partners in the loop — There’s no such thing as over-communication, especially when
collaborating with media partners. Be specific, don’t be reluctant to bring up details that may seem
inconsequential; redundancy is a good thing.

#3708
3) After launch
What happens next? It's important to come up with a detailed plan to keep the conversation going.
Find out where your audience is and reach out to that community using Facebook, Twitter, CoverItLive
embeddable chats, Reddit , Pinterest and more.
Look for continuing coverage to drive traffic to your web page.
Consider an event—either on site or online—to air issues raised by your investigation.
Plan follow-up stories with interactive features—updates that can be added later; features that can be
refreshed or added that you didn’t have time to do initially

Looking to your next project: A checklist for multimedia features
-- Database applications
-- Graphics including animated features
-- Video; slideshows
-- Audio/Webcasts
-- DocumentCloud
-- Video from a public event tied to the project
--Web Chats
--Interactive maps
--Reader contributions—photos, video, comments
--Facebook page to gather comments and interaction
--Interactive timeline with embedded photos, video, documents
--Features that allow readers to curate their own experience

Multimedia projects discussed by the panel:
The Philadelphia Inquirer
Assault on Learning
http://www.philly.com/assaultonlearning
USA TODAY
Ghost Factories
http://ghostfactories.usatoday.com

FRONTLINE
Law & Disorder
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/law-disorder/

#3708

