#3709
June 2012
IRE Boston -- Covering Breaking Military News Tony Capaccio,
Defense Reporter, Bloomberg News 202-624-1911
@acapaccio@bloomberg.net

Half the battle in reporting on the military and being
prepared to cover a breaking story is knowing the players and
building contact lists before a crisis because once one erupts
in your circulation area it’s very, very difficult to get
through to a military public affairs official, much less a key
direct participant.
To mitigate this problem, build up your e-mail contact list
early. Collect any phone directories and wall organization
charts that list names.
Among the less obvious -- local police liaison officers to
a military base, the base MP office, the head of the base’s
operation’s center -- the nerve center that monitors
developments for commanders -- and the defense aides for your
local congressmen and state senators.
One of the first tips as to what happened in the case of
Sft. Sgt Robert Bales accused of killing 16 Afghans was a
descriptive memo sent to congressional defense committees March
12, one day after the killings (attached). Bales was not named.
But I got it from a congressional staffer.
Also -- get on the Twitter feed for the Pentagon Force
Protection Agency -- the Pentagon’s police force -- for early
alerts of emergencies in the DC area that may resonant in your
area --@ThePFPA
If your base has a unit deployed overseas, find out who
heads any associations charged with family support. They can be
valuable in an emergency.
If all you have is a name here are the current military
locator numbers for the Army (502-613-4416 --The Human Resources
Command PA shop); Air Force (210-565-2660); Marine Corps (1-703784-3942); Navy (1-866-827-5672); Coast Guard -866-772-8724.
Before calling them you need at minimum DOB and last four
numbers of SSN. Middle initial helps.
Set Your Clock

#3709
Another rule -- the military is on different clock than
reporters -- I’m not just talking about its use of 24-hour time
-- i.e. 1300 hours for 1:00 O’clock. If you cover the military,
get used to making calls in the 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. range.
Your chances of getting a military public affairs officer or any
officials after 8:30 a.m. drop greatly.
Translations
Need translation of military jargon: Go to the Dictionary
of Military Terms: www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/doddict
Need a list of military journals in your area of coverage.
Check out: http://www.au.af.mil/au/aul/periodicals/dodelecj.htm
phone numbers.
Social Media
The Pentagon in February 2010 reversed a directive that
blocked access from U.S. military computers to about 10 socialnetworking sites, such as YouTube.
Troops now have unrestricted access to these and other
sites, such as Facebook and Twitter, if security precautions are
applied and ethical guidelines are followed. That could be a
real benefit for reporters who follow military leaders like JCS
Chairman General Martin Dempsey on Twitter or NATO Commander
Admiral James Stravridis on Facebook.
I arranged a DC interview with Stavridis via Facebook, for
example.
Here’s the Pentagon’s social media link listing all
official users:
http://www.defense.gov/RegisteredSites/SocialMediaSites.aspx
Safety Centers
A common breaking military news story is a jet or
helicopter crash. The places to go for accident rate and other
safety data:
The Army Safety Center contact is Michael Negard at the
Army at 334-255-3770 -- michael.j.negard.civ@mail.mil. The
website: https://safety.army.mil/Default.aspx
Navy Safety Center -- 757-444-3520, April Phillips x7312
http://www.safetycenter.navy.mil

#3709
Air Force Safety Center: AF Safety Center at Kirtland AFB,
NM http://www.afsec.af.mil/ Public Affairs: Masao Doi
Masao.doi@kirtland.af.mil 505-8246-2098
Safety queries to the AF PA Shop in Washington: SAF/PAO Capt
Phil Ventura Phillip.ventura@pentagon.af.mil 703-695-0640
Enforcers
Among the other key players to check for in your area are
field officers for the Defense Criminal Investigative Service -the Pentagon’s FBI at http://www.dodig.mil/inv/dcis/dcismap2.htm
The Army Audit Agency, Navy Audit Agency, Air Force audit
agency and the criminal investigative branches of each service
have offices near military installations. Get to know
investigators in your area.
The Navy Audit Service, unlike the Army and Air Force audit
agencies, has a very transparent web site that lists reports.
The Army and Air Force don’t list report titles, making you FOIA
for titles or waiting until the prior six months are published
by the Pentagon Inspector General in its semi-annual report.
That’s why meeting and cultivating regionally based
auditors is key to finding out in a timely manner what reports
are available.
Here’s the DoD IG Master list of its publications contained on
its website: DOD IG Master list:
http://www.dodig.mil/PUBS/index.html
The latest semi-annual report is at:
http://www.dodig.mil/SAR/SAR_MAR_2012_Reduced.pdf

Navy Audit Service:
http://secnavportal.donhq.navy.mil/portal/server.pt?open=512&obj
ID=303&&PageID=37389&mode=2&in_hi_userid=2&cached=true
Army Audit Service:
http://www.hqda.army.mil/aaaweb/links.htm
Air Force Audit Service:

#3709

http://www.afaa.af.mil/
The Special Inspector General For Iraq Reconstruction Stuart
Bowen puts on a quarterly report that most usefully contains the
ongoing work of other agencies on Iraq fraud, waste and abuse,
including the GAO, Pentagon IG and Army Audit Agency:
http://www.sigir.mil/publications/quarterlyreports/index.html

The Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction
also publishes a quarterly report at:
http://www.sigar.mil/pdf/quarterlyreports/2012-04-30qr.pdf

Check the section “Other Agency Oversight” to track
ongoing State, AID, Defense and GAO reports as the U.S. military
commitment there grows.
Also check if there is a regional field office of the U.S.
Government Accountability Office in your region. GAO auditors
are good source of context on defense management and weapons
programs and can give insights into ongoing work and reports
near completion. They are also free to talk about reports they
have already released.
http://www.gao.gov/about.gao/phonebook/orgphonebook.pdf
Obtaining Military Records/Fakes
Covering the military more and more involves uncovering
instances of ‘fake valor,” or an exaggerated military record.
Here’s a listing of good stories to review for technique and
context: 1) Washington Post, May 10, 2010: Exposing Falsified
Valor, Christian Davenport. 2) Financial Times: Mock Heroics,
Oct. 24, 2004, Jonathan Green. 3) New York Times, A Sworn
Mission to Unmask Pretenders to Military. Pam Belluck, Aug. 10,
2001. 4) The Story Behind A Soldier’s Story (The Ed Daily, No
Gun Ri charade), May 31, 2001, Michael Moss.
Here’s how to get the official breakdown of person’s military
record from the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis
http://www.archives.gov/st-louis/military-personnel:

#3709

Fax on company letter to its “emergency line” --314-8010763. Write ‘Attention: Customer Service, Media Request.”
Include a return Fax number and mail address.
Outline who you are, provide deadline and ask for “all
information under FOIA” on the person. At minimum you need
name, middle initial, date and place of birth and branch of
service.
The center within 3 days will work to compile a Form 13164
that lists military record and medals, if any.
Analysts
There are three very good watchdog/analysis groups: The
Center For Strategic and Budgetary Assessment, Project on
Government Oversight, or POGO and Taxpayers For Common Sense.
CSBA is the best D.C. think tank in terms of explaining the
defense budget. Csbaonline.org is the URL.
The POGO ferrets government waste and abuse. Pogo.org. It
maintains a data base on corporate fraud, waste and abuse
convictions, guilty pleas and civil fines.
Laura Peterson, the national security analyst for
Taxpayers’ is expert on tracking congressional defense earmarks.
Laura@taxpayer.net
Bales Case
Bloomberg News enlisted Washington and regional reporters
on the new State and Municipal Team for coverage of Staff Sgt.
Robert Bales, accused by the Army of killing 16 Afghan civilians
in March.
I covered from the Pentagon. Bales’s name leaked to cable
TV about 6:15 pm on March 16. We confirmed name quickly and
passed to Bloomberg Team. The Army formally confirmed the name
later that night.
From there, reporters fanned out to Washington, Ohio and
Florida gathering information.
From Bloomberg, reporters Alison Vekshin, James Nash,
Elliott Smith, and Peter Robison and Seattle Times reporters Hal
Bernton and Sanjay Bhatt come these tips:
-- Once the name surfaced, social media was scoured. Bales’

#3709
wife Kari had a blog. Reporters used screen shots to save the
blog figuring correctly that it would be taken down. The Army
attempted to erase all Bales references from its websites so the
lesson is -- move fast.
-- Once it was known that Bales had deployed multiple tours,
reporters searched for military publications that mentioned him
as he’s the type of soldier the Army wanted to highlight.
-- Bales was highlighted in a detailed 2009 article in the
“Northwest Guardian,” an Army publication. The Army removed
links to it but a Seattle Times reporter found it by using an
advanced Twitter search, typing in “Robert Bales, military” or
“Robert Bales, Army,” and it led her to a tweet that included
a cache of the article.
-- The article was also important because it contained the
names of numerous soldiers who served in Iraq with Bales.
-- Reporters for the Seattle Times used a website called
openbook.org, which allows you to search any public postings on
Facebook sites about Bales. That lead to an Army buddy of Bales
who had posted pictures and remembrances of the staff sgt.
--- Reporters checked online property records in King and
Pierce counties in Washington State looking for statutory
warranty deeds, liens, deeds of trust, excise tax affidavits and
notices of trustee sales. The transaction history of each
property was searched via the registrar of deeds site.
-- Online court records in Seattle disclosed a Bales 2008 arrest
outside a bowling alley after an altercation. The online version
didn’t have a narrative so a Bloomberg reporter visited the
courthouse Monday morning to check the paper copy.
State court records also turned up a 2002 assault arrest
and 2005 drunk driving charge.
-- After indications surfaced that Bales at one time was a
stockbroker, including employment at Spartina Investment, Miami,
Bloomberg reporters checked his Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority records and found he’d been charged with defrauding
clients before he enlisted:
http://www.stockbrokerfraud.com/downloads/Robert-Bales-PDPI.pdf

