#3710

Investigating Public School Construction
Gale Holland
Staff Writer
Los Angeles Times
Gale.holland@latimes.com
213-237-7725

IRE conference 2012
Boston, MA
Investigating Higher Ed

Billions to Spend

In the summer of 2009, my colleague Michael Finnegan and I received separate tips about
troubles in a $5.7 billion community college building program in Los Angeles. During an 18month investigation, we discovered tens of millions of dollars had gone to waste on reckless
spending, shoddy construction and pay-to-play contracts to political donors.
Our six-part series relied on documents we obtained through the California Public Records Act.
What follows is a discussion of some of the records and how we used them. Many of the tools
we used would work on investigating any public works project.
Public construction is complex, records vary state by state and project by project and the
documents you need for your investigation may be different than the ones we consulted. What
we found most useful was to stay focused on simple, concrete things: money and buildings.
Foundational documents:
State bond law, attorney general opinions, ballot measures, bond project lists, requests for
proposals, campus master plans, board/trustee action on construction and bond issues, audits,
district contracting and ethics codes, citizen oversight committee minutes, campus and district
construction committee meeting minutes and reports.
The building program we examined was financed primarily through voter-approved bonds, as is
most school construction in the US. It was extremely complex: nine campuses, each with their
own professional construction management staff, faculty construction committees, president
and administrative staff calling the shots, plus an uber-management staff, a board of trustees
and a citizen’s oversight committee at the district level. We consulted these baseline
documents often to learn how the program was structured and to test whether officials were
following the rules and doing what they told the voters they would do.
Calculating costs:

#3710

Vendor contract reports, design and construction contracts, consultant contracts, contract
amendments, change orders, task orders, work orders and invoices.
Contracts and amendments establish what the agency agrees to pay for a project. Invoices
document what the agency has actually paid out. Change orders are issued for additional work
the schools have agreed to pay for, over and above the original contract amount. Notice to
proceed orders set the date construction is to start and when it should finish and statements of
substantial completion tell you when it was actually concluded. From these documents, you can
calculate if a project has gone over schedule and exactly how much.

Both the invoices and change orders reveal with great specificity exactly what aspects of the
construction the money was spent on. Public officials like to say change orders are only granted
to handle unanticipated problems that arise during construction, and sometimes this is true.
But we found many instances in which change orders were approved to cover the costs of fixing
construction defects or penalties paid out over construction delays to to give additional work to
favored contractors. Typically, any delay over and above the stipulated construction schedule
lead to penalties against the contractor, the designer or the government agency, whoever is
found at fault. These penalties can run into the millions.
In your effort to document money wasted, do not overlook vivid examples, even if the dollar-figure is
small. One of the botched projects we wrote about was a newly constructed water trough for a
veterinary program that was too high for the campus pig to reach. The amount of money in that project
involved was not great – about $300,000 – but this was perhaps the single most-commented-on detail in
our series.
We also used payment records to uncover money wasted on abandoned projects. In our case, the
district did not provide all the financial records on abandoned and botched projects that we sought so
we turned to workarounds. In the case of the pig trough, the campus project manager provided a report
with cost estimates. We also applied political pressure to the elected board of trustees, making it clear
in writing that we were seeking evidence of serious problems that would look even worse if they were
covered up. On several occasions, these appeals jogged a frozen public records release process back into
action.

Construction documents:
Inspector of Record reports, Architect of Record Reports, field orders, field trip notes, requests
for information, Engineering reports, laboratory test reports, deficiency reports, field
observation reports, notice of non-compliance, punchlists, Division of State Architect reports,
blueprints.

#3710

These documents are long, highly technical and full of jargon. But if you read them carefully you
will find they spell out problems pretty clearly. Engineering reports are particularly useful; they
will state if a building is not structurally sound. The most serious defects are classified fire life
safety violations by the Division of State Architect, the agency that oversees school construction
in California.
Punchlists contain things still undone or done improperly at what is supposed to be the end of
the project. Our graphics reporting staff was able to translate these records into interactive
graphics depicting section by section the construction defects in two particularly troubled
projects.

Employment documents:
Resumes, labor summaries, employee labor logs, reimbursable expense receipts, company web
sites, task orders and work orders, company help-wanted ads.
Task and work orders helped us identify individuals and companies working as subcontractors
or subconsultants that we otherwise would not have been able to document, including family
members that college officials had placed on construction payrolls.
We also relied on Form 700 statements of economic interest filed by state officials including
public college officials in California and the state’s corporation records. The state Department
of General Services issues Small Business Certifications that clarified each owner’s share of the
company. We also consulted property records – deeds of trust, liens, mortgage documents etc.
– which in one case established that two people with different last names were in fact a
married couple, and legal documents including a bankruptcy filing.
We used payroll spreadsheets and other employment records to unravel a complex scheme to
put contruction management staff on the payrolls of private companies that niether supervised
or controlled them. In the words of one contractor whose email we obtained, the contractors
were “shell pass-throughs” that, in exchange for processing paychecks, were allowed to charge
percentage “markups”, ostensibly for business overhead and profit. The system, we were able
to show, doubled or tripled payroll costs to taxpayers for no good reason. Most of the company
principals had donated to college district leaders’ campaigns.
Through the documents, we were able to calculate how much the employees were making and
how much the contractors were taking in markups.
The devil was in the details. After learning one of the contractors who had made several
millions of dollars off the program did not appear to have an office or any other real overhead,

#3710

we sent a photographer to what he listed as his corporate address. It was a mail drop business
along a commuter rail line in northern California called Box Ship and More. The picture of the
business we ran told the story.
Through the labor logs we also discovered public relations personnel, grant writers and
videographers were being paid with bond money that by law should have been spent only on
building buildings. We also discovered frivolous spending on things like aerial photography,
feng shui consultants and videographers.
Political documents:
The college district’s campaign finance records were available in a paper version only. Some
were hand-written, and few were uniform. We obtained them from the county clerk, our
database team painstakingly vetted and analyzed the data and compared it to an electronic
vendor contract amounts list we had obtained from the district through a public records
request. The resulting database, which we posted online, showed that the biggest political
donors had been awarded the largest contracts.

Email:
E-mail was the motherlode for us. College officials had traveled the country touting their
construction plan as the best green building progam in the nation, but in their emails and
memos they were quite candid about the problems. We were able to quote them in their own
words complaining about problems that they had officially disputed.
Officials stonewalled our requests for construction documents on a troubled track and field
project, so we requested email between the project managers and college and college district
officials. When it arrived, all the engineering, inspection and other reports were attached to the
email messages. The messages revealed the human drama as officials fought over various
problems and how to fix them.
Some of the email was delivered in Outlook format. So we could load it into our own email
programs, where it was sortable and word searchable, an enormous organizational advantage.
Confidential sources:
We did not use unnamed sources in our stories, but confidential informants were enormously
important. Some slipped us documents in clandestine meetings in gas stations or 7-Eleven
parking lots. Others told us what documents to seek, or helped us decipher the technical
language.

#3710

We developed some sources by cold-calling people we discovered in meeting minutes or at
construction meetings we attended. We chose people who appearedto be in the middle of
projects or to be acting in the public interest. Others came forward because they were
dismayed by the waste. Most of them did not have many specifics about waste, but they helped
lead us to where the to get the information.
Interviews and visits:
Over the course of our project, we made a number of unannounced visits to officials in
construction trailers and offices who we either knew would not agree to meet with us or who
we wanted to hear from before they had time to consult their PR people and come up with a
canned statement. We also were aggressive about gaining access, at times over resistance, to
construction projects we were writing about. Some of the problems we could see during our
visits. Other projects looked great; the problems only emerged through sources and
documents. But we needed to describe what the projects looked like in our stories.
Whenever we learned something new, we immediately sought out the head of the program
and other college district officials for answers. Eventually the director agreed to hours of
interviews, all of which we taped. That proved important when he and other officials realized
what might be damaging and tried to change their stories.

