#3718
Ana Lourdes Cardenas, SomosFrontera.com/El Paso Times
analourdes3@gmail.com
Kevin Rothstein, of Fox 25 WFXT in Boston
kevin.rothstein@foxtv.com
Mc Nelly Torres, Florida Center for Investigative Reporting (Moderator)
Torres.mcnelly@gmail.com
Jessica Vaughan, Center for Immigration Studies
jessicavaughan@verizon.net

Covering Immigration
Whether you work in a rural area, big city or a border town like El Paso, immigration is a hotbutton issue that requires shoe-leather reporting and document digging from journalists. In this
panel, we’ll show you where to look for big-picture problems with policies and procedures and
give you tips on how to ethically and accurately cover the human side of this controversial topic.
Tips:
Knowledge is power: Become involved in that community and get to know community leaders,
activists and spoke persons. Attend festivals and learn about the specific culture.
Grassroots groups and advocates: Establish relationships with these groups such as
National Council of La Raza and/or American Immigrant Justice because they can educate and
inform you about issues in specific communities and especially community needs.
Immigration attorneys and local business associations: Develop relationships with
immigration attorneys because they can tell you about the trends in the community. There’s
always an array of local business associations that caters to specific groups. In South Florida,
for example, we have the Puerto Rican Chamber of Commerce
(http://puertoricanchamber.com/) and many others. Did you know that there’s a Haitian
American Nurses Association?
Education: There’s nothing that tells more about a community that students attending public
schools. Talk to school district leaders to learn about specific groups within that community.
Also, you can obtain data from school district to learn about where students of specific groups
and cultures attend which schools. It’s very telling.
We are all different: Never generalize about a group. One of the things I love about South
Florida its diversity. I’m always learning about people. I think it has enriched my life and that of
my children. We do appreciate that.
Be aware about the cultural differences. For example, people from Mexico are completely
different from people from Puerto Rico, Venezuela and so forth. The only thing that we have in
common is the Spanish language and is not the same for every country. Also be aware of
regions just in as in the U.S., people from the west coast speak different from people from
central and the east coast, the same happens within countries.
Mexicans living abroad
If you are covering Mexican communities in the U.S., look for the Mexican Consulate in your
area and ask them for a list of the “Casas” established in your city. The “Casas” are regional
organizations of Mexicans living abroad.
This website provides information of some of this organizations:
http://www.mexicanosenelexterior.com/index.php?pageID=comUsa
Pew Hispanic Center is a nonprofit research organization aimed to provide on Hispanics in the
U.S. It is a great resource for stories related to cultural identity, education, health access,
political participation, as well as demographic trends, among other topics

#3718
http://www.pewhispanic.org/
The State Department website gives you information of different kind of visas (business visas,
border crossing cards, year by year and region by region.
¨http://www.travel.state.gov/visa/statistics/nivstats/nivstats_4582.html
¨http://www.travel.state.gov/visa/statistics/nivstats/nivstats_4582.html
The Center for Immigration Studies publishes reports using U.S. Census Bureau data focusing
on immigrants in the United States and their jobs, incomes, educational attainment, and use of
government services. The newest report using 2010 Census data will be published in July,
2012 and available at www.cis.org. Example of the last report:
http://www.cis.org/immigrants_profile_2007. CIS also has estimates of changes in the size of
the illegal immigrant population: http://www.cis.org/camarota/new-dhs-estimates-confirm-illegalimmigrant-population-stopped-declining-under-obama.
For stories related with asylum petitions, use the Department of Justice website and the link to
the Statistical Yearbook at http://www.justice.gov/eoir/efoia/foiafreq.htm
If you story is related to Mexicans and you require all kind of information about the town(s) were
these immigrants are coming from, you can find it at the Instituto Nacional de Geografía
Estadística e Informatica, which is the equivalent of the U.S. Census. The website is difficult to
navigate but it has tons of valuable information.
www.inegi.gob.mx
One interesting way to look at immigrants’ process to adapt to their new environment has to do
with the school system. All the state education agencies provide detailed information school by
school and year by year about the performances of schools and students. You can review the
number of schools that have registered an increase in the number of ESL students or the
number of economically disadvantaged students that have enrolled recently and cross that
information with the accountability rates. Some schools keep records about the country where
new immigrants are coming from and those can be requested using public information act.
Here are some links to the education agencies of some states:
http://www.ode.state.or.us/home/
http://www.ade.az.gov/
www.tea.state.tx.us
If you story has to do with the hardships that immigrants face when trying to cross to the US.,
you may need to contact people that help this immigrants in the other side of the border,
especially with people who provide temporary shelter for them. Here is a website with general
information about some shelters in the north of Mexico. They help Mexican immigrants and
Central and South American migrants.
http://www.guanajuato.gob.mx/migrantes/casas-apoyo.htm

Story Ideas:
Secure Communities -- a controversial program that automatically sends the fingerprints
of those arrested by local law enforcement to DHS for comparison against immigration
databases.

#3718
* ICE data: This program was created to deport illegal immigrants with criminal records but the
data in most places don’t show that. Try to get the data from your state or county and compared
that with the rest of the nation.
http://fcir.org/2011/01/31/security-breach/.
DeportationStatistics Unwrapped: Which ICE programs are responsible for generating the
deportation numbers? What kind of cases are they counting to achieve record numbers?
* Other issues with Secure Communities:
* Who is being identified? What are their crimes?
·
How is ICE dealing with the referrals/cases – detained, released, monitored, charges
dropped?
·
Much attention focused on who ICE has detained, but the individuals that ICE has
released and why can be an even bigger story.
·
Privacy issues: Is the use of biometric programs in law enforcement an invasion of
privacy? How do limitations on federal use of biometrics compare with the private sector and
social networks?
* Secure Communities can be politically charged -- what do local politicians, police chiefs,
immigration advocates say about the changes it has made? Has it actually made communities
safer? As it's being rolled out, have concerns over its use been born out?
This issue started a political firestorm in Massachusetts:
http://www.myfoxboston.com/story/17787563/mass-delays-immigration-program
Note: It is important to understand the jargon and the workings of immigration law when
covering enforcement programs; e.g. definitions of “criminal alien”, the difference between
criminal and immigration violations, and immigration due process. See:
http://www.cis.org/deportation-basics and http://www.cis.org/Immigration-Courts.
U.S. Deportees to Haiti Jailed Without Cause Face Several Health Risks: FCIR worked with
many media outlets to localize this story.
http://fcir.org/2011/11/13/u-s-deportees-to-haiti-jailed-without-cause-face-severe-health-risks/
Follow the story: FCIR has spent a great deal of time following these issues and updating the
story. It does make a difference.
http://fcir.org/2011/11/17/u-s-government-will-review-300000-deportation-cases/
http://fcir.org/2011/01/31/ice-secure-communities-not-optional/
Immigration law enforcement/criminal aliens
Who is ICE arresting? New ICE forecasts of criminal alien releases by county. Also, detailed
reports on alien arrests by county, state and region. ICE’s FOIA reading room:
http://www.ice.gov/foia/ Check FOIA logs to find out what others are requesting (ICE can
provide the same data to you once it is released).
Immigrant incarceration: Dept. of Justice/ICE data on incarcerated aliens tallied for State
Criminal Alien Assistance Program awards:
https://www.bja.gov/ProgramDetails.aspx?Program_ID=86 under “Archives” tab at page bottom.
Together with Secure Communities, this data set provides the best estimate for the number of
illegal alien criminals arrested in a local jurisdiction.

#3718
Immigration Courts, Detention and Alternatives to Detention
·
Rates for absconding, failure to appear, breached bonds
·
New detention standards; Violence in ICE detention facilities; attacks on guards and other
inmates (recent murder of guard in Miss). No official ICE reports, but corrections companies
and individual jails might track this.
Tips: Some local LEAs are more forthcoming than ICE with information on aliens arrested,
especially in 287(g) locations. Example: Georgia and North Carolina sheriffs will release
statistics on arrested aliens, in defiance of an ICE gag order.
Tip: U.S. Sentencing Commission – one of the few agencies that tracks offenders by citizenship
status (federal immigration and non-immigration crimes).
Tip: In general, call DHS for information or statement last, after you are able to formulate
precise questions about the case or story line.
Immigrant Gangs
·
Statistics available from ICE on gang members and associates arrested by location,
citizenship, age, gang affiliation, immigration status, other crimes
·
Relationship of street gangs to larger criminal organizations, transnational ties
Changes to 287(g) Program -- a controversial program that “deputizes” local law
enforcement as immigration enforcers
·
Arrests and Crime statistics available from ICE and local agencies
·
Forced to ignore low-level violators rather than process as minor offenders
·
No new programs, de-staffing support office in HQ
US-Visit (the biometric entry screening program at airports and seaports). This summer,
DHS is planning to launch a new visitor tracking system to detect visa overstayers.
·
Overstay tracking implementation (biographic): Who is overstaying? Types of visas?
Which countries?
·
ESTA – How many unscreened and/or refused travelers have been allowed to enter?
From which countries? Can the airlines be trusted to implement the mandates properly?

Worksite Enforcement
*
What companies in your community are hiring illegal immigrants and what is ICE doing
(and not doing) about it?
·
Results of Audits – Who is fined and how much? Who escapes sanctions? ICE will
provide results of audits completed, but resists supplying company names.
·
Experience of companies with E-Verify. List of E-Verify Companies:
http://www.ilw.com/immigrationdaily/news/2012,0403-everifyemployers.shtm
·
Use of SSNVS (SSA system to verify entire payrolls):
http://www.ssa.gov/employer/ssnv.htm.

ID Theft
·
Use of Puerto Rican identities to establish citizenship for employment or crime.
·
Impact of illegal alien ID theft on U.S. victims, especially children. Denial of welfare
benefits to children with income recorded on their SSN. (Ask state benefits agencies).

#3718
·

Federal Trade Commission tracks statistics on types of ID theft (i.e. employment-related).
REAL ID Act -- are ineligible immigrants fraudulently obtaining driver’s licenses? How
secure are your state’s driver’s license? The US REAL ID Act requires states to impose several
security measures, including checking for applicants’ legal status. A roundup of state’s
compliance with REAL ID is here: http://cis.org/real-id-implementation-report
Visas and Benefits
How many new workers admitted in legal programs (permanent, quasi-temporary, and
temporary)?
* Incentives for hiring foreign workers (wages, no employment taxes, FICA, etc.)
* Fraud problems – marriage fraud, student visa fraud, temporary worker fraud.
* Growth in asylum applications: See Arriving Alien Credible Fear Determinations report on
ICE FOIA web site, showing 400+% increase in cases since 2009.
* Border Crossing Cards – entry visa issued to 9 million Mexican citizens. Unlike visitors
entering through airports and seaports, BCC holders are not vetted with biometrics, and travel is
not monitored. Huge imposter problem. Source: Customs and Border Protection, port of entry
reports.
* Public charge – Although immigration law stipulates that prospective visitors and immigrants
must show that they will not be dependent on public support, this provision is almost never
enforced. Visa officers are prohibited from refusing applicants based on past use of Medicaid
and other “non-cash” welfare programs. States routinely offer these services, especially for
childbirth. Certain hospitals are known destinations for foreign mothers.
Sources:
1. State Department Visa Office:
http://travel.state.gov/visa/statistics/statistics_1476.html. Information on visa issuances,
countries, waiting lists, refusal rates, ineligibilities, etc. Visa Bulletin gives wait times and size of
waiting list, by country and category.
2. Dept. of Labor databases: Office of Foreign Labor Certification databases:
http://www.flcdatacenter.com/CaseH1B.aspx. Look up companies sponsoring foreign workers,
types of jobs, and how much they are paid. Why are they getting approval to sponsor foreign
workers? Because there isn’t a domestic source or because they are saving the company
money by bringing in cheaper labor?
3. Lists of Barred Employers: http://www.cis.org/Debarred-Firms-2011.
4. Foreign students and hosting schools: SEVIS By the Numbers:
http://www.ice.gov/sevis/outreach.htm.
5. U.S. Census Bureau databases (takes practice).
Food Stamps – 45 states calculate benefits so that illegal alien-headed households qualify for
larger monthly payments than U.S. citizen households of the same income level. This is
because the illegal alien’s income is not counted as household income, while the earnings or a
legal resident are counted -- thus reducing the size of the food award. Kansas and a few other
states have discontinued this practice.
Tuition discounts -- for foreign students at public universities – Some states (Texas, Florida,
Georgia, Minnesota and others) offer special scholarship grants and fee waivers to foreign
students (who are supposed to pay their own way) to enable them to qualify for in-state tuition.
Examples: “Mexican Citizens with Financial Need-Border Nations Waiver” and “Good Neighbor
Scholarship Program” in Texas and the “In-State Cultural Contribution Scholarship” and the
“Academic & Cultural Sharing Scholarship” in Minnesota, which automatically goes to all foreign
students in their first semester.

#3718
Individual Tax Identification Numbers – Source: US Treasury audit reports. Large numbers
of tax refunds issued to individuals with earnings under duplicate or fake SSNs.
Immigrants and schools.- Is the new influx of immigrants in your area impacting the schools
system? Is there any visible impact in the state’s accountability rates? Is this influx translating in
the schools demanding additional funding? Are the schools having problems to hire ESL
teachers? From where are they bringing the teachers?
Sources: State Dept. of Education website, look for accountability rates, ESL students, budget,
etc.
Immigration and crime.- Is the influx of immigrants having an impact on crime? How many of
the people arrested by the police have been transferred to immigration authorities for
deportation?
Sources: Local Police Departement, DHS, ICE (http://www.ice.gov/criminal-alien-program),
Immigrants advocacy organizations, etc.
Immigrants and urban areas.- New immigrants trend to establish themselves in areas where
other immigrants from the same country have settled down before. Have you seen a
demographic growth in these areas? Have other areas of the city been “incorporated” into these
immigrant zones? Have some groups of population been displaced by new immigrants?
Sources: Census Data, Local Urban Development departments, community organizations,
demographer, etc.
Immigrants and health: Do the public hospitals in your area have enough translators to help
foreign born patients? What percentage of the immigrants in your state of county have medical
insurance? Where do they get help if they don’t have insurance?
Sources: Local department of health, U.S. Census, community organizations, county
commissioners, State Children’s Health Insurance Program.

Useful Websites:
ICE FOIA Reading Room: http://www.ice.gov/foia/, including FOIA and Congressional logs.
U.S. Census Bureau: Demographic trends are very important to understand how communities
are changing over time. The Census has a great deal of data and tools about demographics,
business, poverty, and even education. Look for the Data Finder on the site’s right side which
allows visitors to perform quick searches. www.census.gov
Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugees:
http://judiciary.house.gov/about/subimmigration.html
Haitian Diaspora Federation: http://www.myhdf.org/Board_Members.htm
American Immigrant Justice: Formerly known as Florida Immigrant Advocacy Center, this
nonprofit offers legal services to immigrants and is dedicated to protecting and promoting the
basic human rights of immigrants of all nationalities. http://www.fiacfla.org/
American Immigration Lawyers Association: http://www.aila.org/
Immigration Prof Blog: Blog by a group of law professors and includes a list of useful and
informative links to other immigration sites. http://lawprofessors.typepad.com/immigration/
Center for Immigration Studies: This is a think tank devoted exclusively to the research and
policy analysis of all immigration-related issues. Their site is good. Among other things, CIS has
a mailing list that lets you stay on top of what everyone else is writing about immigration issues,
from the smallest border papers to the New York Times. www.cis.org

#3718
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse: A non-profit that has successfully sued the
justice department for tons of data and makes it available to journalists and researchers. Son of
it is free, the rest you get for a subscription fee. http://trac.syr.edu
The ACLU’s Immigrant Rights Page: http://www.aclu.org
Federation for Immigration Reform: An organization that argues that the U.S. has too many
immigrants and proposes reforms. Among other things, the site has state-by-state profiles and
news releases. www.fairus.org
NumbersUSA: www.numbersusa.com/content/
Immigration Works USA: A grassroots group that supports immigration reform that works for
all Americans including employers, workers and citizens. Part of its mission is to educate the
public about the benefits of immigration. www.immigrationworksusa.org
National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials (NALEO): www.naleo.org
America’s Voice: www.americasvoiceonline.org
National Immigration Forum: www.immigrationforum.org

