#3720

Campaign 2012: Tips for backgrounding candidates
IRE 2012, Boston

Jack Gillum
Washington investigations team
The Associated Press
(202) 641-9448
jgillum@ap.org
And, yes, I’m on Twitter: @jackgillum
Using documents and data to your advantage
We’ve heard it ad nauseam, but it’s true: Follow the money. How has a candidate gotten
rich? Conversely, how has he or she sunk deeply into debt? When the candidate entered
office, did he/she sponsor legislation that benefited him/her?
Examine avenues of illegal behavior. Tax evasion, cutting corners on land development,
hiring an illegal immigrant nanny?
Hypocritical/immoral behavior. Point out when candidate professes one thing but does
another. Look at a candidate’s books or writings about their positions and see how they’ve
changed.
Lying about background. This includes work experience, fudging details of academic
tenures or being misleading about their past role as a lobbyist.
The company they keep. Pay close attention to candidates’ advisors, major donors,
personal friends and business associates.
Income taxes. Is the candidate refusing to release them? Does he/she owe any back taxes?
Debt problems. Examine bankruptcy filings and tax liens (Nexis is good for this) and check
for any outstanding debts. Was the candidate eventually taken to court?
Legal troubles. Sift through state, county and federal lawsuits in which the candidate was
named, particularly if he/she gave a deposition. Any disciplinary behavior by professional
standards boards, like a congressional ethics panel, the FEC, state campaign finance bodies
state bar? Any sexual harassment complaints?
Put past scandals back in focus. Don't assume they are old news to readers and just ignore
them. Odds are, your competition won't.
Voting record. If the candidate has been in office before, has he/she been absent during
important votes? Is there a voting pattern that could tell a story?
Favors for friends. Did candidate cut any sweet deals for people close to him? State and
federal public records search could be your friend here.
Any hints of mistresses or love interests? (This isn’t just grist for the tabloid-gossip mill;
these hidden affairs could prove dangerous to the candidate – and public – once in office.)
Charities. If candidate has one and won’t reveal donors to his/her 501(c) group, you
should write about it.
- over -

#3720
Key documents and data to seek (including some worth repeating)
Financial disclosure reports at state and congressional level
Land or tax records of home and business properties tied to the candidate and his/her
spouse.
Nexis/PACER/Westlaw court-record searches, both civil and criminal cases.
Campaign finance reports, particularly from the FEC.
Writings for op-ed pages, think tanks, grad school papers or law journals.
Corporate records, like Securities and Exchange Commission documents or IRS filings.
Look beyond GuideStar for most recent Form 990s.
FOIA correspondence between candidate and state/federal agencies.
Check state archives for schedules and appointment logs.
General strategy and miscellaneous tips
Have a plan for backgrounding a candidate and enlist the help of others in your newsroom.
Periodically – and especially at the outset – do a brain dump and write out everything you
know and don’t yet know.
In an election year, remember that everything old is new again.
Good cop vs. bad cop. If you can, assign one reporter to schmooze the campaign to get
announcements while the other spends more time looking into candidate’s past.
Finally, write with sweep and context. Political stories, including ones that dig into a
candidate’s past, are very contentious among readers. Show – don’t tell – them why it’s
important you’re looking at the candidate’s past.

