Investigating Shadowy Organizations
IRE 2012 - Boston
Matt Apuzzo
The Associated Press
mapuzzo@ap.org
What is a shadowy organization? It doesn’t have to be the CIA, though it certainly qualifies. A shadowy
organization is any group that attempts to keep its affairs out of the public eye. Maybe it is a quasi-government
agency that’s exempt from open records or public meeting laws. Maybe it’s a private business, a charity, a
sports team or an industry front group. The steps below will help you crack the organizations on your beat or
approach them as part of an investigation.
1. IDENTIFY ACCESS POINTS. There is almost no such thing as a closed system. Pausing to identify the
access points can give you a reporting road map. As you conduct this exercise, write down every name you
come across.
A. Find out where the organization intersects with the government. Is it regulated? Does it have to
file paperwork -- any paperwork -- with the government? Does it receive state or federal money?
Does it lobby or otherwise try to influence the government? Are its facilities inspected, its real
properties taxed? What does it own? Does it invent things and seek patents?
As you answer these questions, you will find places that paper is dropped and people from the
outside are let behind the castle walls. Emails to government officials often can be obtained under
open records laws. Grant recipients are audited. Lobbying records tell you what’s important to them.
Property transactions are documented. Did it bid on contracts? If so, what did it tell the government
about the company?
B. Follow the anger. Lawsuits, divorces, bankruptcies, employment disputes, etc., provide a wealth of
information and give you the names of people who have an axe to grind. If their cases actually
proceeded, their lawyers might have a box of internal documents sitting in storage somewhere.
C. Read everything that’s been written. Do a Nexis search for your organization’s name, as well as
every name you come across. See who is mentioned in these stories, what they do and what they say.
Then find out where they are now.
D. Find their friends. Everybody needs somebody. Apple isn’t going to tell you what the new iPhone
is going to look like but it also isn’t the one building the glass screens or the microchips. It has
suppliers for that and they have a pretty good idea what features the phone will have. Is your
organization pushing for a change in the law? Search the lobbying records and see who else wants it
changed. It’s a good bet they’ve been in touch, sharing information and strategies. No matter how
secretive your organization is, it lowers the draw bridge for somebody. Find them.
E. Find their enemies. Who’s the competition? If your organization bids on state highway work, find
the company who’s losing out. In the examples above, you want to find out who’s lobbying against
your organization or which microchip maker was passed over in the deal to supply the new iPhones.
No matter how secretive your organization, somebody else has a strong incentive to learn what’s
going on behind the castle walls. Find them.

F. Tap the alumni association. This might be the single best way to crack an organization. Find the
former employees, former attorneys (inside and outside), former auditors, former contractors and
subcontractors and former competitors. Organizations stay secretive when everyone has an interest
in keeping secrets. Once people leave, that interest tends to diminish. Alumni are easier to find now
than ever. Linkedin is a goldmine for this (I prefer to use google to mine Linkedin. In your Google
search bar, type: auditor Organization XYZ site:linkedin.com and search your results that way). Find
your alumni through trade or professional organizations, yearbooks, old company literature, news
articles and regular old web searches.

2. UNDERSTAND HOW THE MACHINERY WORKS. Information typically flows through an
organization in a predictable manner. Offices form cliques. Every organization has black sheep and favored
sons. The more you understand about these idiosyncrasies, the easier it will be for you to track down
information and develop additional sources. As you meet the people you’ve identified in Step 1, before running
headfirst into the questions at the heart of your story, make sure you’ve covered some basics. Remember, these
people are the ones who will help you find and build sources closer and closer to the heart of your organization.
A. What’s your day like? Maybe my favorite question, this allows you to understand how this new
source fits into the system, what role she plays at the castle, who’s around her, how she spends her
time. Now, when you need information, you understand how she fits into the machinery and what
information she probably would have access to. It’s an easy, innocuous question and it leads nicely
into this one ...
B. Who did you work for? This question and others like it (who was your point of contact, what is
your relationship with so-and-so, etc) help you flesh out an organizational chart and identify the
people who have the information you want. Find out as much as you can about the personalities, the
cliques and the social hierarchy. That will help you identify further access points and also give you
credibility when talking to others.
C. What kind of paperwork is there? And where did that get filed? Organizations keep paperwork
on everything. It’s just a matter of knowing who keeps it and where.
D. Learn the lingo. If the documents are officially known as Form 30Bs but everyone calls them “the
Bees,” then you should, too. If everyone calls the boss Marty, not Martin, then you should, too. It
reinforces the idea that that you are in the loop, that you are safe to talk to.
E. Can I drop your name? Or better yet, can you email him for me? Nothing gets you access like
someone vouching for you. Be discrete with this and it’ll pay off.
F. Rinse, lather, repeat. These meetings will provide you with new access points and new names.
Repeat this process for each of them. Build your way into the organization.

3. ORGANIZATIONAL TIPS
Store notes, docs, interviews (including audio) in OneNote (installed with Office) or EverNote (free)
Use Dropbox to collaborate, keep files synced across multiple computers. Great for team reporting. Free
2GB cloud storage. Sign up with this link and we both get free bonus space www.bit.ly/KaEvSD
Keep lists of things you want to confirm or ask about. You won’t remember them otherwise. If you’re
on the phone or rushing out to a source meeting, grab the list.

