#3722
Investigating Prisons
Cindy Chang
The Times-Picayune
cchang@timespicayune.com
cindy.chang@aya.yale.edu

The Times-Picayune prison series, Louisiana Incarcerated, is at www.nola.com/prisons.
1. Prison are like schools
In some respects, covering prisons is similar to covering schools. You're dealing with controlled
environments where visits are nearly always chaperoned -- though it's easier to sneak into a school than a
prison. (Hint on the latter -- make friends with an inmate's mom.)
So, how to get a true picture of what's going on inside? Number one, accept any opportunities for official
tours. Even if they're presenting their best face, you will get a sense of the place.
If you find a legitimate story that's not project-scope, do it. Corrections officials will start to trust you, and
sources will come forward.
Inspection reports can provide a valuable overview of physical conditions. Incident reports document
violence inside prisons and are typically required any time someone gets hurt. EMS reports can add detail
on specific incidents and show how often ambulances are called to a prison.
The two types of federal prisoner civil rights actions are 550s and 555s. If you search for these on Pacer,
you can see what prisoners at a given facility are suing about. Some of these lawsuits are trivial, others
are chilling if true. Lawsuits provide names of inmates, former inmates and attorneys to follow up with.
More on inmates later. First, some tips on penetrating prisons from the outside in, just as you would a
school.
Other than current inmates, three types of people will know something about a prison -- former inmates,
relatives of inmates, and people who have access to the facility, whether it's guards, church volunteers or
attorneys. The ACLU and other criminal justice advocates may have a sense of what the big issues are.
Where to find former inmates:
I found a good source on a job bus parked outside the probation and parole office. Others came from a
nonprofit helping ex-cons integrate back into society. There are usually a few former inmates in town
who work with recently released prisoners -- you'll quickly find out who these "nodes" are. If probation
and parole officials are willing to cooperate, they can give you referrals. Of course, you can go to
neighborhoods where people get locked up a lot, and talk to people on the street.
Family members:
There's a website called Prison Talk with message boards specific to each prison. I posted saying I was
looking for sources. Support groups or legislative action groups such as CURE are likely to include
family members of inmates.
Corrections officers usually have a union, so you can start with the union leader. You can also look at
clips to see who spoke publicly on downsizing or sale of a prison. In some rural towns, if you stop
someone on the street, chances are they might work at a prison.

#3722

2. Some thoughts about inmates
Inmates tend to have interesting life experiences. They make amazing profile subjects. There's always a
need to humanize them, so people realize they're not faceless monsters but fellow humans who have made
terrible mistakes.
In my case, state corrections officials were keen on spotlighting the issue of life without parole. They
were great about referring me to inmates who fit particular criteria and allowed me to spend hours with
the men. However, that was only at Angola -- they didn't allow me to interview inmates at sheriffs'
prisons, which shows how little control they have over the conditions there.
With cell phones on both sides -- you with your phone always in your pocket or purse, and many inmates
with illegal cells -- communication is increasingly easier. Believe it or not, some inmates are even on
Facebook. Old-fashioned pen and paper can be a valuable communication tool, too. Corrections officials
allowed me to correspond with the Angola inmate I profiled, and the richness of that written dialogue
completely dwarfed what I'd gotten out of him during several in-person visits.
Ask anything you're curious about, even if it seems off point. Prison is a different world, and knowing the
details will inform your writing.
3. The “boring” stuff: statistics
My starting point was an extraordinary statistic -- Louisiana has the highest incarceration rate in the
world. I set out to explain how that came about and what the consequences are of locking up so many
people.
Tons of corrections data is available on the web. The Louisiana Department of Corrections has a
surprising amount of data on its website, as I'm sure many states do. The federal Bureau of Justice
Statistics puts out a report twice a year with detailed tables by state.
For comparative data as well as an introduction to the major issues, reports by Pew, the Sentencing
Project and the ACLU, among other nonprofits, are invaluable. The Justice Mapping Center and
Columbia’s Spatial Information Center have done maps showing incarceration rates by neighborhood in
selected cities. The Southern Legislative Conference puts out an excellent annual report on corrections in
southern states. If you're just starting out on the prison beat, give these a thorough read.
If your state is an outlier in any category, that's worth investigating. Louisiana houses over half of its
inmates in local prisons, as opposed to state prisons -- by far the highest percentage in the country. Could
that be a cause of the high incarceration rate? Turns out it is. As I dug deeper into the local prisons, which
are mostly run by sheriffs, I found a massive for-profit industry operating with little oversight from the
Department of Corrections.
So far, I've been talking about statewide corrections data, which is readily available. What about the city
you cover? Narrowing the data by place and by race or gender is a way to define incarceration's effects on
particular communities. It's a way to get at the disparate impacts of incarceration.
Your state Department of Corrections should have data by county. I was able to get a racial and gender
breakdown of inmates from New Orleans currently serving time. From that, I calculated that 1 in 14 black
males from the city are serving time, as opposed to 1 in 86 adults statewide. Even more stunning, 1 in 7
black males from New Orleans is either in prison or on probation or parole.

#3722

