3735

PIECES OF THE PAST
Building your stories from archives and historical documents
IRE June 16, 2012 Boston, MA
James Neff, Investigations Editor, The Seattle Times
206-464-2285 jneff@seattletimes.com

Journalists often overlook archives as a source for stories. This is a mistake. In many
cases, official records, personal papers, photographs and video are easily available and
extremely useful on any topic that touches government, business, or influential people. In
my experience, archivists—unlike government FOIA officers—like to hear from
journalists; their culture is to disclose rather than deny. Here are some tactics and tools:
Has your topic touched the White House? Presidential archives are vast and precisely
catalogued. Their websites list findings aids (also called inventories or folder-title lists),
oral histories, and previously processed materials. Depending on the library, you can run
proper names through memo and correspondence tracking systems.
National Archives’ Online Public Access: http://www.archives.gov/research/search/
OPA is a new search tool that culls the National Archives databases, including the
Archival Research Catalog (ARC), Access to Archival Databases (AAD), Archives.gov,
and the Electronic Records Archive (ERA). This is your first stop for federal records.
Worldcat.org: www.worldcat.org, the world’s largest library catalog, can be used to
locate finding guides to federal, state, and business archives.
ArchiveGrid contains a million collection descriptions from thousands of libraries,
archives and special collections. It is a commercial search tool available for free at
university libraries and elsewhere. Caveat: digital collections and references reflect only
part of the total archival holdings. New listings are added daily. Another similar
commercial search tool is Archive Finder.
Work backwards from unique or first-time access to archival materials. There will be
stories in the patterns of documents. Check to see what has been recently released.
Ask about collections that haven’t been processed yet.
What is happening to the public papers of your mayor, governor, elected official,
university president or other important public person when s/he retires or leaves office?
Do a story about these historical materials, which are owned by the public and in almost
all cases are to be preserved by law. This story should be part of routine coverage about
outgoing elected officials, because sometimes they don’t follow the rules.

1

