3736

IRE-2012 TIP SHEET

Muse: A tool for working with email archives
Demo Saturday, 2.30-3.30pm in the Suffolk room.
Download link. Send questions or comments to Sudheendra Hangal, hangal@cs.stanford.edu
BACKGROUND: Muse is a research tool from Stanford Computer Science for browsing largescale archives. It was originally meant for people to browse their own long-term email archives.
We have now started adapting it for journalists, archivists and researchers, who have a need to
browse others’ long-term email archives. It is not yet commercial grade, but we would like input
about features that would be useful to you. Please send us feedback! Here's an hour-long talk
video about Muse (Note: 264MB).
DATA FORMATS: In all cases, try to get data in a proper email format. Avoid getting
unstructured PDF files. Common email formats are 1) mbox, the canonical and best open
format for email 2) .PST (Outlook), .DBX (Outlook express) are proprietary Microsoft formats,
3) Eudora. If possible, convert the messages to mbox format. These files can be read by many
email clients, including Thunderbird (a cousin of Firefox), Apple Mail and Eudora (see this
page). To convert between formats, use an email converter like Mailstore Home (free for
personal use) or Emailchemy (commercial, but inexpensive). Muse can also fetch email from
one or more online email accounts (Gmail, Hotmail, corporate/university servers etc.) to which
you have the password. It will try to automatically fix bad formatting, merge identities (same
person with different accounts, name spellings) remove duplicates, etc.
USES OF MUSE
1) Automatically create summaries of messages per month (by identifying the top terms
mentioned in email) so you can get a quick sense of the contents of the emails.
2) Automatically group people who “go together” (i.e. frequently recipients on the same
message) and show you patterns of activity over time with each group. You can also manually
edit the groups if you like.
3) Perform sentiment analysis to detect messages that are likely to reflect certain emotions
such as congratulations, anger, milestones, family events, trips, etc. You can customize the
sentiment categories to any terms you want.
4) View all attachments in one screen, or copy them out as files.
5) Browse messages quickly, turning facets on and off (e.g. see messages reflecting a certain
sentiment, exchanged with a particular group, from a certain folder… etc.). Rapidly skim
hundreds or thousands of messages without clicks or keypresses.
6) Investigate archives in complete privacy. You can run Muse on your own computer without
you giving up the data anywhere else.
A BROWSER PLUGIN THAT CONNECTS TO ARCHIVES: Muse also includes a browser
extension for Chrome and Firefox that will automatically highlight significant terms on the
current page that are also in the archive. You can click on a highlighted term to get to all the
messages that contain the term. If you have other terms you would like the browser to highlight
(e.g., a list of names of all people on a web page, or in your Rolodex), simply email the text to
yourself, put the message in a new folder, and include the folder when you run Muse.

3736

RAPIDLY BROWSING COLLECTIONS OF WEBPAGES: Scoop (download, see demo
video) is a browser bookmarklet for Firefox, Chrome, or Safari lets you “scoop” up links on a
web page just by selecting text, quickly skim the pages that lie behind those links without
additional tabs, clicking links etc. E.g. scan all news items on a page or the results of a patent
search or Fortune 500 companies quickly. See the website for examples. This is a new feature,
(independent of Muse) and we’d love feedback about sites on which this would be useful.
SWEET SPOT: Archives with about 50,000 messages. Runs in less than an hour on a laptop.
Use a big machine with lots of memory for larger archives.
UPCOMING: We are actively working on making Muse more robust and better documented.
We can apply the underlying technology to other kinds of text documents as well, so let us know
about datasets that you are interested in.
--Sudheendra Hangal, Stanford University

