2012 IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE, BOSTON
Panel: Tracking Corruption Internationally

“Exporting Narcos”
Claudia Méndez Arriaza
Investigative reporter
elPeriódico and Canal Antigua
Guatemala City – Guatemala
@cmendeza

There is a great potential for investigative reporters and editors based in the U.S. in
following the tense relationship between the U.S. Department of Justice and South
American drug organizations. In the past five years, the number of defendants
extradited to the U.S. has risen to the point that we count them by the dozens. I´m
talking about Guatemalans, Hondurans, Salvadoreans, Colombians and Mexicans.
What kind of information can be found in following these cases for future
investigation projects? Here’s what I´ve found in following a single case that
expanded into at least 8 trials:

•

How DEA works in Latin America.

•

The division between protecting collaborators and granting them impunity

•

The judicial bargaining process with traffickers: release one to catch another
I followed these cases in two ways:

One, through the PACER (www.pacer.gov)
Two, I attended some hearings in the Southern District Court of New York.
Through PACER I gave special attention to these sources:
•

Indictments, which contain details and description of evidence. In following
the Byron Berganza case, I was able to understand details of the drug business.

•

Affidavits, declarations of agents who relate their special operations. Two
DEA agents revealed that in some countries, it was impossible to follow the
legal course of an extradition. The particular case revealed how they captured

a defendant and transferred him in a private plane from a little town in Central
America to New York City.
•

Calendar of Events, to know about hearings.

•

Court Reporters, you don´t need to travel, all you need is to contact their
office in the court where the case is and they will send transcripts of important
hearings for a reasonable fee.
Through attending hearings I was able to

•

Navigate in a case of international dimensions: trials reveal the patterns of
how the US Department of Justice is dealing with the so-called war on drugs
in Latin America.

•

Contact the defense attorneys: they have access to a great deal of information
inside the investigations and they are willing to share it.

•

Get more sources: they approached me, only after I had maintained constant
coverage on the topic. Defense attorneys especiallywere valuable sources; they
often represent more than one defendant and therefore know a great deal about
the conditions and networks in the region .

You might be asking at this point how to get in touch with these cases or stories.
And the best way is going back to the basics:

•

Google Alerts on extraditions from Latin America to U.S. They get heavy
coverage in newspapers in the region, so you’ll get a great feed of information.

•

The Office of International Affairs from the United States Department of
Justice which centralizes all processes of extradition. There are offices in
Rome, Mexico and San Salvador. The website does not provide a list of all
extraditables (how I wish!), but there are some useful reports of what went
wrong in the recent past. Website: www.justice.gov/criminal/about/oia.html
(202) 514-2000

