IRE Boston – June 2012
Anatomy of an investigation: Behind the story with two IRE Medal winners
Some of the documents, sources and tools used in California Watch's earthquake safety
story.
1. You can’t always see safety problems – in our story, many of the construction
issues had been buried under concrete.
Find people who can help you see beneath the surface: inspectors and structural
engineers were the most helpful for our story.
Very few people involved in a construction project have any incentive to tell you
a building is unsafe – they’re liable. Always be skeptical of assurances that
everything is safe and there’s nothing to worry about. Make sure you ask, how
do you know it’s safe? What documents do you have that can prove it?
Just because you can’t see safety problems, doesn’t mean they weren’t
documented at one point
o Ask inspectors for photographs they took during construction
o Ask for emails from during construction
o Ask for job site meeting minutes
o Ask for letters sent to the school board or other regulatory agency
o Ask for internal investigations
2. Other kinds of fraud and mismanagement can lead you to safety issues. Where
there’s fraud, there’s often more fraud.
We focused on two projects for our latest story:
1. A school official and three executives of the construction company had been
indicted for embezzling $6 million. No one had asked what corners they cut in
the construction process and whether safety had been compromised.
2. A project in Los Angeles was $60 million over budget, and still had not received
sign off from the state. Both the budget issues and the safety concerns had
escaped scrutiny.
With our focus on safety, we were able to mine grand jury testimony taken as part of the
criminal investigation into embezzlement. Under oath, the architect and a school official
both said shoddy construction was rampant.
3. Like every source, experts have to make a living too — make sure you
understand their motivations.
Several of the structural engineers we called to help us understand some of the
construction problems were still making their living as working for school
districts or the state’s office that oversees school construction. Many of them
assured us that none of the buildings were unsafe before they had looked at a
single document.
Look for engineers who are retired or who work in a different geographic area.
They might be willing to talk more openly and critically about what the
documents show.

Finding the right expert takes time and it helps to start the process early. We
spent hours in the office of one retired structural engineer poring over
documents. When small technical questions came up later in the process, it was
much easier to give him a call since he was already familiar with the
construction projects.
4. Construction doesn’t happen in a vacuum. Get emails and meeting minutes –
these show what decisions were made and who was responsible.
Meeting minutes from Los Angeles Unified confirmed that the district was well
aware of the problems that arose during construction – but proceeded anyway.
Official files are sometimes incomplete. We had asked for the state for the
complete file on the construction projects we wanted to dig into, but through our
request for e-mails we found several letters from the structural engineer
identifying safety issues at the schools.
5. Break the rules.
Public information offices are not set up to encourage transparency. If you only go
through the front door, you will not get the full story and will do a disservice to your
readers.
We’re not doing our jobs if we don’t piss spokespeople off sometimes.
Don’t just sit in the office waiting for the records to come to you in the mail —
show up at the agency’s office.
Call people at home where they can talk more freely.
6. Don’t give up on public records requests. It trains agencies that they can ignore
reporters.
For more information:
Kendall Taggart
California Watch
Center for Investigative Reporting
ktaggart@cironline.org
Series is available at: californiawatch.org/earthquakes
Most recent segment: “Thousands of students attending schools with unresolved
safety issues” (http://californiawatch.org/k-12/thousands-students-attending-schoolsunresolved-safety-issues-14142)

