Reporting on public-sector pensions
IRE Conference June 2012, Boston
Tom Frank, USA Today, tfrank@usatoday.com

Pension basics
Public-sector retirement systems get money from three sources: earnings on savings (often the
biggest income source); taxpayer contributions; employee contributions (required in most but not
all jurisdictions).
Public-sector retirement systems pay two types of pensions:
*Defined-benefit (traditional pension) – Employer guarantees employee an annual payment that
is typically based on a worker’s compensation at retirement and number of years on the job.
Common in the public sector, these are preferable for retirees because the benefit is predictable.
*Defined-contribution (401(k)) – Employer pays an amount – usually a percentage of
employee’s salary – into a retirement account that employee can collect on retirement. Common
in the private sector, these are preferable for employers because the cost is predictable.

Pension stories
--What is included in the “compensation” on which a pension is based (“pensionable
compensation” or “covered wages”)?
The higher the compensation, the higher the pension. Does “compensation” include only
salary? Or does it include other payments such as overtime, bonuses, expense reimbursements?
Is pensionable compensation a worker’s salary in her final 12 months on the job? Or is it her
average salary over several years? Many states are requiring pensions to be based on several
years of salary to stop “pension spiking,” the practice of sharply increasing compensation near
retirement (new job, extensive overtime) to boost a pension.
--How are workers classified in a retirement system?
Retirement systems typically place workers into plans or classifications. For example, police
and firefighters usually have their own pension plan or classification that pays better benefits and
has earlier retirement so departments can maintain a youthful workforce. Who else is in the
public-safety retirement plan? Some states put security guards, forest rangers, highway workers
and dispatchers in the same class as police and firefighters.
--How can employees add years to their work history?
Retirement systems routinely let workers add years of work in other jobs to the years they have
accumulated as members of the system. Every retirement system, for example, lets workers add
years of military service to their work experience. Some retirement systems limit that credit to
service during periods when the U.S. was at war.
What other types of work experience can be added? Teaching jobs in another state? Peace
Corps work? Part-time public-sector jobs? How much, if anything, do workers have to pay the
retirement system to add those years?
Can workers add years of credit without any underlying work experience by simply making a
one-time payment? Called buying “air time,” this is like paying to add frequent-flyer miles
without taking a flight and can be costly to a retirement system.

--What is a pension system’s “unfunded liability” and is it growing or shrinking?
“Unfunded liability” is a fancy term for deficit. A pension system’s unfunded liability is the
shortfall between its projected savings plus future income, and the amount of money it will need
to pay the pensions of retirees and active workers. Unfunded liability is measured as both a
dollar amount and a percentage (of projected funding vs. projected costs).
Unfunded liability is a concern because taxpayers and/or employees may have to contribute
more to close the deficit; or retirement benefits may have to be cut. Most states must have a
balanced annual budget, but none is required to fully fund its pension system. Elected officials
can cut spending by simply paying less into the retirement system than they should to maintain a
fully funded system. (Some elected officials like underfunded retirement plans because it gives
them standing to cut pension benefits, or to deny requests for pension increases.)
How much is a system’s unfunded liability? Is it growing or shrinking? Is there a realistic plan
to close the deficit?
--Is the retirement system adjusting variables to increase or decrease the unfunded liability?
Unfunded liability is only an estimate, done once a year by an independent expert called an
actuary. An actuary projects how much money the system will take in and will pay out over
several decades by making many estimates, such as how long retirees will live and how much the
retirement system will earn on its savings. The projections are called “actuarial assumptions.”
If an actuary decides that retirees will live, on average, to age 81 instead of age 80, the
retirement system will have to pay more in pension benefits because retirees will collect for an
additional year. Someone – taxpayers or workers – will probably have to pay more to the system.
If an actuary decides that the retirement system will earn, on average, 8% on investments
instead of 7.5%, that means the retirement system will need less money from taxpayers and
workers because it will collect additional funds through investment earnings.
Are actuarial assumptions changing? If so, are they changing in ways that increase or decrease
the unfunded liability? What is the basis for the change?
If not, should the assumptions be changing? If the average life expectancy of a retiree has not
changed in 20 years, is that realistic? If the earnings assumptions have not changed despite the
recent losses in stocks, is that realistic? See NYTimes, “Public Pensions Are Faulted on Rosy
Returns” (May 27, 2012)
Pension documents
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) and/or Annual Actuarial Evaluation. Often
found on a retirement system’s website, these reports have extensive information showing
unfunded liability, average pension benefits, taxpayer contributions, actuarial assumptions. The
reports are sometimes separate or combined. An excellent resource.
Pension handbooks. Found on a retirement system’s website, these are written for workers and
retirees and explain terms in simple language.
State law. Legislatures establish pension basics, such as retirement age, pension amounts,
payments included in “pensionable compensation,” system or classification membership.
Legislative histories can show evolution. State laws are always on line.
Individual retiree records. Some states release them, some don’t. A request for an individual’s
retirement record should seek: retirement date; pension amount in each year of retirement;
pensionable compensation; years of credit and jobs for which credit was awarded; retirement
plan or classification.

If retiree records are closed, ask for the above excluding names or other details that might
identify someone. A sympathetic governor might help you. Public-sector unions will fight you.
Pension sources
Trade associations
*National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems -- represents public-sector
retirement systems, good overview information
*National Association of State Retirement System Administrators -- represents administrators of
state systems; contact Keith Brainard, research director
*National Council on Teacher Retirement -- represents administrators of retirement systems for
teachers, a sister organization to NASRA
Think tanks / academics
*Employee Benefits Research Institute – studies public and private sector benefits
*Pew Center on the States – issues national reports on public-sector retirement systems
*National Conference of State Legislatures – posts reports on pending and enacted pension
legislation in states; contact Ron Snell, pension analyst)
*Center for Retirement Research – pension think tank at Boston College run by Alicia Munnell,
former Clinton administration
*Pension Research Council – pension think tank at Wharton School of Business
Advocates
*National Institute for Retirement Security -- union funded, pro-defined benefit
*Pension Rights Center -- consumer group advocating to protect workers and retirees

Pension pitfalls
BE SURE to understand the parameters of a pension system and which workers it includes.
The Minnesota State Retirement System covers state employees; the Public Employees
Retirement Association of Minnesota covers municipal and county employees in Minnesota.
DO NOT try to compare two separate pension systems and declare one more generous than
another. There are way too many variables to make a comparison valid much less possible.
BE CAREFUL writing about “double dipping,” a term that has many meanings and widely
varying degrees of outrage. There is a big difference between a retired Massachusetts state police
officer becoming a teacher in New Hampshire and a retired Massachusetts state police officer
becoming a police officer in Boston.
Pension stories in USA Today
How state lawmakers increase their pensions -- http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/201110-11-1A-state-lawmakers-pump-pensions.htm
The growing number of workers classified as public-safety or hazardous-duty workers -http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/story/2011-12-08/state-pensions-workers/51750670/1
States that allow workers to buy “air time” -http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/story/2011-12-27/pension-perk-costs/52247140/1 and
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/story/2011-12-27/public-pensionmiscalculation/52246538/1

