Using Census Data
To Report on the Economy
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
rcampbell@ocregister.com
The Census Bureau and other federal statistical agencies collect mountains of
economic data that can help you quickly confirm or undermine a theory. Before
you begin mining that data, here are a few cautions to keep in mind:
Timeliness: The sooner it comes out, the less reliable it tends to be. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics rushes to prepare monthly unemployment
statistics, which it often must revise a month or two later. The Census
Bureau spends a year or more calculating every last decimal place before
it publishes a report.
Frequency: Some information is updated monthly, quarterly or yearly.
Other reports are updated on three- or five-year cycles. Generally, the
longer the reporting cycle, the longer the wait for publication.
Geography: The most reliable statistics are for the nation and states
because sample sizes are comparatively large. The least reliable data is
for neighborhoods because sample sizes are quite small. On the reliability
scale, metro areas and large counties are somewhere in the middle,
smaller cities on the lower end.
With the sole exception of the once-a-decade national headcount, every number
the government collects is based on a survey. That means every number has a
margin of error. The MOE may be buried in the footnotes; in rare cases it may
not even be reported. Without getting buried in the weeds here – this is going to
be a short tipsheet – be wary of small differences among numbers; they might be
explained by the MOE.
Websites Worth Watching:
1. American Community Survey. Available in three flavors: One-year (for the
nation, all states and cities and counties over 65,000 population), threeyear (cities and counties between 20,000 and 65,000, plus all larger
geographies) and five-year (everything down to the tract level). ACS does
not cover religious belief and only indirectly covers sexual orientation; I
mention these exceptions because it is otherwise a one-stop shopping
mall for reporters seeking reliable statistics on dozens of other
newsworthy topics, including personal income, employment, commuting
habits, housing and education. Coverage: Nation, states, counties, cities,
tracts. Frequency: Annual. Currency: 2010.
2. Bearfacts. I hate cutesy website names, but I love the Bureau of Economic
Analysis Regional Economic Accounts. Bearfacts contains fact sheets for

-1-

every state, county, metro area and hundreds of “BEA economic areas.”
The “bare facts” include per capita personal income, total personal
income, per capita income for the selected area as a percent of national
per capita income and a breakdown of total personal income by category
(earnings, dividends, transfer receipts) and by year (2000 vs. 2010).
Coverage: Nation, states, counties, metro areas, consolidated metro
areas. Frequency: Annual. Currency: 2010.
3. Economic Census. Microscopic economic data for hundreds of cities and
counties, including employment and payroll for dozens of economic
sectors. Easy to use. What could possibly be wrong? Oh, yeah. It’s
collected on a five-year cycle, and they're just beginning work on the 2012
report. Don’t expect any results until December 2013. Coverage: Nation,
states, counties, metro areas. Frequency: Every five years. Currency:
2007.
4. Consumer Expenditure Survey. The Bureau of Labor Statistics is bestknown for its monthly unemployment report and for the Consumer Price
Index. But there's gold for reporters in the Consumer Expenditure Survey,
which tracks the spending habits of American households in excruciating
detail. Who knew that the average American family spent almost as much
in 2010 on entertainment ($2,504) as on health care ($3,157)? Coverage:
Nation. Frequency: Annual. Currency: 2010.
5. American Time Use Survey. Another BLS gem, the Time Use Survey
records how we spend our work and leisure time. It's broken down by sex,
age, race and other variables, and of course the data is archived so you
can trace changes through the years. One example among many: In 2010
the average adult American male spent seven hours in front of the TV for
every hour engaged in active recreation. Coverage: Nation. Frequency:
Annual. Currency: 2010.
6. Work Stoppages. The union movement is fading, but it still has a
heartbeat. One place to measure it is the BLS' log of strikes and lockouts.
BLS counts only those strikes or lockouts involving at least 1,000 workers
for at least a full shift. Coverage: Nation. Frequency: Monthly. Currency:
January 2012.
7. Regional GDP and Personal Income. The Bureau of Economic Analysis
produces two hot-button national numbers, the Gross Domestic Product
and personal income estimates. Along the way it produces thousands of
component pieces that receive way less publicity: the GDP and the
personal income for the states and metro areas that comprise the United
States. Coverage: States, counties, metro areas. Frequency: Annual.
Currency: 2011.
8. American Housing Survey. Watch for the 2011 AHS very late this year or
early 2013. It will offer detailed information on topics such as mortgages,
health and safety, and home modifications for the disabled. Coverage:
National; supplemental coverage for 29 metro areas. Frequency: Every
two years. Currency: 2009.

-2-

