3751
6/14/12
Revisiting Diversity: Not Why But How
A Look at Some Best Practices
INN/IRE Lightning Talk
Linda Jue
G.W. Williams Center for Independent Journalism
nvijdirector@gmail.com
Commitment from the top
Story choices
Collaborations with ethnics newsrooms
Training
Hiring
Assigned staff
Freelancers
Public Engagement

Center for Investigative Reporting/California Watch: Leading with Diversity
www.cironline.org, www.californiawatch.org
A. Aggressive pursuit of diversifying staff and coverage, as well as education and
outreach efforts into ethnic and immigrant communities via innovative, awardwinning public engagement strategies.
B. Mandated as #1 priority from top leadership. Strong follow-through from
executive director on down to senior management and staff. Constant discussions
about progress at senior manager and staff meetings. Insist on active pursuit of
candidates with diverse backgrounds. Managers hired must share same values
about diversity so that they can organically create a workplace culture where
diversity can thrive.
C. Employ Faultlines concept taught by Maynard Institute, which defines diversity
across five main vectors: race/ethnicity, generation, gender (including sexual
orientation), class and geography. These vectors are used to assess whether they
have a good mix of staff who can bring important cross-section of views and
experiences to their reporting and editing. The vectors are also used to assess the
unexamined personal biases that each staff member brings.
D. Diversified staff and coverage increases access to many multicultural
communities of Calif. Also allows CIR/CA Watch to develop business

1

3751
partnerships with big ethnic media news organizations such as Univision and La
Opinion to expand audience reach.
E. Public engagement strategies establish presence and develop sources in diverse
communities for future stories. Also help set up more diverse citizens to become
part of crowd sourcing for Public Insight Network. Funding for engagement
strategies often available from donors and foundations not normally associated
with media or journalism but who care about civic engagement and diversity.
Two examples of many:
1. “On Shaky Ground" series on seismic safety in California’s public
schools: The series’ publication was only the beginning of their efforts to
cover the issue and engage Californians. Their public engagement
strategist, Ashley Alvarez, designed and wrote a coloring book that taught
young kids how to respond to earthquakes. Published initial run of 36K
books, distributed in five languages to communities situated along
fault lines from Oakland to Chula Vista. Alavarez also hosted
earthquake preparedness trainings, attended safety fairs, and introduced
kids to earthquake preparedness through puppet shows organized by Red
Cross. Funded by Isabel Allende Foundation.
2. Timed with the release of their story on lead-tainted jewelry, CA
Watch sponsored free lead screenings of jewelry in three cities: LA,
Richmond and Oakland. Held in culturally diverse neighborhoods, where
the risks for elevated blood-lead levels tend to be higher. Distributed their
story and other information about lead poisoning and provided access to
what are normally very expensive tests. CA Watch saw this as prime
opportunity to raise awareness about their work and to make connections
in these communities.
F. Their biggest plus is that they have money to hire staff. Can afford to pay
decent wages and hire top-notch staff who are also of diverse backgrounds.

NPR: Leading with Diversity

www.npr.org

A. New CEO, Gary Knell from Sesame Street Workshop, makes diversity his
first priority. He came in with a plan. All program planning aimed at goal of
increasing and diversifying NPR audience. Every management and staff meeting
has discussion of progress toward diversity goals as top agenda item. Priority
placed on actively seeking diverse candidates for job openings. Accountability for
progress on NPR diversity strategy will soon become part of performance
evaluation.
B. Former leader of NPR’s digital strategy is now Chief Content Officer. He
oversees NPR content across all platforms and divisions. He answers only to the

2

3751
CEO. Responsible for ensuring consistent and coordinated implementation of
strategies to diversify content vis-a-vis coverage, sources, audience targets, story
subjects, etc. Make content look and sound like the real America.
C. Vice president for diversity of news and operations visits a minimum of 10
(working up to 20) NPR affiliates/yr to develop diversity strategies at the local
level. Leads workshops with station management on developing plans that will
address lack of diversity at top levels of leadership as well as among staff. Lots of
discussions on making content relevant to wider mix of audience. National CEO
wants to see numbers of affiliates involved in this effort grow into a critical mass
that would enable the NPR network to reach an estimated 12 million people of
color who are not current listeners or web visitors.
D. Dedicated senior editor in newsroom makes sure sources and stories are more
diverse. Attends daily news meetings, proposes story ideas and sources across all
radio content.
E. Pursue Digital First strategy to grow national NPR into substantial player in
providing coverage and a forum for discussions on race and ethnicity in America.
Use blogs, tumblr, FB, Twitter, etc to tap into already diverse audiences that exist
on these platforms. Goal: add 1.7 million digital users of color over 2 years by
bringing onto their site bloggers whose voices are important to people of color.
Also want to diversify audiences more broadly than race/ethnicity. Want more
varied mix among generations, geographic origins, and ideologies. (Not quite
using Faultlines analysis.)
F. Pursue funding to add more bodies. Looking to hire people who can raise NPR’s
profile among the aforementioned demographic groups for both radio and online.
At a time when NPR facing serious financial challenges, focus is on expanding to
increase diversity, not cutting back. Funders are interested in serious plan.
G. The Race Card Project (theracecardproject.com) is a personal web site created
by NPR’s Michele Norris that is an outgrowth of her book tour promoting her
memoirs. She asks people to think about their experiences, questions, hopes,
dreams, etc. about race and identity; then distill those thoughts into a “six-word
essay.” Deluged with responses. Offers a safe way to get people talking about race.
The Race Card Project will eventually become a feature on the NPR site.

Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism: Collaborating with Ethnic Media
http://www.wisconsinwatch.org/2010/12/09/the-birth-and-life-of-a-tribal-tragedy/

A. Reporter Allie Tempus discovered unusually high suicide rates on Indian
reservations in Wisconsin while working on another story.
B. Brought in Native American reporter Brian Bull, a Nez Perce from Idaho and
asst. news director at Wisconsin Public Radio, to work with Allie. Provided access
3

3751
and credibility for Allie. Shortened time it would have taken her otherwise to
develop relationships with Native sources.
C. WCIJ saw need to partner with Native American media and journalists to
cover. Outreached to both Wisconsin and national Native American Media.
D. Outcomes
1. Brian produced two-part series on Native Am suicides for Wisc. Pub.
Radio.
2. Allie wrote a 3400-word story published on WCIJ’s web site. She also
appeared on Native American radio talk shows.
3. Wisconsin Public Television interviewed counselor Ken Ninham, one of
the sources from Allie’s story.
4. IndianCountryTV.com interviewed Dr. Arne Vainio about a family
member who took his own life.
5. Native Public Media made the all the broadcast coverage available to
dozens of Native stations.
6. Tribal newspapers used the print story, including the Menominee and
Oneida tribes.
7. New America Media published Allie’s story and distributed it to ethnic
media nationwide.
8. At least 10 Wisconsin news organizations used the report.
G. Lessons learned
1. Know your strengths and weaknesses. Their strengths: strong journalist
with strong story idea. Their weakness: no extensive sources in Native
American communities or Native American journalism community.
2. Seek collaborations that build upon your strengths and that of your
partners.
3. Allow time for relationships to develop and trust to build between
journalists and sources. Even with Brian’s help, it still took Allie close to
3 months before sources trusted her enough to share photos and make
visits to graves sites.
4. Choose stories with shelf life. These stories are not breaking stories.
They take time. Don’t box yourself in with tight deadlines.
5. Have realistic expectations about the learning curves of interns and new
reporters. Don’t expect them to churn things out quickly right away.

Feet in Two Worlds: Training and Working with Reporters from Immigrant and
Ethnic Media
http://news.feetintwoworlds.org/
A. Brings the work of immigrant and ethnic media journalists to public radio and
the web. Their reporters can straddle two cultures to tell stories often not captured
by the mainstream media. (Hence, the name.) Their work appears on PRI’sThe
World, Studio 360, and The Takeaway; American Public Media’s Marketplace;

4

3751
NPR’s Latino USA; WNYC in New York and WDET in Detroit. FiTW is based
at the Center for New York City Affairs at The New School. Executive producer
John Rudolph is a radio journalist with more than 30 years experience as a
program host and producer of documentaries and news reports.
B. Sponsor various fellowships, from weekend technical radio and story
development trainings to three-month multimedia fellowships on how to cover
specialized topics. Fellows receive modest stipends. Their stories appear on
FiTW’s blog and podcasts as well as in their respective ethnic news organizations.
A select group goes on to produce radio and online broadcast stories for FiTW
and partner sites.

C. Content for FiTW (radio and web site) and partners produced by fellows and
regular contributors. The latter are all freelancers and produce 1-2 pieces/week
Paid normal freelance rates by partners. Some contributors normally work in
ethnic media; others are professional freelancers in their communities. Still others
are journalism grad students.
D. Developing a farm team
1. Contributors’stories offer partner outlets eyes and ears into immigrant
communities.
2. Trainings enhance reporters skills, pushes their voices and stories out to
mainstream.
3. Reporters move up into public radio
4. Many start their own web sites or improve existing sites
E. Challenges
1. Different ideas of editorial standards. Most ethnic journalists come from
advocacy traditions. They’re used to advocating for their communities.
2. Time management always an issue. Immigrant reporters often have
competing priorities. Often difficult for them to keep up commitments as a
result.
3. Fundraising constant. Always seeking. Lots of funders will support
adivocacy on issues, but not journalism.
4. Language issues. Reporters accents often too thick for radio, yet they
have access to stories not otherwise available
5. Use careful criteria to select journalists: Can bring good story ideas;
must be able to keep time commitments; must be experienced journalists.
Not at Journo 101 level.
6. Limited pool of experienced ethnic investigative journalists. You will
have to train more of them.
7. Be careful not to treat ethnic media journalists and outlets as servants
to your cause.

5

3751
8. Biggest challenges is not enough resources. Collaborations more
necessary.

City Limits: Covering Immigrants and Communities of Color as a Beat
www.citylimits.org
A. Independent investigative magazine and news site covering New York City. It
focuses on communities neglected by mainstream media, including lowincome New Yorkers, immigrants and communities of color. Past stories
explored issues ranging from charter schools to “the deepening economic
crisis of New York’s black men” to “the death and life of the neighborhood
store. Regarded by NY insiders as “a model of in-depth urban journalism
that examines systemic problems, challenges assumptions and points toward
solutions.” Also key training ground for the city’s corps of investigative
journalists.

B. Relies on freelancers who know NY’s different communities well. But the
pool of qualified investigative reporters of color is small. Need for training
programs.
C. Specializes in covering communities with sensitivity and insight.
1. Be aware of your own “gross assumptions,” blind spots, biases
about stories. Scrutinize your own thinking and behaviors. (A different
way of saying, apply a Faultlines analysis.)
2. Don’t be afraid to ask if there’s an ethnic or racial dimension to a
story. We are not a post-racial society.
3. Be in communities regularly. Develop your beat. Take time to
develop deep sources in a community. Don’t rely on the usual - and
convenient - suspects. Establishing regular presence in communities
gives you more credibility. People more likely to give you story tips or
introduce you to sources. Also makes collaborations with community
and ethnic media easier.
4. Do your homework. Get background on community issues. Don’t
parachute in and expect to get at the deeper stories.
5. Don’t pigeonhole your reporters of color. They can cover other
things besides stories about their communities.
6. Don’t treat community members or reporters like they’re there to
serve you.

6

3751

-30-

7

