Covering your local pension plan
It took me three years and two dozen stories to really figure out how to tell
if a public pension plan is healthy or not.
Here are the tips and shortcuts to save you the time.
By David Milstead
davidmilstead@q.com
303-800-6423
Originally presented/copyright 2005; revised 2009, 2011, 2012.
Based on work done in the Rocky Mountain News on Colorado PERA from 2001-2009, including “The
PERA Puzzle,” a 2005 SABEW Best in Business award-winning project.

Part One: Introduction
Defined benefit plans: Known as “pensions,” it’s the benefit that’s defined, usually as a specific
amount per month, in retirement. It’s the plan manager’s responsibility to invest the money that comes in
to make sure the benefit can be paid.

Defined contribution plans: Like a 401(k), it’s the contribution – what goes in – that’s defined.
What comes out at retirement is whatever is in the account after years of investing. Typically, these
accounts shift the investment risk to the individual – for better or worse.
This presentation is about defined benefit plans run by the public sector – governments like states, school
systems, and cities.
Non-governmental entities, like for-profit corporations, run defined benefit contribution pension plans as
well. There are special issues with corporate pension plans, like accounting rules and the tax benefits
from the contributions, that we will not cover here.
Also, these non-governmental plans are covered by the Federal ERISA (Employee Retirement Income
Security Act), and the employers can walk away from the plans in certain circumstances and turn the over
the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., the federal pension insurer. Public pensions are generally regarded
as contractual relationships between the public employer and the employee – meaning public pension
promises, typically, must be kept.

Part Two: Pension cash flow
Contributions + Investment Income = Expenses + Benefits (hopefully)
A defined benefit plan takes in cash each year from the employer and, typically, from the employee as
well. These are the “contributions.”
Contributions are typically expressed as a percentage of pay. In Colorado, the state school employers of
PERA members paid 13.85 percent of salaries into the plan in 2011, up from 10.15 percent several years
ago. Employees had been paying 8 percent of their salaries; recent changes increased that figure to 10.5
for some.
Other plans require higher contributions. When I compared plans in 2005, one West Virginia pension plan
had an employer contribution rate exceeding 22 percent – more than twice what Colorado taxpayers paid
at the time.
(Many pension members reject the idea that “taxpayers contribute” anything to their plan, even though
they are employed by a governmental entity. Excerpt from an e-mail from a PERA member: “The 10.1

percent contribution of the employer and 8 percent from the employee are both part and parcel of the
employee's overall wage and benefit compensation earned for work performed and services rendered.
That money is twice removed from the taxpayer and no longer any of their business.” Former New York
Times reporter David Cay Johnston made a similar argument in 2011 in a blog post in which he
lambasted journalists for using language he considered supportive of efforts to cut back pensions.)
The contributions go to work as investments – stocks and bonds, and to a lesser extent, real estate,
venture capital, private equity, hedge funds and timber. Some of these assets – dividend-paying stocks,
bonds, real estate funds that distribute rental income or sales proceeds – throw off cash, or investment
income, every year. That cash can be used to pay benefits or can be reinvested in new assets.
Each pension fund has certain expenses that must be paid each year. All plans have certain
administrative costs, and all plans have investment costs as well. Some plans, like PERA, manage a
significant amount of their money in-house, and employ more people. This arrangement may be cheaper
than paying asset-management fees to outside money managers, which many plans do to a certain
extent. Plus, PERA, for example, also manages 401(k)-style accounts and a health-care plan, which adds
to its expenses.
Expenses can be examined as a percentage of assets in the pension plan, (an “expense ratio”) and that
number seems very small, perhaps 0.50 percent of assets. And the ways in which the plans are
structured can cause the number to be higher, or lower, without it being wasteful or inefficient. Also, all
plans have fixed costs, so a smaller plan will have a higher expense ratio.
Each year, the plan must pay benefits to its retired members. A member that has retired with full
eligibility for a pension gets what’s called an “unreduced” benefit. (My editors don’t like that word, so I call
it a “full” pension, which is not an official pension term and, consequently, angers pension members.)
A typical pension benefit is expressed as a percentage of salary, which is then multiplied by years of
service. Or:
Benefit = Salary X percentage X years of service
The salary is typically a “highest average” or “highest annual.” Some plans take the three, or five, highest
annual figures. Others take the highest 24, 36, or 60 months. Others take final salary on last day of
employment. The method of calculation is important because a pension payment can be manipulated
when the salary period is small. Some public safety plans with loose rules have “chief for a day”
problems, where police officers or firefighters get a one-day promotion, a $20,000 raise for pension
purposes, and a much more golden retirement.
In Colorado, am unreduced pension is equal to 2.5 percent of HAS, times years of service, with a cap of
100 percent of HAS.
A retiree with 30 years of service and a HAS of $50,000 would get $50,000 X .025, or $1,250, times 30
years, for $37,500. A 40-year employee would get $50,000 X .025, or $1,250, times 40 years, for
$50,000. As you can see, any years worked over 40, with the 100 percent cap in place, yields no extra
pension benefit.
Benefits are then typically adjusted each year in retirement for increases in the cost of living. Some
increases are set year-by-year, or are linked directly to a measure of the Consumer Price Index. Others
plans, like PERA until recent reforms, are fixed. PERA retirees’ benefits were to increase 3.5 percent per
year, a decision that was made in 2000 when PERA was overfunded. Recent changes now tied the
COLA to the lesser of the Consumer Price Index or 2 per cent.
Public-sector plans may allow members to purchase years of service credit for time they spent with an
employer outside the plan, particularly a private-sector employer. As a retirement incentive created by the
Colorado state legislature in the late 1990s and early 2000s, PERA sold extra years of service credit at
prices far below their “actuarial cost” — meaning they knew from the moment of sale they’d be paying far
more in benefits than the cash they were getting could support. The practice was halted by subsequent
legislation.
A number of older, established public-sector plans were allowed to opt of the federal Social Security
system. That means that while their members do not pay FICA tax, they are also ineligible for any Social

Security payments in their retirement based on their earnings while in the pension plan. For these
pension members, their pension benefit “is it” for their retirement.
Many plans with an older retiree population may actually be cash-flow-negative, which means they have
to sell off assets in order to pay benefits. Not a good sign.

Questions to know the answers to:
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

What are the employer and employee contribution rates for this pension plan? How much are
taxpayers putting into the plan each year in employer contributions?
What are the plan’s expenses, as a percentage of assets? How does that compare to plans of
similar size? Is there something about the plan’s structure, like how much of the plan’s
investments are managed in-house, that affects the comparison?
What is the plan’s formula for calculating benefits? Is there any limit to what a member can earn
in retirement?
How is the HAS calculated? Does the plan’s method of calculating HAS make it susceptible to
manipulation?
Can members buy extra years of service? Does the cost cover the expected benefits?
Can the plan’s members also get Social Security, or are they wholly reliant on the pension for
their retirement?
Do the plan’s contributions exceed benefits paid? If not, does investment income make up the
difference? What are the trends – are benefits paid increasing at a faster rate than income?

Part Three: Pension funding - ratios and schedules
The funding ratio is the plan’s assets, compared to its liabilities. But truly understanding the ratio is little
harder than you might think.
Let’s start with liabilities first. A pension plan estimates all its future benefits payments to members for
the rest of time. They have to make numerous assumptions – life expectancy, age of retirement, salary
growth, and inflation. Then, they take that stream of payments and come up with a present value. (If
you’re familiar with present value calculations, it involves using an interest rate and discounting the cash
payments to current dollars, based on the premise that getting dollar in 2042 is worth less than getting a
dollar in 2012.)
The higher the interest rate used in the discounting, the smaller the present-value number is. Conversely,
the smaller the interest rate used, the higher the present-value number. Think of it this way: If you need
$100,000 in ten years, and you’re only going to earn 2 percent per year, you need a lot of money today. If
you’re going to earn 10 percent per year, you need a lot less money today to hit your goal.
The discount rate issue has become a major source of contention in the current debate over the pension
issue. Public pensions typically use their assumed investment rate of return — often 7 percent, 8 percent
or more — to discount the liabilities, a choice that makes the present value of the liabilities smaller than if
it used the rate on high-quality corporate bonds or Treasury Bill rates. (Most private-sector employers use
the rate on high-quality corporate bonds.)
That’s the plan’s liabilities.
You might think the plan’s assets are the money it has in its portfolio. But that isn’t necessarily so. When
a funding ratio is calculated, it typically uses what’s called “actuarial assets,” and those are different
because of a process called “smoothing.”
With “smoothing,” a pension plan takes one-year gains and losses and spreads them out over time. The
goal is to make funding requirements more stable, so one bad or good year doesn't require employers to
pump much larger or smaller amounts into the plan.
In bad times, such as 2000 through 2002, or 2008, smoothing delays the accounting for losses, can make
actuarial assets higher than their market value, and makes things look better than they are. In good times,
such as 2003 through 2006, it delays gains, can make actuarial assets lower than market value, and
makes things look worse.

PERA had a great approach to this. It smoothed over four years, so its funding looked better than it truly
was as the portfolio declined. After 2004, when the smoothing process had recognized the losses but
hadn’t yet recognized the gains, it took a one-time markup and increased its actuarial assets by $1.5
billion. Then it went back to smoothing again.
So, once a plan arrives at its assets and liabilities, it can calculate a funding ratio, which is
Assets
Liabilities
If assets exceed liabilities, which is rare these days, the funding ratio is 100 percent or more and the plan
is fully funded. If liabilities exceed assets, which is common, the ratio is below 100 percent and the plan is
underfunded.
The first significant drop came in the stock market decline of 2000-2002. A 2004 study of state retirement
systems by Wilshire Research showed that the combined funding of 123 pension plans declined from 91
percent in 2002 to 82 percent in 2003. The median funding level was 79 percent.
Gains from 2003 to 2007 helped reverse the situation; then came the recent market crash. The Pew
Center on the States estimated in April 2011 that funding in state pension plans declined from 84 percent
in 2008 to 78 percent in 2009.
Why is it OK for a pension plan to be continually underfunded? A good question. One PERA answer, from
the plan’s spokeswoman, is “Remember that PERA does not need to be 100 percent funded since not all
benefits are due and payable at one time.”
Another explanation is that if a plan is fully funded, all of its assets are exposed to market risk. By being
underfunded, it stands to lose less in a down year.
Funding ratios are like the debt-to-equity ratio on a balance sheet – it’s important to know, but it doesn’t
tell the whole story. Two companies with similar debt burdens could be in very different situations,
because one is highly profitable and can pay off the debt, but the other is losing money and will have to
borrow more.
An easy way to look at the funding ratio is the trend. At PERA, even with the market recovery of 2003 and
2004, the funding ratio went from 100 percent in 2000 to 70 percent in 2004 – a drop of 30 percentage
points in four years. (Even with the subsequent market recovery, PERA’s funding ratio peaked at 73.8
percent before falling to 67.2 percent in 2009 and 64.7 percent in 2010.)
The pension plan may well be making internal projections for its board about the funding ratio using
different assumed rates of return. PERA’s projection, which it did not typically release to its members,
showed just how bad the situation was.
Another way to look at the issue, one that’s more complex, is the fund’s “amortization schedule.”
An amortization schedule is the number of years it will take the plan, with current contribution levels and
the assumed investment return, to pay off its unfunded liability. Accounting rules say a pension plan is
adequately funded if it has a 30-year amortization schedule.
To create that schedule, a pension plan’s actuaries arrive at the “actuarially required contribution
(rate),” or ARC, that is required to get the plan to its amortization schedule. In California, municipal
pensions are required to be on an amortization schedule, and the plan sponsor must ensure contributions
from employer and employee equal the ARC.
But not all states have similar laws, and you may be able to detect just how much more taxpayers need to
put in to pay off the liability. Colorado is an extreme example, because PERA had an infinite amortization
schedule at year-end 2004, which meant the plan would never pay off its obligation. (In this way, it was in
worse shape, in my view, than the West Virginia plan with a 22 percent contribution rate and a funding
ratio of 19 percent.)

Here’s where PERA stood in 2005 when I did my project “The PERA Puzzle”: PERA’s actuaries
calculated an ARC of 16.91 percent. PERA’s employers contributed 10.15 percent, but 1.02 percentage
points of that went into the health-care plan, so just 9.13 percent of employee pay went into the pension.
The difference between the ARC and the actual contribution, then, was 16.91- 9.13, or 7.78 percent of
employee pay.
PERA’s payroll was about $5.3 billion in 2004, a figure I found in the annual report. A 16.91 percent
contribution on that would be about $895 million. But there were only $453 million in employer
contributions in 2004, another figure from the annual report.
So this is the paragraph I wrote: “PERA's actuaries told the fund in June that to get PERA back into sound
funding status, employer contributions needed to nearly double. That, according to a Rocky Mountain
News analysis, would require an extra $400 million a year, starting now.”
The market returns of 2004-2007 improved the situation. Using results at the end of 2007, PERA
estimated that it could actually have a funding schedule for most of its employee groups that was not
infinite. Some of the funding schedules had slipped below 30 years. The results of 2008-09 threw that all
out the window, and PERA had to propose a significant reform package, including higher contributions
and limits on benefits, to fix the problem.
In its 2010 annual report, PERA said the “Cumulative Contribution Deficiency of Our Employers" — the
amounts they should have put into keep the plan to match the ARC, but didn't — totaled $3.5 billion over
eight years.
Remember, calculating a plan’s liabilities involves a lot of assumptions about age and retirement, as well
as inflation and salary increases. Changing these assumptions can increase or decrease the liability,
which then would increase or decrease the funding level, and consequently, the ARC.
The investment assumption – what the plan’s assets are expected to return in the long term - is the
biggest factor by far. Many plans are still assuming annual returns of 8 percent - even though the
portfolios may not be constructed to approach those returns. (See Part Four)

Questions to know the answers to:
•
•
•
•
•

What interest rate is your plan using to discount liabilities – and have they done estimates using
different interest rates?
What is your pension plan’s funding ratio? Is it increasing or decreasing?
Does your plan use actuarial smoothing? Do they do it consistently?
What amortization schedule is your plan on?
What is the actuarially required contribution? Is the plan actually making the contribution? If not,
how much extra taxpayer money is required?

Part Four: Investments
In the early days of the American pension system, fund managers typically bought bonds that matured
when benefits came due. It was stable, not particularly risky — and expensive.
As stocks began to rise in the 1980s, more and more pension managers realized they could take
advantage of the equity markets' higher returns. An employer could put less money into the plan, or pay
more benefits, if investments grew more quickly. So pension funds shifted from stocks to bonds, although
many still have bonds as a significant part of the portfolio.
The asset mix of the pension plan’s portfolio is a key part of the annual report. Equities are generally
divided into domestic and international, and there’s a category for bonds. Most pension plans have
expanded their portfolios to include real estate, venture capital, private equity, hedge funds and timber.
Because of this mix, it’s not entirely fair to compare a pension plan’s return to the Standard & Poor’s 500.
Instead, the pension plan’s annual report likely mentions, in the annual report, a “benchmark return” for
pensions of its size, and whether it beat its benchmark.
There are many benchmarking reports published by industry consultants that slice and dice portfolio
information and can give you a sense of how a pension plan’s asset mix compares to its peers.

The following paragraphs, from one of my stories, give you a sense of how this information, looking
backwards, can be used to explain how a pension plan got to its current state:
“By the end of 1999, PERA had 71.2 percent of its portfolio in domestic and international stocks. Another
9.5 percent was in "alternative investments," which includes venture capital. Just 11.1 percent was in
bonds and cash, with the remainder in real estate and timber.
Everyone with stocks or a 401(k) knows what happened next. The market peaked in March 2000. Internet
stocks went first, then other tech and telecom stocks began to follow. The Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks, followed within weeks by the collapse of Enron, ensured another down year in 2001. WorldCom,
and the doubts it raised about whether any big company could implode in scandal, took down all of bluechip America in 2002.
At the end of those three years, PERA's portfolio had dropped from $30 billion to $23 billion. It had a
three-year annualized loss of 6.6 percent. The typical pension fund, which owned less in stocks than
PERA, lost just 4 percent per year.”
Pension funds typically perform asset review studies, in which an outside consultant looks at the
portfolio’s asset mix, makes an inflation assumption, and calculates a likely near-term return. (Sometimes,
both the staff and the board have consultants, so there are two estimates.)
What makes things interesting is when a pension fund uses an investment return assumption to calculate
its funding ratio, yet is given a different probable return by its investment consultants. It happened a lot
more than you might think, like in Colorado, where the return assumption was 8.5 percent in the middle of
the last decade, but the investment consultants said the portfolio was more likely to return 7.75 percent.
Questions to know the answers to:
•
•
•

What is your pension plan’s asset mix? Does it have more in stocks and other volatile
investments than similarly-sized plans? How has it changed recently?
How does the plan’s investment return compare to the benchmark? Is it underperforming
because it wasn’t invested in the best-performing asset classes?
Do investment consultants predict a different investment return than what’s in the actuarial
assumptions? How does the pension plan justify this? If the pension portfolio returns the lower
number, what are the implications for funding?

Part Five: Governance
The financial stuff gets tough. It’s easier to figure out how your pension plan is structured, and how that
differs from others.
In many states, the boards of public pension plans are wholly or partially appointed through the political
process. Some boards have educational requirements for some or all seats. A portion of many board
seats are held by workers who will someday benefit from the plan.
In Colorado, when I first started covering the issue, the PERA board had 16 trustees. 14 were elected
directly by the benefit recipients, active and retired; the other two board members, the state Treasurer
and Auditor, are also PERA members.
In a reform law several years ago, the board structure was changed. Member-elected seats were reduced
to 11, and three board members were appointed by the governor instead.
Virtually all pension trustees travel to “conferences” that are ostensibly for education, but truly provide an
opportunity for Wall Street sharpies to wine and dine gullible public servants. Many pension plans have
travel or expense limits, and PERA goes further in requiring trustees to fill out an “evaluation form” after
attending a conference. (A great subject of an FOI request, I’ll point out.) Pension plan executives attend,
too.
Pension plans also may, or may not, have their budgets set through the legislative process, and their
employees may or may not be part of the state employment system. Big differences in pay and perks can

result when there’s no outside oversight; pension plan managers can get intoxicated with the idea they’re
operating in the big-money finance world, and standards for public-sector pay don’t apply.
A list of pay and perks that were available to PERA executives and employees that were not available to
rank-and-file state employees as of 2005: A choice of luxury automobile or $1,175-per-month car
allowance; annual bonuses, plus a special “long-term incentive” for executives; the ability to accrue 52
weeks of leave time and get paid for it on departure; health-care benefits for life for a handful of top
execs. PERA later changed or abandoned many of these practices.
A harder governance issue to track is conflict-of-interest policies for trustees and staff. Most pension
plans limit, or ban, gifts from Wall Street managers or vendors to the plan. But pension plan staff often
serve as advisors or directors to the private-equity funds they invest in, and the luxurious meetings of
those boards are typically considered expenses of the fund – not gifts to the pension executives.

Questions to know the answers to:
•
•

•
•

How is the board of your pension plan structured? Do benefit recipients control the majority of
seats?
Are there any policies that limit board travel to conferences? Who on the board has spent the
most at these conferences? How much does the board and staff spend each year on conference
travel?
How is the pension plan’s budget set? Are the plan employees state employees, part of the
personnel system?
Is there a conflict-of-interest policy? Are board and staff members filling out disclosure forms
about gifts they receive?

