FOLLOW	  THE	  MONEY	  –	  Tracking	  Companies’	  Influence	  on	  Politics	  
By	  Bill	  Allison	  and	  Ron	  Nixon	  
	  
CAMPAIGN	  FINANCE	  	  

	  
The	  Federal	  Election	  Commission	  site,	  www.fec.gov,	  is	  the	  original	  source	  for	  data	  on	  
contributions	  given	  to	  federal	  campaign	  committees,	  national	  political	  parties	  (the	  RNC,	  the	  
DNC,	  the	  DCCC,	  etc.)	  and	  political	  action	  committees.	  	  
	  
The	  political	  parties	  and	  most	  political	  action	  committees	  file	  on	  the	  20th	  of	  each	  month,	  
and	  the	  candidates	  and	  some	  PACs	  will	  next	  file	  on	  July	  15.	  The	  candidates	  will	  also	  file	  
before	  their	  states'	  primary	  elections,	  and	  before	  and	  after	  the	  general	  election.	  The	  House,	  
the	  national	  parties,	  and	  the	  House	  Republican	  and	  Democratic	  fundraising	  committees	  file	  
electronically;	  the	  Senate	  and	  the	  Senate	  Democratic	  and	  Republican	  fundraising	  arms	  still	  
file	  on	  paper.	  Those	  paper	  filings	  are	  scanned	  into	  the	  FEC	  website,	  though	  often	  lag	  behind	  
the	  due	  date.	  
	  
Raw	  FEC	  data	  can	  be	  difficult	  to	  work	  with,	  and	  the	  site	  is	  set	  up	  to	  give	  information	  on	  the	  
filings	  campaigns	  and	  committees,	  not	  necessarily	  the	  donors	  to	  those	  campaigns.	  A	  bunch	  
of	  nonprofits	  take	  this	  data	  and	  make	  it	  much	  easier	  to	  find	  out	  how	  much	  and	  to	  whom	  
donors	  are	  giving.	  
	  
The	  Sunlight	  Foundation’s	  InfluenceExplorer.com	  has	  federal	  campaign	  finance	  data	  
from	  the	  Center	  for	  Responsive	  Politics	  (CRP)	  and	  state	  level	  campaign	  finance	  data	  from	  
the	  National	  Institute	  on	  Money	  in	  State	  Politics	  (NIMSP;	  see	  below	  for	  more	  on	  CRP	  and	  
NIMSP).	  It	  also	  has	  data	  on	  federal	  lobbying,	  federal	  contracts	  and	  grants,	  federal	  
regulations	  and	  other	  information	  (see	  below	  for	  Influence	  Explorer’s	  other	  datasets).	  The	  
site	  fills	  two	  roles:	  It	  provides	  totals	  and	  top	  ten	  lists	  grouped	  by	  employer	  for	  all	  campaign	  
contributors	  (if	  there’s	  a	  company	  called	  Top	  Cat	  Marine	  Security	  with	  an	  employee	  who	  
made	  one	  $250	  donation—and	  there	  is—Influence	  Explorer	  has	  a	  page	  for	  that	  company).	  
	  
It	  also	  lets	  you	  download	  data	  in	  bulk	  or	  filtered	  at	  http://data.influenceexplorer.com.	  The	  
downside	  of	  the	  site	  is	  that,	  because	  it	  relies	  on	  CRP	  and	  NIMSP	  for	  campaign	  finance	  data,	  
it’s	  always	  a	  little	  less	  up-­‐to-­‐date	  than	  either	  CRP	  or	  NIMSP.	  
	  
On	  the	  plus	  side,	  it	  combines	  federal	  and	  state	  campaign	  contributions,	  lets	  you	  download	  
just	  the	  data	  you	  want	  to	  work	  with	  (rather	  than	  downloading	  2	  million	  or	  so	  records	  from	  
CRP	  or	  NIMSP’s	  bulk	  data).	  
	  
InfluenceExplorer.com	  is	  sort	  of	  like	  a	  Wikipedia	  for	  campaign	  finance	  and	  other	  influence	  
data—a	  good	  place	  to	  check	  first	  for	  a	  quick	  overview,	  while	  data.influenceexplorer.com	  is	  
where	  you	  go	  to	  dig	  deep.	  
Contact	  Bill	  Allison:	  ballison@sunlightfoundation.com	  
Contact	  Ron	  Nixon:	  nixon.ron@gmail.com

	  
The	  Center	  for	  Responsive	  Politics,	  online	  at	  http://www.opensecrets.org,	  provides	  the	  
top	  100	  donors	  to	  every	  members	  of	  Congress	  by	  cycle	  and	  for	  their	  whole	  career.	  They	  
also	  code	  contributions	  by	  industry	  and	  sector;	  provide	  data	  on	  contributions	  to	  
committees	  from	  the	  industries	  they	  oversee;	  and	  provide	  additional	  info	  like	  campaign	  
expenditures	  for	  House	  and	  presidential	  candidates.	  
	  
They	  also	  track	  contributions	  to	  and	  from	  PACs	  and	  independent	  political	  groups	  including	  
Super	  PACs	  and	  the	  old	  527s,	  named	  after	  the	  section	  of	  the	  tax	  code	  that	  regulates	  them.	  
Though	  Super	  PACs	  have	  by	  and	  large	  replaced	  527s	  as	  the	  destination	  for	  large	  donors,	  
some	  527s—particularly	  the	  Republican	  Governors	  Association	  and	  the	  Democratic	  
Governors	  Association—still	  raise	  huge	  amounts	  of	  money.	  	  
	  
Some	  useful	  links	  from	  OpenSecrets.org:	  	  
	  
Heavy	  Hitters	  (tracks	  the	  biggest	  organizational	  givers):	  
http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/list.php?order=A	  
Committee	  donors	  (shows	  which	  industries	  and	  donors	  give	  to	  which	  committees):	  
http://www.opensecrets.org/cmteprofiles/index.php	  
Interest	  groups	  (shows	  how	  much	  industry	  groups	  give	  to	  candidates	  and	  parties)	  
http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/index.php	  
Outside	  spending	  (tracks	  spending	  and	  contributions	  to	  super	  PACs,	  nonprofits	  including	  
501c	  organizations	  that	  don’t	  disclose	  donors,	  etc.)	  
http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/index.php	  
	  	  
Speaking	  of	  outside	  spending	  and	  super	  PACs,	  the	  Sunlight	  Foundation	  has	  the	  Follow	  the	  
Unlimited	  Money	  Tracker,	  which	  updates	  throughout	  the	  day	  and	  contains	  information	  
on	  independent	  expenditures	  and	  electioneering	  communications	  made	  by	  third	  parties.	  
	  
You	  can	  filter	  information	  on	  candidates,	  the	  races	  they’re	  competing	  in,	  organizations.	  It	  
offers	  aggregate	  totals,	  downloads	  of	  data,	  and	  links	  to	  the	  original	  filings	  on	  the	  FEC	  site.	  
Online	  at	  http://followtheunlimitedmoney.com.	  	  
	  
National	  Institute	  on	  Money	  in	  State	  Politics	  compiles	  campaign	  finance	  information	  
from	  all	  50	  states,	  and	  makes	  it	  available	  in	  an	  online	  database	  at	  
http://www.followthemoney.org.	  They	  code	  contributions	  by	  industry	  (using	  a	  method	  
incredibly	  similar	  to,	  and	  derived	  from,	  the	  Center	  for	  Responsive	  Politics).	  
	  
They	  also	  trace	  the	  influence	  of	  money	  on	  state	  policies,	  from	  Enron	  and	  utility	  
deregulation	  to	  the	  privatization	  of	  state	  prisons.	  NIMSP	  has	  data	  on	  state	  ballot	  initiatives	  
as	  well	  as	  contributions	  to	  state	  legislative,	  executive	  and	  judicial	  candidates	  (note:	  they	  
only	  have	  state	  data,	  not	  local	  data).	  	  
	  
Political	  Party	  Time	  site,	  online	  at	  http://politicalpartytime.org,	  publishes	  invitations	  to	  
fundraisers	  that	  are	  collected	  from	  lobbyists	  (there	  are	  upcoming	  events	  as	  well	  as	  an	  
archive	  going	  back	  to	  2007).	  The	  site	  publishes	  the	  actual	  invitations	  in	  a	  PDF-­‐like	  format,	  
and	  also	  digitizes	  some	  information	  so	  one	  can	  search	  for	  the	  host	  of	  an	  event	  (these	  are	  
Contact	  Bill	  Allison:	  ballison@sunlightfoundation.com	  
Contact	  Ron	  Nixon:	  nixon.ron@gmail.com

often	  lobbyists),	  the	  location,	  the	  beneficiary,	  other	  members	  in	  attendance,	  the	  date,	  and	  
so	  on.	  	  
	  
IRE’s	  Campaign	  Finance	  Information	  Center	  has	  a	  database	  that	  includes	  contributions	  
and	  how	  the	  candidates	  spent	  their	  donations.	  In	  some	  cases,	  it	  includes	  money	  flow	  to	  and	  
from	  PACs,	  candidate	  committees	  and	  party	  committees.	  
http://www.campaignfinance.org/	  	  
	  
Tips	  about	  stories:	  http://www.campaignfinance.org/background.html	  	  
	  
The	  Internal	  Revenue	  Service	  has	  an	  online	  search	  for	  527	  committee	  filings.	  To	  find	  their	  
donors	  and	  expenditures,	  see	  
http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoAdvanced8872Search.action.	  You	  
can	  search	  the	  IRS	  527	  donor	  database	  for	  donors.	  
	  
There	  are	  very	  few	  groups	  that	  track	  local	  campaign	  finance	  records.	  Maplight.org	  has	  
information	  on	  contributions	  to	  Los	  Angeles	  campaign	  committees,	  and	  the	  Municipal	  
Securities	  Rulemaking	  Board,	  a	  self-­‐regulatory	  organization,	  discloses	  political	  
contributions	  made	  by	  financial	  firm	  employees	  that	  market	  bonds	  for	  local	  governments	  
(online	  here:	  http://www.msrb.org/Market-­‐Disclosures-­‐and-­‐Data/Access-­‐Data/Political-­‐
Contribution-­‐Disclosures.aspx)	  but	  for	  the	  most	  part	  reporters	  looking	  for	  local	  campaign	  
contribution	  data	  have	  to	  work	  through	  whatever	  municipal	  disclosure	  system	  exists.	  
	  	  
LOBBYING	  	  
	  
At	  the	  federal	  level,	  lobbyists	  must	  register	  within	  45	  days	  of	  beginning	  to	  lobby	  for	  a	  
client,	  then	  file	  quarterly	  disclosures.	  Lobbying	  firms,	  not	  clients,	  file	  disclosures,	  although	  
note	  that	  big	  companies	  with	  lobbyists	  on	  their	  payrolls	  file	  disclosures	  too.	  
	  
The	  disclosures	  list	  the	  amount	  of	  money	  spent	  (note	  that	  there	  are	  four	  different	  methods	  
for	  lobbyists	  to	  calculate	  what	  they	  spend	  on	  lobbying—comparing	  what	  different	  groups	  
are	  spending	  on	  lobbying	  can	  be	  difficult),	  the	  names	  of	  the	  lobbyists,	  the	  branch	  of	  
Congress	  or	  federal	  agency	  they’re	  contacting	  and	  the	  issues	  they’re	  lobbying	  on—often	  
including	  the	  name	  of	  the	  bill.	  
	  
Lobbying	  firms	  and	  individual	  lobbyists	  also	  report	  campaign	  donations,	  donations	  to	  
presidential	  libraries,	  to	  nonprofits	  honoring	  government	  officials	  and	  members	  of	  
Congress,	  and	  other	  information—those	  reports	  are	  filed	  twice	  a	  year.	  
	  
OpenSecrets.org	  has	  a	  very	  useful	  lobbying	  database	  
(http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp).	  Same	  data	  is	  available	  at	  
InfluenceExplorer.com	  for	  download	  (http://data.influenceexplorer.com	  -­‐-­‐	  then	  click	  on	  
the	  tab	  labeled	  “lobbying”).	  Sunlight	  Foundation	  also	  tracks	  new	  lobbyist	  registrations—
filed	  by	  lobbyists	  within	  45	  days	  of	  starting	  work	  for	  a	  new	  client—at	  
http://reporting.sunlightfoundation.com/lobbying.	  	  
	  
Both	  the	  registrations	  and	  quarterly	  reports	  are	  available	  at	  the	  House	  Clerk’s	  Office	  at	  
Contact	  Bill	  Allison:	  ballison@sunlightfoundation.com	  
Contact	  Ron	  Nixon:	  nixon.ron@gmail.com

http://disclosures.house.gov/ld/ldsearch.aspx	  and	  the	  Senate	  Office	  of	  Public	  Records	  at	  
http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfields.	  	  The	  Senate	  allows	  you	  to	  search	  
by	  key	  words.	  You	  can	  search	  for	  new	  registrations	  on	  either	  site.	  The	  contribution	  reports	  
that	  lobbyists	  and	  lobbying	  firms	  must	  file	  can	  be	  searched	  on	  the	  Senate	  site	  here:	  
http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=lobbyistselectfields.	  
	  
For	  states,	  the	  lobbying	  picture	  is	  much	  more	  complicated.	  Each	  state	  has	  its	  own	  lobbying	  
registration	  and	  disclosure	  systems	  and	  requirements,	  and	  there	  is	  no	  single	  resource	  from	  
which	  you	  can	  gather	  all	  this	  information.	  NIMSP	  prepared	  an	  overview	  of	  what	  different	  
states	  require,	  and	  where	  you	  can	  get	  each	  state’s	  disclosures,	  here:	  
http://www.followthemoney.org/press/ReportView.phtml?r=452	  
	  

Contracts	  and	  Grants	  

	  
USASpending.gov	  has	  all	  federal	  grants	  and	  contracts	  in	  a	  semi-­‐searchable	  database	  (the	  
interface	  can	  be	  confusing);	  you	  can	  get	  the	  same	  information	  for	  download	  at	  
http://data.influenceexplorer.com,	  which	  also	  has	  old	  earmark	  data	  (Congress	  disclosed	  
earmarks	  beginning	  in	  fiscal	  year	  2008	  and	  ending	  in	  fiscal	  year	  2010;	  in	  2011,	  both	  the	  
House	  and	  Senate	  agreed	  to	  moratoriums	  on	  earmarks).	  
	  
Some	  states	  disclose	  contract	  and	  grant	  information,	  while	  others	  don’t	  (it	  requires	  a	  FOIA	  
request	  to	  get	  the	  information).	  	  
	  

Regulations	  

	  
Federal	  regulatory	  dockets	  are	  available	  on	  Regulations.gov,	  and	  you	  can	  get	  the	  same	  
information	  in	  much	  more	  user-­‐friendly	  formats	  from	  InfluenceExplorer.com,	  in	  
downloadable	  formats	  on	  http://data.influenceexplorer.com	  (click	  the	  “regulations”	  tab)	  or	  
on	  each	  company	  page—scroll	  down	  to	  the	  regulations	  section	  for	  ExxonMobil	  here	  
http://influenceexplorer.com/organization/exxon-­‐
mobil/819555dfc3d449d2be54286f0cb385e2	  to	  see	  submissions	  the	  company	  has	  filed,	  or	  
regulatory	  dockets	  that	  mention	  the	  company.	  
	  

BILLS	  

	  
APPROPRIATIONS	  COMMITTEES	  
www.appropriations.house.gov	  
www.appropriations.senate.gov	  
Both	  these	  committees	  are	  responsible	  from	  drafting	  and	  passing	  spending	  bills	  that	  fund	  
the	  government	  and	  provide	  billions	  for	  programs	  that	  benefit	  nearly	  every	  sector	  in	  
American	  society,	  including	  companies.	  Contributions	  can	  be	  checked	  along	  with	  voting	  by	  
members	  of	  these	  committees	  on	  programs	  that	  benefit	  donors.	  
	  
THOMAS	  
www.loc.thomas.gov	  
This	  is	  the	  Library	  of	  Congress	  that	  is	  great	  for	  tracking	  the	  status	  of	  bills,	  key	  votes,	  
Contact	  Bill	  Allison:	  ballison@sunlightfoundation.com	  
Contact	  Ron	  Nixon:	  nixon.ron@gmail.com

committee	  reports	  and	  other	  materials	  that	  let	  you	  follow	  legislation	  from	  beginning	  to	  
end.	  	  
	  
GOVTRACK	  
http://www.govtrack.us/	  
This	  is	  a	  better	  version	  of	  the	  Thomas	  website.	  Built	  by	  a	  private	  company,	  this	  site	  lets	  you	  
access	  all	  the	  information	  available	  at	  Thomas,	  but	  in	  a	  friendlier	  format.	  
	  
FEDERAL	  REGISTER	  
https://www.federalregister.gov/	  
	  
This	  website	  is	  updated	  daily	  with	  new	  regulations,	  proposed	  regulations,	  agency	  and	  
advisory	  board	  meetings.	  It’s	  a	  good	  way	  to	  keep	  track	  of	  regulations	  that	  industries	  might	  
back	  or	  opposed.	  It	  should	  be	  matched	  with	  lobbying	  disclosure	  reports	  and	  campaign	  
finance	  records.	  
	  
CONGRESSIONAL	  RECORD	  
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/collection.action?collectionCode=CREC	  
	  
The	  Congressional	  Record	  is	  the	  official	  record	  of	  the	  proceedings	  and	  debates	  of	  the	  
United	  States	  Congress.	  Lobbyist	  will	  often	  try	  to	  get	  members	  of	  Congress	  to	  read	  
statements	  into	  the	  Congressional	  Record	  to	  show	  support	  for	  a	  bill	  that	  might	  benefit	  a	  
client.	  	  
	  
	  
JOINT	  COMMITTEE	  ON	  TAXATION	  
https://www.jct.gov/	  
The	  Joint	  Committee	  is	  a	  committee	  in	  the	  Congress	  that:	  
1. Investigating	  the	  operation,	  effects,	  and	  administration	  of	  internal	  revenue	  taxes	  
2. Investigate	  measures	  and	  methods	  for	  the	  simplification	  of	  taxes	  
3. Make	  reports	  on	  the	  results	  of	  those	  investigations	  and	  studies	  and	  make	  recommendations	  
4. Review	  any	  proposed	  refund	  or	  credit	  of	  taxes	  in	  excess	  of	  $2,000,000.	  

Documents	  posted	  on	  the	  Committees	  website	  are	  good	  sources	  of	  tax	  breaks	  that	  benefit	  
companies.	  
	  
FEDERAL	  ADVISORY	  COMMITTEES	  
http://fido.gov/facadatabase/interestareas.asp?type=search	  
	  
These	  committees	  are	  set	  up	  to	  provide	  agency	  with	  expertise	  from	  the	  private	  sector,	  etc.	  
Often	  the	  panels	  are	  stack	  with	  corporate	  officials	  who	  help	  influence	  policy	  that	  could	  help	  
their	  companies.	  The	  Obama	  administrator	  banned	  lobbyist	  from	  the	  panels,	  but	  other	  
members	  of	  a	  corporation	  can	  sit	  on	  these	  boards.	  	  
	  
LEGISTORM	  
http://www.legistorm.com/	  
Contact	  Bill	  Allison:	  ballison@sunlightfoundation.com	  
Contact	  Ron	  Nixon:	  nixon.ron@gmail.com

A	  site	  run	  by	  former	  reporter	  which	  includes	  a	  database	  of	  congressional	  staff	  salaries,	  
financial	  disclosure	  forms	  for	  staffers	  and	  members	  and	  a	  database	  of	  all	  privately	  financed	  
trips	  taken	  by	  members	  of	  Congress	  or	  their	  staffs.	  This	  site	  helps	  you	  track	  the	  revolving	  
door	  between	  Congressional	  staffers	  and	  corporate	  lobbyists.	  
	  
TAXPAYERS	  FOR	  COMMON	  SENSE	  
http://www.taxpayer.net/index.php	  
A	  budget	  watchdog	  group	  that	  tracks	  wasteful	  spending	  in	  government	  programs.	  	  
	  
ETHICS	  
	  
Lawmakers	  aren’t	  the	  only	  ones	  targeted	  by	  companies.	  A	  lot	  of	  lobbying	  goes	  into	  getting	  
to	  know	  legislators	  or	  maintaining	  contact	  with	  former	  lobbyists,	  etc	  who	  work	  for	  the	  
government	  and	  are	  in	  positions	  to	  influence	  regulations	  or	  agency	  policy.	  Ethic.gov	  
https://explore.data.gov/ethics/	  	  provides	  access	  to	  documents	  such	  as	  the	  White	  House	  
visitor	  logs,	  and	  the	  Office	  of	  Government	  Ethics	  http://www.oge.gov/	  maintains	  financial	  
disclosure	  forms	  for	  senior	  government	  executives.	  
	  

Contact	  Bill	  Allison:	  ballison@sunlightfoundation.com	  
Contact	  Ron	  Nixon:	  nixon.ron@gmail.com

