3764

Finding the Story
IRE – Boston 2012
Michael J. Berens – The Seattle Times
mberens@seattletimes.com

Sure, you’ve mastered many tools of the trade. You’re aggressive, relentless. But time and again
you watch in bewilderment as big enterprise stories by your competitors or colleagues break
around you – spectacular reporting efforts that overflow with unique findings.
I could have done that story, you say. If only I had found it first.
Don’t just “follow your gut.” Anyone can work a telephone, file public record requests, and query
the web. Develop a strategy that helps excavate story nuggets into polished stories.
Begin by understanding the elements that make for great stories (see checklist handout). For most
reporters, the mandate is to find great local stories that reverberate nationally.
Here are some of my hunting grounds and tips on selling your story.
Stage 1: Scouting:
Scour state agency disciplinary and regulatory reports
Enforcement actions are rich repositories. Be vigilant for the unusual. Look for patterns. I once
stumbled on a notation that a psychologist, who had sex with a patient, was not allowed to treat
women age 50 and older. So, a 49-year-old woman represented a sexual risk but a 50-year-old
woman was fair game? This nugget was one of many behind a three-day series (a Pulitzer finalist)
that found more than 500 health providers who had sexually preyed on patients. Untold stories are
often found in plain sight.
Follow the paper; find the data
Identify every public record connected to your topic. For example: a fatal police chase crash.
How many agencies are involved? Police, paramedics, medical examiner – that’s three sure-fire
routes of public records. But fatal car crashes are also reported to a state computer system (which
you can get), which reports to the federal Fatal Accident Reporting System (which you can obtain
via IRE and NICAR). Veer from the beaten path. Look for lawsuits (depositions) and worker
compensation claims (medical information). Who pays for the damage? Are police protected by
sovereign immunity laws, even when they are at fault? How many cop cars crash each year?
Review state audits and state or federal inspector general reports
Make these reports a regular reading habit. Sure, most reports are boring, even old news. But
embedded in these reports can be exciting story nuggets. These reports usually disclose all
sources of information. I’ve culled new datasets and obscure records from links in these reports.
When you see aggregate data, ask how the agency derived that information. You might find new
data-rich repositories.
Follow the law
Lawsuits connect us to documents, exhibits, depositions and sources of every type. Lawyers are
great sources; they are document-based creatures – like us – and they often relish media contact.
Pick a state agency or large company and pull every related suit. Most will be dismissed but that
doesn’t mean that there isn’t a story lurking within the pages.

3764

Follow the money
This Watergate-era mantra endures because it’s true. Demand line-item budgets. Identify
contractors . Look for questionable expenditures to unknown consultants or obscure companies.
With state or public agencies, it’s always fruitful to ask for a list of every civil settlement. Some
states create a spreadsheet that shows legal settlements for all agencies.
Stage 2: Research:
Get organized with a spreadsheet
You have the idea. It’s met the checklist challenge. Now you need to scrub the idea, pull and
twist it and see if it falls apart. Don’t pitch it to an editor just yet. Many story ideas fall into the
trash after this phase – at least for me. An Excel spreadsheet is an excellent organizational tool to
keep lists of names, companies, budget numbers, etc.
File preliminary public record requests
Start the process quickly – time is not your friend. Make discreet requests – don’t jam everything
you want into a giant request. This way, you get the record as it’s available instead of waiting for
the agency to pull together 19 more items.
Create a timeline
This is an essential tool. I use a Word file and start putting dates as well as chunky narrative
passages from lawsuits or reports, etc. I use a timeline for every story. Not only does it help keep
complex events in focus, it will save you time during the writing phase.
Find the guy in the basement
No matter how obscure the topic, you can bet that there is someone, somewhere who has devoted
their life to it. Find that person. I don’t care if they wear foil around their head or weave
conspiracy theories about Mars – I want their documents. To be sure, most of these sources will
be well-heeled advocates. Remember, just because someone has an agenda doesn’t mean they
aren’t right.
File a record request for all databases manuals
What better way to discover what data is kept and all the fields of information. No redaction is
required because these are the user manuals. Don’t underestimate the power of this technique.
Stage 3: Write the pitch memo
Open with story language
Tease the strength of the story. Structure it like a mini-top. Make sure to cover the bases in the
project checklist: relevancy; potential for reform; unique findings; etc.
Outline the reporting strategy
Show your editor that you have a plan – step one, two and three. be honest about what you have
and don’t have, and what it will take to finish. I detail travel plans and projected costs.
Don’t forget multimedia
Describe the rich array of photo, video and graphic possibilities
Story structure
State whether this is one large story or a series.

