American FactFinder
Gateway to the Census
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Imagine a funnel with several gigabytes of data in the maw and a computer
screen at the tip. That‟s American FactFinder. Its job is to guide the public to
millions of pieces of data gathered over the past decade for the nation, every
state, county, city and hundreds of thousands of smaller geographies.
“Legacy FactFinder,” the original site that shut down on Jan. 20, 2012, was
admirably simple. It also was quirky, occasionally inconsistent in its search
results (for example on disabilities), dreadfully slow in mapping and plainly
inadequate for the flood of data from the 2010 Census.
So in early 2011 the Census Bureau launched a new site
(factfinder2.census.gov). The old address (factfinder.census.gov) redirects to the
new address after a 6-second delay; at some future point both addresses will
work automatically. The initial rollout, coinciding with the release of redistricting
data, was poorly received by many journalists. But today the site lives up to the
bureau‟s claims: Once you master its search functions you can find an amazing
amount of data quickly.

-------This is version 3.0 of a handout originally prepared for the NICAR conference in Raleigh in February 2011. It was updated
for the McCormick census conference at Arizona State University in July 2011 and completely revised for the NICAR
conference in St. Louis in February 2012.

-1-

The words below and to the right of the American FactFinder logo are buttons.
Using FactFinder provides a simple tutorial; Glossary defines census-speak –
always helpful when you type a search term and don‟t get the expected result.
What We Provide is a list of FactFinder‟s main sources of data with links to more
information about those sources.
There are three basic ways of mining data from FactFinder, two easy and one
not so easy. I‟m going to wimp out and start with the two easy ways.
QuickStart is exactly what it sounds like. Let's say I tell everyone that I‟m going
to St. Louis for the NICAR conference when, in reality, I‟m looking to buy up
vacant homes on the cheap. FactFinder is my friend. I start to type “v-a-c-a” in
the Topic box, and FactFinder helpfully suggests Table B25004: Vacancy Status.
Yep, that‟s what I want. I then move to the State, County or Place box and begin
typing St. Louis, and before I can finish, FactFinder again completes my work.

I press the GO button, and then all I have to do is decide whether I want the 1-,
3- or 5-year American Community Survey data.

A small but important point:
FactFinder remembers where
you‟ve been. To eliminate a
selection, click the red X from
the “Your Selections” box or
click the “clear all selections”
hyperlink.

-2-

Address Search allows users to search for all Census data near a specified
address. Let's see what we can find near the NICAR Conference hotel. The
Address Search link is toward the center right of the FactFinder home page.

We enter the street address, click GO, and get this page:

-3-

There are 15 results. Those “geography names” are all hyperlinks. Let‟s take just
three of the 15 – tract, city and State House District 63. As we click each, they
automatically appear in the “Your Selections” box. There are 1,271 tables with
data on the three areas we selected. Close the “Select Geographies” box and
take a look at some of the tables.

There‟s a lot on this page, so let‟s take it one piece at a time. First that tiny thing
on the top right is a hidden convenience. Take a close look – really close. You
can decide how many tables you want to display on a screen.

Next the cheery “i” icons in the “About” column: They represent empty tables.
Why should you care? Because this could be a timesaver on deadline.
FactFinder has thousands of preformatted tables which in turn represent
hundreds of thousands of live tables. (Think, for example, of QT-P1, Age Groups
and Sex: one preformatted table, replicated for each and every block, block
group, census tract, city, county and state in the whole country.) That‟s where the
“i” comes in handy; you can window-shop for tables, picking just the ones you
really need, without having to wait for the data to load.
Next the Dataset column: We‟re seeing just seven of the nearly 1,300 tables with
data on the NICAR Conference neighborhood. But those seven tables come from
four datasets – three distinct releases of 2010 Census data (the 100% data,
demographic profiles and the racial profiles in Summary File 2) plus the 2010 5year American Community Survey. There are dozens more.
You‟ve already narrowed down the data geographically by selecting a tract, a city
and a legislative district. You can sort tables by ID, file name or dataset, if you
are among the very few people (even at NICAR conferences) who are fluent in

-4-

census-speak. But FactFinder also provides a search bar near the top of the
Search Results panel to let you search the tables on the fly. So if you want
information on the foreign-born population in the NICAR „hood, just start typing,
and FactFinder instantly offers suggestions:

Now to see some data.
First I‟m just going to look at a single table. I‟ll click on the hyperlink for DP04,
Selected Housing Characteristics. A moment later the table appears, with data
visible in separate columns for St. Louis, Census Tract 1255 and State House
District 63.
Next I want to see three tables: DP-1, Profile of General Population and Housing
Characteristics, DP02, Selected Social Characteristics, and DP03, Selected
Economic Characteristics. Rather than click each hyperlink one at a time, I‟ll click
the checkboxes to their left. As I do so, the View and Download boxes are
highlighted.

Multiple files are automatically zipped during download; when expanded they can
be opened in Microsoft Excel.

-5-

Topics & Geographies: I deliberately left this until later, hoping that an
explanation of Basic FactFinder 1-A would make the hard stuff go down easier.
Topics & Geographies builds on the same concepts – though that‟s a bit like
comparing a 747 with a Piper Cub. Here are a couple of key principles to keep in
mind:
Everything in the Census – everything – is based on geography. Every bit
of census data is tied to a particular place, whether that place is the entire
nation or the block where you live.
Most things in the census are tied to a topic such as race, sex, age or
income. Many things are tied to two or three or four topics. Thus the everpopular race by sex by age tables based – you guessed it – on
geography.
We turn now, finally, to the left-hand column on the Main or Search page of
FactFinder. (The Search page is a stripped-down version of the Main page;
functionally, the left-hand column performs identically on both pages.) Although
Topics appears above Geographies, I recommend selecting your geography first.
It‟s the most complicated and the most crucial step.

Click anywhere on the Geographies bar to activate the “Select Geographies” box.
There are three tabs at the top of the Select Geographies box: Name, Address
and Map. We‟ve already seen the Address search function. The Map search lets
you find data by state, county and other geographies; however, it‟s quite slow
and, in my judgment, not ready for deadline reporting. The Name search is the
most useful; as with most FactFinder tools, when you begin typing a name,
FactFinder will try to complete what you type.

-6-

But the real power of the Geographies tab comes below, in the Geography Filter.
Here you can choose among 700,000 geographies, narrowing your choice by
location and type. I‟ll take you through an easy exercise and then show you how
to do something that is, in my opinion, unnecessarily hard. Along the way I‟ll
show you perhaps the best thing about the new FactFinder.
First: something easy. Let‟s get every county in Missouri. (And remember, I‟m a
first-time visitor; not part of the Mizzou Mafia.) I‟ll go to the name bar and type
Missouri. The moment I do that and click the GO key, my Geography Results
panel changes dramatically. Here it is:

-7-

Almost too easy, wasn‟t it? Just click on the “All counties within Missouri”
hyperlink to add it to “Your Selections”, close the Geographies box, and – oh,
yeah – remember to discuss the Topics side of Topics & Geographies.
Now for something that isn‟t so easy. Reporters who cover big counties not
unreasonably want census data for every city in their county. The Census doesn‟t
make it easy. Since a handful of cities (most notably New York City) cross county
lines, the Census treats all cities as if they might run across the county border in
the dark of night. This suspicion is hard-wired into Census reports. The bottom
line is that you can easily get data for all cities within a state but not for all cites
within a county.
There is a work-around, however. Here is an example:
1. Keeping Missouri highlighted in the Geography Filters, click to expand the
“within State” filter option and choose Missouri.
2. Next choose “Within County” and pick a county. (In our example, we‟ll
choose St. Louis County.)
3. In the Geography Results panel, choose “All places fully-or-partially within”
your chosen county.

This will link us to every city and Census-Designated Place in St. Louis County,
MO.
Now let‟s explore the Topics search function. It‟s outwardly pretty simple: six
drop-down menus. But they disguise a huge number of choices. By picking and
choosing you can dramatically narrow your selection from the 8,876 tables the
Census is offering for places fully or partially within St. Louis County, MO.

-8-

The broadest topics are, of course, People and Housing. But you can greatly
narrow your selection by choosing a particular year (2000 and then annually
2005 through 2010), program (decennial or American Community Survey) or
dataset (such as the progressively more accurate 1-, 3- and 5-year ACS).
Mapping: This is the biggest single improvement over Legacy FactFinder. Let‟s
map median age by city in St. Louis County, MO. First we‟ll go to Select Topics,
expand the People category, expand Age & Sex, and choose Age. That will add
it to “Your Selections.” We‟ll then close the Select Topics box and type median
age in the Search box.

-9-

I chose Table B01002 from the 2010 ACS 3-year estimate. Here‟s what I got:

Click on “Create a Map” and then click on an example of the values you want to
map; in this case I chose the total median age for Affton CDP (35.7). To confirm
my choice, FactFinder then displayed a box saying the selected value is median
age by place and asking me to either “Show Map” or “Cancel.” Here‟s the result:

I can customize the colors by clicking on the “Colors and Data Classes” tab. I can
also add or remove boundaries and markers. But the best part is that I can
download the map. In early versions only PDFs were available. Census has now
added JPEGs and, best of all for the GIS-conscious journalist, shapefiles.
- 10 -

The addition of SHP exports is an enormous improvement to FactFinder, one
that I (and several others) had been urging on the bureau since the launch of the
new FactFinder a year ago. Think about the implications for a moment: You get
the bureau‟s wonderful data without its – let‟s face it – staid format. You get files
you can upload to Arc or QGIS or Fusion Tables. You get data you can combine
with your own data, then ship to artists. What‟s not to like?
Sharing the wealth: FactFinder offers two ways to share your research with
others – bookmarking queries on websites and saving queries that can be
opened within FactFinder.
First I‟ll return to Census Tract 1255 in St. Louis, home tract for the 2012 NICAR
Conference, and fetch Table DP02, Selected Social Characteristics. Click on
“Bookmark” and you get the Bookmark dialog, asking you to “Create Bookmark”
or “Save Query”.

- 11 -

Create Bookmark will create a bookmark in your own browser that you can then
copy to a web page.
Save Query is less intuitive because it requires users to understand FactFinder.
But for the experienced user it‟s a good way to share mountains of data. Just
email a very small query to a colleague, which he or she then saves to the
desktop and uploads to FactFinder. Here‟s how a saved query works on the
recipient‟s end:

Simply click the “Load query” button, find the saved query (which ends with the
extension “.aff”), run it and the table opens on your colleague‟s computer.

- 12 -

