Finding danger in data
I’m Dylan Purcell, the head of computer-assisted reporting for the paper and I report to the
investigative editor, Mike Leary. A lot of my work the past six years has been data-driven
investigations. [SLIDE 1]
To get at the topic of finding danger in data I’m going to talk mostly about our Inquirer series and
follows for Assault on Learning, which examined school crime in the city public school system.
o The crimes were committed by children on children or other staffers, but it was the adults in
charge who we found responsible for neglecting, mismanaging and in some cases covering
up the violence problems.
o I thought I’d run through some findings and just come back with the nerdy details for any of
those that you want to ask questions about at the end.
Don’t worry, it’s easy
o [SLIDE 2] Here is my diagram from a courts project I did in 2009 and 10. I drew this out of
necessity to show my editor at that time this wasn’t automatic.
I’ll run through the data I used and then come back and explain how that data helped us find
troubling safety issues
o I used criminal court records data. My last project was a series where we figured out the
conviction rates in Philadelphia were among the lowest in the nation for large court
systems.
o I relied heavily on the district’s database of incidents. I combined those with another table
of yearly enrollments to get crime rates, which the district largely failed to do.
 [SLIDE 3] We wrote a story showing how their claims of improving violence were
flawed. They didn’t factor in significantly declining enrollment, among other issues.
They said crime was down 29 percent. Flat was more like it. And neighborhood high
schools were actually up 17 percent in violent crime.
 [SLIDE 4] Our rates were put to use in an interactive web tool.
o I wasted a lot of time studying the district’s data called CSAP, which stands for
Comprehensive Student Assistance Process. It is meant to track students who need extra
support resources. In reality, the data was a mess.
o I obtained a roster of school police officers that included name and date of birth. We used
that for a follow up story.
Some findings stunned even the project reporting team, including the district beat writer.
[SLIDE 5] We found that assaults were the major problem and were occurring at about the
same level as 2006. The district wasn’t making progress on these beatings.
[SLIDE 6] The incident data contained a Yes/No if police were contacted about the incident.
Notice also that there were nearly 700 assaults on teachers in that one school year.
[SLIDE 7] The district had a major problem with consistency that it ignored; which opened
the door for underreporting of crime.

[SLIDE 8] Indeed, some numbers looked so out of line that we believed crimes were being
underreported, such as Roosevelt High, where serious incidents and assaults dropped off
dramatically.
[SLIDE 9] And by the way, this high school showed up in another investigation we did into
test score cheating. Students were wildly outperforming expectations on state tests.
[SLIDE 10] …but that stopped once we wrote about the school
[SLIDE 11] By using rates we noticed that some elementary schools had high violent crime
rates but weren’t getting enough district attention.
[SLIDE 12] Rates also revealed schools with stunning increases in crime, including one
school were a student was hospitalized with a facial fracture after being beaten in an
incident the school labeled simply a “disorderly conduct”
[SLIDE 13] Then when we looked at their violence prevention program we found the data
so unreliable as to be nearly unusable. But what we could see was a policy change had led to
principals stuffing about a third of the student population into the program. Making is all
but impossible for students to get meaningful help.
[SLIDE 14] After the series, one of our follow up stories used school police payroll data to
uncover officers with criminal records in the state that included admitted drug addition,
assaults and thefts. Through a source we found these individuals often had other
troublesome problems in their personnel files.
[SLIDE 15] By the way, unrelated, but about the same time I was losing a court battle to
make government employee date of birth a public record in Pennsylvania.
[SLIDE 16] And in our most recent follow up story a freshman girl was allegedly raped in
one of the district’s large high schools.
1. The building is ancient and underutilized.
2. After the series I went back to the The district and asked for a new cut of their incident
database. This time I asked for, and received, the location of each incident.
3. Armed with that new piece of intel we discovered a troubling pattern. The rape took
place in a basement stairwell. And the data showed that year after year there were sex
crimes in basement stairwells. All in all we found that in recent years about 45 serious
incidents occurred in stairwells or the basement at that school. So it begs the question,
could the rape have been avoided?

