3780
Investigating Higher Education
IRE Conference – Boston, June 16, 2012
Erica Perez
California Watch
eperez@cironline.org
510-809-3179
PUBLIC RECORDS
Contracts
Example from California Watch:
http://californiawatch.org/dailyreport/uc-davis-gives-us-bank-marketing-access-perks-exchangeroyalties-3686
UC Davis’ contract with US Bank shows the university earned cash for every student account opened
in exchange for a slew of perks for the bank and its executives.
Correspondence
E-mails and memos at public universities are public records. Request administrators’ emails on any
topic you are investigating for deeper insight.
Court records
Check your county’s superior court periodically to find lawsuits against your university or court
records for university leaders. Some courts keep records online; others require an in-person visit. To
check on federal lawsuits, which include employment discrimination cases and bankruptcy filings,
set up a free account on PACER (http://www.pacer.gov) to access a database of federal court records.
Document downloads cost $0.08 per page. The docket report is a good place to start.
Data retention schedule
Typically, public universities maintain a data or document retention schedule with rules for how long
they must keep copies of different types of records. Great for thinking of story ideas and for holding
the administrators accountable if they claim documents have been deleted or thrown away.
Example: http://uncw.edu/itsd/documents/nc_data_retention.pdf
Expenses
Expenses for board meetings, housing for chancellors or presidents, administrators’ travel and
lodging. Do university employees and trustees abide by policies regulating spending? Are any
employees or trustees traveling excessively?
Calendars
Request for presidents, chancellors, provosts, regents, trustees and the like to find out who they’re
meeting with or to check the veracity of their claims.
Financial disclosure forms
Example: California’s Form 700
http://www.fppc.ca.gov/index.php?id=500
Requires employees at state and local government agencies (including public universities) who make
or participate in making decisions that could affect their personal economic interests to fully disclose
their personal assets and income.
Grade distribution reports
Request the history of grades given in each course, including professor names, over a number of
years to find stories about grade inflation, grade variation and more.
Personnel investigations/statements of charges

3780
If an administrator, faculty or staff member at a public university is under investigation, personnel
files contain public records you can obtain, such as statements of charges. In California and perhaps
in other states, findings of an investigation into work performance can also be disclosed.
Example from California Watch: http://californiawatch.org/dailyreport/college-pays-instructorsresign-amid-alleged-pay-grades-scandal-15990
Property records
Does your local college own lots of off-campus property? What is the school doing with the land?
Does it have surplus property it is sitting on or planning to sell?
WEB RESOURCES
Commercialization of university research
Association of University Technology Managers – www.autm.net
Annual survey of licensing activity – see how many patents your university obtained, licensing
revenue it received, etc.
General U.S. higher ed data
U.S. Department of Education – Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) –
www.nces.ed.gov
University revenues and expenditures, assets and indebtedness, state funding per student, student
financial aid, and much more.
IRS non-profit filings
Guidestar - www.guidestar.org
Foundation Center – www.foundationcenter.org/findfunders/990finder/
Lobbying data
Open Secrets – www.opensecrets.org
Find out how much public and private universities spent lobbying elected officials, who the lobbyists
are, what issues they lobbied on, and more.
Philanthropy
Voluntary Support of Education – www.cae.org
Covers about 85 percent of private giving to colleges and universities in the U.S. Use the Data Miner
for data on endowments, total donations, percent of alumni who donate, sources of giving
(corporations, foundations, alumni, etc.) and more.
Public company filings
Securities and Exchange Commission – http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
Good for examining for-profit colleges.
Research grants and spending
National Science Foundation – https://webcaspar.nsf.gov/
Tracks annual research & development spending at colleges and universities
Student financial aid
Student loan defaults
U.S. Department of Education – federalstudentaid.ed.gov/datacenter/
Data by campus on students who default on their federal student loans.
Pell grants
U.S. Dept of Ed – www2.ed.gov/programs/fpg/
See how many low-income students attend your colleges and universities

