Investigating
Poverty
IRE 2012
Kimbriell Kelly

Patricia Wen

Jarrett Murphy

Chicago Reporter

Boston Globe

City Limits

Why cover poverty?
narrative: good stories
explanatory: central to understanding society
accountability: crucial to function of government
mission: critical test of social justice

Why it's hard to cover poverty .... and do it well
Poverty fatigue (or perception thereof) by editors, readers
Stereotypes and preconceived notions on reporters' parts
Complexities in the lives of low-income people

What is poverty?
An inability to afford life's necessities
Different ways of measuring:
Absolute Poverty
income below a minimum level

Relative Poverty
income below a share of median income

Comparative Poverty
looking at poverty across countries
National measures: U.S. 15.1 percent, Albania 12.5 percent?
OECD, $1 a day ... $1.25 a day (purchasing power parity or PPP)

How the U.S. measures poverty
Poverty rate
the percentage of the population living in households with incomes below the
relevant poverty threshold. Determined by the Census Bureau in an annual
report based on Current Population Survey data from monthly questioning.
Poverty threshold (or poverty line)
dollar figure below which a person is considered to be in poverty. Set by the
Census Bureau based on updates to a formula developed in 1964.
Poverty guidelines
Adaptation of Census Bureau thresholds by the Department of Health and
Human Services to determine program eligibility.

The Orshansky measure
In 1963-1964, Social Security Administration analyst Mollie Orshansky
developed a threshold for determining who in America was poor. She:




determined share of a typical household's income devoted to food (one third)
figured out the cost of a USDA “economy food plan”
multiplied that cost by three

To this day, this is how the U.S. measures poverty. Every year, it is adjusted for
inflation and the thresholds are updated.

1982 threshold for a family of four: $9,300

2012 threshold for a family of four: $23,050
Hawaii: $26,510 Alaska: $28,820

The current poverty picture
U.S. poverty rate in 2010

15.1 percent
46.2 million people, up from 14.3 percent in 2009
26 percent of people under age 5
9 percent of people age 65 and over
9.9 percent for non-Hispanic whites
12 percent of Asians
26.6 percent of Hispanics
27.4 percent of blacks
6.6 percent in New Hampshire
22.7 percent in Mississippi

The 0.8 percentage-point increase in the U.S. poverty rate
from 2009 to 2010 is the biggest post-recession increase over
the eight recessions since 1960.

Problems with the U.S. poverty measure
Arbitrary: a dollar's difference?



Lagging: Last year's news



Snapshot: Cannot fully capture movements into and out of poverty
2009 poverty rate: 14.3 percent

23.1 percent of the populations were poor for at least two months7.3 percent
were poor in every month


Dated: Doesn't reflect changes in consumption (food now an eighth or less of typical
family spending)


Overbroad: Fails to reflect geographic differences in price



Incomplete: Misses the impact of noncash benefits



Alternative measures
Census Bureau, 2010: 16 percent

Ratios of Poverty
Measures that try to transcend official measure's shortcomings by:
1. Detailing the income structure of the poverty population
(depth of poverty)
– 6.7 percent of Americans (roughly 40 percent of the poor) have incomes
less than half the poverty level
2. Capturing the population living just above poverty
(near poor)
– 34 percent of Americans live below 200 percent of the poverty rate

Recent History of U.S. Poverty

Explanations for poverty
Structural ... failing of the labor market
Human capital ... lack of necessary skills
Discrimination ... racism or gender bias
Behavioral ... personal failings on the part of the poor

The culture of poverty ... adaptations to poverty end up reinforcing it
Genetics ... poor people are less intelligent
Ordinary events ... medical emergency, death of parent, etc.

Benefits for the poor
TANF – temporary assistance for needy families. Successor to AFDC. Time
limits. Work requirements. Sanctions. Caseload reduction credits.
– 1993: 14.2 million people
• Fully a third of poor children did not receive welfare
– 2010: 4.3 million
• 55 percent denied nationally. Mississippi: 96 percent denial
SNAP (Food Stamps)
WIC (Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children)
SSI
Section 8 and Public Housing
Medicaid
Earned Income Tax Credit

Fresh Angles?
•

suburbanization of poverty

•

management of benefit programs
–

private contractors

–

denial/approval rates

•

food stamp uptake

•

the poor paying more

Where to get good stuff
Census Bureau
OECD, UNDP
State and local benefit offices
Urban Institute, Brookings Institute
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, EPI
American Enterprise Institute, Cato, Heritage

More info

www.citylimits.org
jarrett@citylimits.org

