The 2012 election promises to be the most expensive on record. One important way in which
it differs from the 2008 contest: The presence of more outside groups, spending much more
money, thanks to the Supreme Court's opinion in Citizens United v. FEC in 2010 and
subsequent legal developments. It's now perfectly legal for these groups -- ostensibly
independent of any candidate -- to accept, and spend, unlimited amounts of money from
virtually any source, including corporations, unions and trade associations.
That makes it more important than ever for reporters to examine not just the candidates
running for office, but the other entities that are spending money to help them get there. Here
are some questions to keep in mind during the campaign, and some resources on the
website of the Center for Responsive Politics (www.OpenSecrets.org) that can help your
reporting:
For covering CANDIDATES:


How many donors have maxed out ($2,500 for the primary and $2,500 for the general
election) to the candidate so far? What percentage of his or her total haul comes from
small donors giving $200 or less? Does the candidate have a joint fundraising
committee with other candidates and a state or national political party? What about a
supportive super PAC? (Resources: Donor Lookup, Outside Spending)



Who are the campaign’s bundlers-- who's putting together lots of checks to deliver to
the candidate? These are individuals to whom candidates have reason to be
especially grateful. Their voices are likely to speak louder than those of many other
supporters, and they may reap rewards after the election. Campaigns aren't required
to disclose these names, except for those who are federal lobbyists. So far President
Obama is the only 2012 presidential candidate who is disclosing all his bundlers. But
prodding from the press and watchdog groups resulted in others doing so in 2008.
(Resource: 2012 Bundlers - Barack Obama)



How is the candidate spending his or her campaign cash? Are there lots of pricey
meals or hotel stays? Is the campaign using vendors that have some tie, financial or
familial, to the candidate? (Resource: Expenditures Breakdown)



What can you tell from the candidate’s personal financial disclosure statement? What
are his/her assets and debts, and which side of the balance sheet is larger? Is this a
candidate who seems more or less likely to be able to relate to the 99%? Has the
incumbent grown richer or poorer while in office, and how? Nearly half of all members
of Congress in 2010 were millionaires. (Resource: Personal Financial Disclosure
Database)



Where (literally) are the candidate's contributions coming from? What share is coming
from his/her home state versus the rest of the country? What about from fundraising
hotspots like New York and California? (Resource: Contributions by Geography)



Does the candidate have his/her own PAC, and if so, what can you tell from the
donations the PAC is making? Is it giving to other candidates whose support will be
important to the donor candidate in some way? Sometimes these PACs are used to
fund travel, restaurant meals and other such expenses if the candidate is trying to
build a national profile. (Resource: Leadership PACs)

For covering OUTSIDE GROUPS, such as super PACs, 501(c)(4)s, 527s and so on,
which are organized under different sections of the U.S. tax code and operate under
varying disclosure rules:


What outside groups are active in the races you're interested in? There were super
PACs dedicated to each of the main Republican presidential candidates. To what
degree are super PACs popping up in congressional races? Are they going positive or
negative with their ads (usually the latter)? (Resource: Outside spending by race, list
of super PACs)



Who's funding the groups -- corporations, unions, the traditional deep-pocketed,
politically active individuals? Last year, a mysterious company called W Spann LLC
gave $1 million to the pro-Romney super PAC Restore Our Future. It was a shell
corporation, and in the ensuing uproar, the true donor came forward. Look for more
like this, and press to find out who the real donor is. Contact the largest donors and
ask them why they're giving so much money. (Resources: Top Overall Donors; Top
Individual Donors; Top Industries (Presidential))



How closely are candidates working with the super PACs that are helping them? Are
they showing up at outside groups' fundraisers and appearing in ads? Are donors to a
candidate's campaign also giving to outside groups that are supporting him/her? Are
these groups pushing the envelope on prohibited coordination between candidates
and independent expenditure committees?



The FEC requires groups making independent expenditures to file notices within 24
and 48 hours of reaching certain spending levels. Review those notices and the list of
new super PACs as a part of your daily routine. Who's suddenly spending money?
Who's behind that super PAC with the vaguely patriotic name and who is it organized
to support or oppose? (Resources: Independent Expenditures, Presidential Race; List
of Super PACs)



More and more of the outside spending is being done by 501(c)(4) groups, which don't
have to disclose their donors. We will fill you in on CRP's 990 project at our IRE
session, but quite often it'll be the case that the only way to get behind the brick wall is
through (really good) sources -- if then. However, sometimes a story about
nondisclosure is important, too, particularly if such groups are playing a big role in a
race.

