Resources for
covering elections
Compiled by:
Jaimi Dowdell, Mark Horvit and Megan Luther

Follow the money












OpenSecrets.org from the Center for Responsive Politics –Information on
spending and influence.
National Institute on Money in State Politics – Find state campaign donations.
Search by donors.
Federal Election Commission – The source for federal election contribution and
expenditure data.
MapLight – A nonprofit organization that brings voting and contribution data
together in an attempt to look at influence. Covers Congress, California and
Wisconsin.
LegiStorm – Information on U.S. Congress members including travel, salaries and
more.
The Sunlight Foundation – This site has a number of useful tools to help you keep
track of candidates, issues, influence and more.
Consider the Source from the Center for Public Integrity – This project shows a
lot of information on PACs and donors. “This project seeks to „out‟ shadowy
political organizations that have flourished in the wake of the Supreme Court‟s
Citizens United ruling.”
ProPublica – Has a number of useful features that can help you understand
modern campaigns. They also have some interesting campaign finance tools.
The New York Times – Breaks down campaign finance by party and more. Also
includes a U.S. map drawn by electoral votes.
Farm subsidies from Environmental Working Group – Check to see if politicians
have received farm subsidies.

Break down advertising campaigns
For the first time, network television stations in major markets (top 50) are required to
post information about political ads. Find the data (in PDFs) for top 50 stations here.
Stations not required to post the information still have to keep it and it is available for
inspection. Political Ad Sleuth from the Sunlight Foundation is attempting to gather these
documents and post them online.
Who are the voters?
Don‟t forget about the voters. Use data from the U.S. Census Bureau to get a handle on
the voters in your community.

Use documents
If you‟re looking for some different angles in your coverage, don‟t forget to dig into
documents. State and local retention schedules can help you determine what is available.
Here‟s an example of Colorado election records, but try to think beyond basic election
documents to things like calendars (for incumbents), parking tickets, liens, property
records, etc. To find your state‟s retention schedule, simply go to Google or check out
this directory from the Council of State Archivists.

Follow the candidates on social media
 Politwoops from the Sunlight Foundation shows tweets that have been deleted
from politicians‟ accounts.
 Grab (public) Twitter history with this link:
http://twitter.com/statuses/user_timeline/account.xml?count=n
Save the page and open it in Excel.
Example:
http://twitter.com/statuses/user_timeline/MittRomney.xml?count=100

