Election Watchdog Workshop 2012
Backgrounding Candidates
Laura Frank LFrank@iNewsNetwork.org

Here are some good sources to use when gathering background information on
candidates for election in Colorado:

Political
VotersEdge.org/Colorado – I-News, with MapLight and CU, has one-stop shop for the
money and message behind Colorado ballot measures.
OpenSecrets.org – Center for Responsive Politics tracks the effects of money and
lobbying.
FollowTheMoney.org – National Institute on Money in State Politics has 50 states data
on campaign contributions for candidates, political parties and ballot measures.
MapLight.org – tracks the connections between campaign contributions and legislative
votes.
Tracer.sos.colorado.gov – campaign finance in Colorado.
Colorado.gov/ethicscommission – The Colorado Independent Ethics Commission,
created by the constitution, gives advice/guidance on ethics issues regarding all state
executive and legislative branch elected officials and employees, and local officals and
employees, unless their home-rule counties with their own codes.
Personal Financial Disclosures – You must request these from the Secretary of State.
They treat it as an open records request and you can get the records emailed to you,
typically in less than three days. See examples of the forms on the Secretary of State
website.
General Assembly Bills – http://www.colorado.gov/
These youʼll have to request:
Travel records
Appointment calendar
Voter registration

Legal
COCourts.com – Real-time criminal, civil, traffic and domestic relations records from
district, and county courts. Criminal goes back to 1975; civil to 1986, traffic to 1999,
general session to 2001.Doesnʼt include juvenile or probate cases. Does have attorney
names. Search by name. $7 per search.
PACER.gov – Public Access to Court Electronic Records for case and docket
information from federal appellate, district and bankruptcy courts. Costs 10 cents per
page up to $3. No cap for transcripts. Fees waived if less than $15 per quarter.

Business
SEC.gov/EDGAR.shtml – Securities and Exchange Commissionʼs Electronic Data
Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval. Every domestic public companyʼs SEC filings.
Searchable by company. Up to 3,000 filings per day.
Guidestar.org – Information on nonprofits. Most of it free. Can get Form 990s free if
you register. Guidestar is itself a nonprofit.
SOS.state.co.us/biz – Colorado Secretary of State business licenses. Free searchable
database.
Professional associations – This site lists professional associations by category, from
Chambers of Commerce to the Denver chapter of the American Society of Women
Accountants: Colorado.jobing.com/org
Professional Licensing Boards – A lot of jobs require a professional license from the
state. This site connects to those licensing boards in Colorado, from acupuncturist to
veterinarian: brbpub.com/freeresources/pubrecsitesOccColorado.aspx

Personal
You can use Google to search for things like:
Nonprofit Board membership
Writings (blogs, letters to the editor, academic papers)
Resumes (make sure you fact-check them)
There are lots of free websites that allow you to search for information about individuals
that would be helpful in backgrounding, including address, phone, potential relatives,
neighbors, social media and social media. Here is a sampling:
zabasearch.com
pipl.com
spokeo.com
123people.com/
peekyou.com
Property records – brbpub.com links to public records from every state. You can get to
county assessorsʼ records from here.

