#3822
Doing Student Investigations with Class
IRE 2012
Marcel Dufresne
University of Connecticut
Marcel.dufresne@uconn.edu
Most of these tips have grown from a variety of projects with undergraduate students since the late 1990s,
in both open-enrollment courses and, most recently, in a designated investigative class requiring
instructor consent.
Many tips are standards of investigative work, modified for the challenges of working with students in a
14-week semester. They are less about actual projects and reporting, and more about planning and other
steps than can boost the potential for success. Some of our projects have been published by news media
statewide. Others have been presented on our own websites. Some have involved both.
Most recently, we have partnered with the not-for profit Connecticut Health I-Team (C-HIT.org), which
has collaborated with us from the start, providing early brainstorming, meeting with students, final editing
and prominent placement in Connecticut newspapers and television. For a small program, is our best
arrangement so far. Links to those stories are listed below.
Media partner or self-publishing? Ideally you can do both, but the goal is always publication of a story
with impact to the widest audience. Look for media partners that will be genuinely involved in the project
from the start.
Picking a topic: Student projects have a built-in deadline, usually a 14-week semester. Your topic can be
a guaranteed story with minimum-maximum possibilities or an exploratory story that may not materialize.
If you have enough students, you can hedge your bests and try one of each. Then the challenge is juggling
both. Your topic often will dictate how much media interest there will be. Is it too local? Too general?
Understand what editors might want and be prepared to sell the idea and your ability to deliver.
Recruit talented students: Talk to instructors in lower-level courses and ask about promising students.
Urge instructors to bring in guest reporters to discuss investigative work. Create a climate among faculty
and students where watchdog journalism is valued and the best students are inspired.
Train Students: Look for places in your curriculum where investigative skills can and should be taught.
If you can, offer a prep investigative class where you can teach the essentials and assess students’ skills,
talent and commitment.
Make it exclusive: This can be a luxury in small programs, but try to require “instructor consent” (You’ll
sleep better). Invite promising students to an informational meeting weeks before the semester begins.
Brainstorm topics, show examples of other student projects, then invite them to apply. The application
can gather information about background, interest, experience, internships and other commitments that
semester. Ask them to assess their own strengths and weaknesses.
Hitting the Ground: Make assignments before the semester starts -- background readings and research,
sources to contact, even preliminary interviews. You want something to discuss and build on the first day
of class.
Clear a path: Start early to get data and documents you’ll need. You can do it yourself or make the
requests part of students’ pre-semester assignments. Also, contact key government and other sources well
in advance. Explain the project as much as you can and solicit their cooperation for students for

#3822
interviews, documents and contacts. This can avoid days and weeks of delays. Students will have ample
other opportunity to get experience tracking down people and information.
Teams or Solo? Team dynamics among students (as they are sometimes with professionals) can pose
management challenges. At their best, teams are exciting to watch work. At their worst, they can
disintegrate. Decide on specific roles and consult with teams often. In teams of more than two, consider
specific roles beyond reporting for everyone, such as coordinator and lead writer.
Interview/Research Prep: Run mini-classes on the types of interviews students will be doing.
Brainstorm questions and the types of information each interview might produce. Consider mock
interviews where each student has to interview you or someone else, then critique the interviews,
including questions, follow-up and missed opportunities.
Debriefing and record keeping: Insist that students process their notes soon after interviews for
highlights, quotes and follow-up angles. Meet with students after their interviews, especially critical ones,
and distill crucial information, facts and themes. For teams, have all members sit in on debriefings when
possible. Share notes, summaries, outlines and early drafts on Google Docs or elsewhere.
Back to basics: Leave time for essential steps: reporting, outlining, writing, re-reporting, revision and
fact-checking. Be sure students understand from the outset that these are all critical, proven steps in the
process.
Instructor editing, rewriting and writing: There are times and circumstances where each of these may
be appropriate. In cases of large teams involving complex research or computer data, the instructor or a
lead writer crafting the main story seems to work best.
Cheerleader or skeptic? Instructors must be both. Encourage, push, flatter, coach when needed to keep
momentum and focus. When the story gets closer to publication, it’s time to question everything. Create a
climate of complete accuracy and let students know they are part of the process. Egos must take a back
seat, as every element is questioned and fact checked.
Bulletproofing: Have students check names, facts, documents for each detail in a story. How do we
know this? Create footnoted versions so everyone can see where each fact, quote, anecdote etc. came
from.
When will it end? Prepare students that if the work hasn’t been published by semesters end, their work
may continue for a while afterward.
SAMPLE PROJECT: BOATING DEATHS LINKED TO ALCOHOL EXCEED U.S. RATE, (Published
May 2012)

http://chit.newhavenindependent.org//health/entry/boating_deaths_linked_to_alcohol_exceed_u.s
._rate/
http://c-hit.newhavenindependent.org/health/entry/candlewood_1_in_lake_boating_accidents/
http://www.courant.com/news/connecticut/hc-boating-safety-20120524,0,3350479.story

