Using DocumentCloud
A guide for reporters
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE/NICAR
More than 500 news organizations around the world have a DocumentCloud account. Newsrooms large and small use it
to collaborate and manage document sets used in the reporting process. It makes it easy for journalists to show readers
what they're reporting on, rather than just telling them. This free, online tool can also help us dig in on stories. You can
see how other journalists have used DocumentCloud on our featured reporting page.

The DocumentCloud homepage
You can find us at documentcloud.org. On the homepage, you have access to help, search options and the logon.

Getting started
Accounts are given to newsrooms and not individuals. To get your newsroom an account, simply email:
info@documentcloud.org
If you already have an account, simply sign in on the homepage as shown above.

Uploading a document
Once you’ve logged on, you’ll be taken to your DocumentCloud workspace. Here’s what it looks like:

Along the left-hand side, you’ll notice options to select documents. They include:
All Documents – this will list all public documents currently stored in our repository
Your Documents – this will only show documents you’ve uploaded
Your Published Documents – Anything you publish (make public) will show up here
Your newsroom’s documents – I’m part of the IRE group, so this would show all of our organization’s documents.

Notice as you click on various options that the search bar changes to reflect which group you’ve clicked on. This will also
change the universe of documents you search.
Just below that, you can add documents or projects:

To add a document, simply click on “New Documents.” A window will open where you can navigate to wherever your
document(s) is stored. Once selected, you can edit the details of the document from the upload screen. Here you can
change the name of the document or click “edit details” to go deeper. This allows you to add a document description
and source.

By default, documents are private. In the “Edit details” window, you can change this. (You can edit document details
after you’ve uploaded files as well. Just look for the “Edit Document Information” icon next to the document’s name in
your workspace.)
Once you’re ready, simply click “Upload” to add your file to your account. Uploads typically don’t take too long, but if
there is a large number of files concurrently processing, it could slow things down a bit.
After you’ve added a document, you should see it in your workspace. To open it, double click on it.

Document tools
One of the things I find most useful about DocumentCloud is the ability to add notes to documents. After you’ve opened
a document, you’ll see the document and then to the right you’ll see a rail with the document description and some
tools.

These tools allow you to add a public note, private note or even redact information.

To add notes or redact, you first must click on the tool you want to use. Then you highlight the portion of the document
you want to work with. Once you’ve highlighted the section, a window will open. Use this window to title your note and
add details.

Notice in the document viewer that there are tabs along the upper left. These tabs allow you to move through different
views of your document. “Document” shows the file exactly as it was when uploaded; “Pages” will show the various
pages of your document; “Notes” will show all of the notes, public or private that you’ve made and “Text” is a plain text
version of your document that DocumentCloud has created. This plain text is what allows documents to be searchable.
Moving throughout your document with these tabs can save you time in your work.

Analyze documents
A lot of the power of DocumentCloud can be found in the analysis. You can look at entities found within documents or
even create a timeline to help you with your work. And really, what good story doesn’t have a time element?

To analyze a document simply go to your workspace. And click on a document (or don’t if you’d like to analyze all of
them).

Look under the “Analyze” tab to see your options: You can view entities or a timeline and share the document.

View Entities will give you a list of organizations, people, addresses, dates, terms, phone numbers, and more –
essentially things that DocumentCloud sees and extracts from your document. You can click on any of the entities and
DocumentCloud will take you directly to where the entity can be found within the document.
The timeline takes extracted dates and plots them on a timeline such as this:

View the timeline as a whole, or use your cursor to drag in on specific time periods to hone in on events. You can click on
any of these dotes to pop you into the document(s) where the date was mentioned.

Searching across documents
You can use the search mechanism to search the documents you’ve posted, those in your news organization’s
workspace, or all of the public documents in the repository. Use the options in the upper left of your workspace to
toggle between your documents, all documents, etc. Once you have the universe you’d like, simply enter the search
term.

For example, in the figure below, I’m searching all of IRE’s documents for the word “Columbia.”

Collaboration
Sometimes you’re going to want more than one person work with you on a set of documents. In this case, you’ll want to
use the collaboration feature. To add a collaborator, you’ll first need to create a project. Use the “New Project” button
on the left side of your workspace to do that. Give your project a name. You can then click and drag documents from
your workspace into the project.
To add a collaborator, click on the “Edit project” icon next to the project name. Then select “Add collaborator.” You can
add anyone to this group so long as they have a DocumentCloud account. Please note that you must use the email that
the person uses to log on to DocumentCloud. Each collaborator will then have access to the documents within that
project even if the documents are private.

Publish documents
After you’ve done all of your great work, you’ll likely want to share pieces of documents or entire documents with the
public. To do that, you’ll need to first make a document public. Select the document in your workspace and go to the
“Edit” menu. Select “Access level” and change it as shown in the figures below.

From there, you can go to the “Publish” menu and select “Publication date.” This allows you to set a specific time for the
information to go live or you can publish it immediately.

To embed a document, just go to the “Publish” menu after you’ve made your document public. Then you can see the
options for embedding:

Once you make your selection, you’ll be given options on how you want your document displayed. You’ll also be given
some code that you can pop into your site.

