Alison Young, USA TODAY
ayoung@usatoday.com
www.alisonyoungreports.com
ghostfactories.usatoday.com
Twitter: @alisonannyoung

Using Technology in your Investigation
Strategies for doing your own scientific testing

Research best practices
•

•

•

•

Start by reading: The National Library of Medicine’s PubMed database of scientific studies is a great starting point
to see what testing methods researchers have used to answer the questions you are seeking to answer:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
Carefully consider whether you should test: Is testing by your news organization necessary? Will it provide
enough new information that’s unavailable through other means to justify the time and expense? Can you afford
the costs of testing enough samples to get good information on whether there’s a problem?
Look for the right technology – and how to best use it: What types of technology or analytical methods are
available? What do federal regulators use? State regulators? Industry? Academic researchers? Examine the
advantages and disadvantages of each, including accuracy, ease of use and costs. How does each technology
record, store and export data? Is it in proprietary software? Can it be exported to Excel?
Study the best way of collecting samples and performing tests: How many samples are needed? How should they
be collected? (In soil: Do you take individual, discreet samples? Or do you mix several scoops from across a yard
into a composite sample? Do you test surface samples? Or sub-surface samples? Each method tells you
something different.) Do research to know how different sampling methods may be better or worse for answering
your reporting questions. Be aware that even some collection methods used by government agencies have the
potential to minimize danger.

Get experts on your team
•

•

•
•

Find a helpful prof: Look for academic researchers who are experts in the field who would be willing to consult on
your project, help you design protocols and advise on data analysis. PubMed searches can help find those who
have published articles in peer-reviewed journals. Also look for individuals who have served on government
scientific advisory committees, showing they are experts that regulators turn to for help.
Get training: If journalists will collect samples or do any of the testing, get appropriate training. Does it need to be
calibrated? Are there procedures that need to be followed to ensure it is operating properly? Does the company
selling/renting the equipment have a training program? Will they help you on the project? If you’re hiring
consultants, make sure they have appropriate training.
Consult with lawyers: Before making the final decision to test, seek advice on potential legal landmines. Do you
need any consent forms? How will you gain access to take samples? Are there any potential issues in how you
publish results?
Know the regulations: Is the testing equipment regulated? Are permits needed to ship samples across state lines?
Make sure to get all licenses or registrations. Be aware that bureaucratic delays can impact when you can test.
Be prepared for additional costs to comply with regulations. Look to register equipment in states with reciprocity

agreements to lessen your regulatory burden. Is any health/safety monitoring (such as radiation badges) required
of or recommended for staff using the technology?

Plan for everything
•

•

•

Think through logistics: How exactly will you travel with scientific equipment? Is it allowed as carryon luggage? Is
it safe to check it? Can you ship it? Is special shipping material needed? What kind of insurance do you need?
What extra costs will this add to the budget for your investigation? What about safety of staff working in the field –
are any precautions needed?
Have handouts in the field: If laypeople are involved in your testing, have written materials you can leave with
them to help answer questions after you’ve left. Are there tip sheets or brochures from reliable sources you can
also carry with you that will help them understand the problem and what they can do about it to protect
themselves? Do you need materials in other languages?
Be ready with tech support, backup: What’s likely to break on your testing equipment? How will you get spare
parts? Is there someone you can call on nights or weekends? If you’re doing your own testing, what if you get sick
and can’t complete the work? When training occurs, consider having a backup reporter trained just in case.

Make the results you publish easy to understand
•

•
•

Be transparent: Explain in easily understood language how you tested and what it means. But also do a “geek
box” that goes into much greater detail so that those who are very interested or skeptical can get answers. Don’t
overstate what your tests show. If there are important disclaimers, make them clear.
Explain the technology: Think about the best way to explain the technology you used. For Ghost Factories, in
addition to a long online “geek box,” we also did a video about how we tested soil with an XRF analyzer, some
samples receiving additional tests by a different, laboratory method at Tulane University: http://usat.ly/UsR5Fh
Make the data useful: How will people want to use the data? What answers will they be seeking from it and how
do you best deliver it to them? Is the data best presented in a chart? Should it be mapped? Is there a key that will
help users spot visually what’s good and what’s bad? Consider directly linking to the “geek box” from all results.

Tech resources used in Ghost Factories
•
•

XRF analyzer rental: Several scientific instrument companies sell and rent XRF analyzers like the ones we used
to test soil in Ghost Factories. Thermo Scientific: http://www.niton.com/en/rentals-and-leasing/rentals
Magic Wand scanner: Hand-held document/photo scanner (about the size of a curling iron) to use on document
reviews. You move it across the document – making it ideal in settings where cameras (including smart phone
scanner apps) aren’t allowed, where copying charges are outrageous, or where you aren’t allowed to take staples
out of documents. http://www.vupointsolutions.com/magic_wand_portable_scanner

