IRE Conference 2013: Investigating After a Disaster
Paul Monies, The Oklahoman
Will Van Sant, Newsday
Scott Keenan, CBS News
Brett Shipp, WFAA
Moderator: Sally Kestin, Sun Sentinel
Paul Monies:
---Have regular contact with weather forecasters and emergency management officials before storms hit.
Most newspapers don't have staff meteorologists like TV stations, but you can visit your local National
Weather Service office to meet forecasters and see how they prepare for severe weather.
---For staff covering a disaster, pack "go bags" and have them ready at the office or in cars. Suggested
contents include cell phone battery chargers/battery extenders; weather radios; rain gear; sturdy shoes or
boots; a complete change of clothes; batteries for audio recorders, cameras; flashlight; sunscreen and hat.
Consider a bike in the trunk to get around roads that are blocked.
---Have a coverage plan before disaster strikes. Update phone lists for all news staff. If possible, make an
internal or private Google map where reporters and editors live so you can deploy the closest people to
the scene after hours or on weekends.
---Get as much as you can in the minutes and hours after a natural disaster. Don't assume that because you
got into a neighborhood the first day you can get back in. Authorities closed access to whole
neighborhoods just hours after the May 20, 2013 tornado that hit Moore, Okla., to prevent looting. The
areas were reopened to credentialed media two days later.
Will Van Sant:
--Find out when the last time your subject, whether it’s a collapsed bridge or a public utility or the
building codes in your now-flooded flood zone, was given a once-over to determine its level of fitness
and readiness to withstand disaster. Read the boring consultant’s report and the regulatory file.
Information in those dry, dense records could suddenly be of great importance and interest to readers.
--There is big money to be made following a disaster. For political leaders, there are suddenly plums to
hand out. Are contracts for inspections, or cleanup or communications going to qualified or to connected
individuals and entities? Be aware that governments need not follow their typical contracting processes
post-disaster, you may have to pry back the curtain to get a read on who has the inside track on the
money.
--Demand for information following disasters is huge and media organizations devote much if not all
available news hole to relentless coverage. You can distinguish your work and help your audience by
elevating your level of presentation. Planning and coordination early in the reporting process can pay off
in nifty web and print presentations that set your work apart from the tempest of information being
produced.
Brett Shipp:
--When a man-made disaster strikes, quickly, get back to your roots. Woodward and Bernstein.
Watergate. “What did they know and when did they know it.” Take the West (Texas) fertilizer plant
explosion. Start with local officials who are tasked with inspections and finding violations. Did the

facility have a history? Next, what chemicals were involved? How were they tracked? Were they properly
disclosed? Who knew what about what was on site? Who was in charge of making sure first responders
and the public were informed?
--Disclosure! Wait, there’s a law that says each community is supposed to have a local committee that
discusses chemical threats to the community. When was the last time that committee met? Wait… no
such committee ever discussed the threat? Does such a committee even exist? Wait… how big a problem
is this? Is this a state-wide problem? Is it a national problem? Who is supposed to make sure these
committees meet?
--What do state officials know about federal laws not being followed? Wait, if first responders knew
there was a threat, wouldn’t that be reflected on radio transmissions leading up to the explosion? What
did those first responders know and when did they know it?
--One question leads to another. Keep tugging on that thread and one story will feed into another. And
don’t worry if no one else follows the same reporting path as you. Don’t be afraid to set the agenda.
Avoid pack journalism, which is easy to fall into in the days and weeks after a disaster. Pick a topic or
area of concern and follow it.
Scott Keenan:
--Don’t trust the “official numbers.” After a natural disaster, there is confusion and chaos on all levels
and that includes the medical examiner and law enforcement officials. Question their numbers.
--Make face-to-face contact with someone in charge and develop a relationship as early as possible. After
a disaster, there are multiple agencies involved and a clear chain-of-command is gone until everyone
figures out their turf. Establishing one “go-to” person will help you navigate the maze and understand
who is taking the lead and the agendas that follow.
--Law enforcement will want to corral the press to keep control. Understandable, but they often keep us
far away from the scene. It’s important to stress to officials that if they don’t give us something to show
the audience, we’ll sneak out on our own and find it. Work with us.
--For TV, remember that if you’re covering a tornado outbreak or hurricane, weather could affect your
transmission. If there’s lightening, the mast has to come down. Heavy rain and cloud cover can block
satellite transmission. Pre-tape your opens and closes. Don’t wait until the end of the day to feed in your
material. Feed as you go.
--Have a point person in the newsroom, who can track tornadoes/hurricanes in real time and guide your
people in the field.
--Every newsroom should have one satellite phone. Keep it charged and ready to go.
--Bring boots with thick soles!!

