Year in Investigative
Reporting

• FINDINGS: This rolling investigation found that influential developers
in D.C. saved hundreds of thousands in taxes this year, thanks to help
from District officials. In 2012, the city potentially lost $48 million in
tax revenue. The Post FOIA’d 10 years of audits and revealed that
some managers had been able to alter the assessed values without
being detected.

• FINDINGS: The yearlong investigation, found 57 previously
unreported lost weapons and uncovered additional evidence
on how “Fast and Furious” scandal armed Mexican drug
cartels
• Revealed that the program was deadlier than what had been
made public to date: caused dozens of deaths inside Mexico
• Timeline/social network graphic

• RESOURCES: Hundreds of classified Mexican documents were
obtained with great difficulty under the Mexican public access
law. A database of 60,000 entries was combined with US
government documents

• FINDINGS: Louisiana imprisons
more residents, per capita, then
any other place in the world.
Most prisons are private
enterprises run by local sheriffs
and rural economies depend on
people being locked-up. In the
South, LA spends the least on its
inmates: avg $38.50/day
• DATA: Bureau of Justice Statistics,
International Centre of Prison
Studies, Southern Legislative
Conference

• FINDINGS: 86 journalists -“likely the largest collaboration in
journalism history” – uncovered how money is stored,
transferred and stolen in offshore accounts. The project
originated in a cache of 2.5 million documents given to ICIJ
director Gerard Ryle that detailed the activities of more than
120,000 offshore companies, 130,000 individuals, 170
countries, and more.
• Reporting is still going-a multi-year project.
• SEARCH more than 100,000 secret companies, trusts and
funds created in offshore locales such as the British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cook Islands and Singapore.

• Donald Barlett and James Steele are revisiting America: What
Went Wrong, their landmark 1991 newspaper series, in a new
project with the Investigative Reporting Workshop. Over the
next year, the project team will examine how four decades of
public policy has shaped America's ongoing economic crisis
• FINDINGS: Showed how powerful legislators and those who
influence them stole some of the economic advantages
Americans always thought they had
• There’s a growing disparity between what individuals and
corporations pay in taxes. In the 1950s, the difference was 22
percent. Recent figures show the difference is 62 percent.

• DATA: Audit, internal documents and online chat forum . CBS
11 obtained internal Corrections Corporation of America
documentation, court records.
• FINDINGS: Prompted by a CBS 11 investigation that exposed
inmate deaths and lack of medical care by the private prison,
the Texas Observer showcased of the lives, and sometimes the
deaths, of women at Dawson State Jail.
• Protocols were not followed and some inmates were given
cheaper meds

• FINDINGS: A yearlong
investigation found that
Americans face higher risks
of food poisoning and other
dangers because the
industry increasingly relies
on a mechanical
tenderization process and
antibiotic overuse is leading
to resistant bacteria in
humans. Big beef paid for
advertising and promotions,
for example, getting lean
cuts certified by the
American Heart Association
as “heart-healthy” food.

• RESOURCES: reporters traveled to
seven states and analyzed USDA
data, lawsuits, scientific studies,
government audits and research
reports.
• http://www.kansascity.com/2012/12
/08/3951701/how-this-series-wasreported.html#storylink=cpy

• FINDINGS: Wal-Mart used
bribes to overcome laws
and public opposition to
build a store near the
ancient Aztec pyramids of
Teotihuacan in Mexico.
Wal-Mart officials, when
confronted about the
bribery, focused on
damage control rather
than redemption
• RESOURCES: Maps that
reveal hidden alterations
and documents from the
company

• Exposed flaws in the way a
special state police force
handles crimes against the
developmentally disabled.
• Abuse cases rose 43 percent
while patient population
decreased 12 percent.
• DATA: Inspection, salary
• RESULTS: Triggered new laws,
a criminal investigation and
staff retraining

• FINDINGS: Zoos’ efforts to preserve elephants have failed
with infant mortality almost triple the rate in the wild
• Zoo deaths
outstripped
births 2-to-1
• DATA: Custom
database of
ownership
data and
studbooks

• FINDINGS: Thousands of medical
professionals have billed
Medicare at progressively higher
rates over a decade’s time,
costing taxpayers at least $11
billion in inflated charges.
• A significant portion of the
added charges is likely due to
“upcoding” — charging for more
extensive and costly services
than actually delivered.
• Upcoding is facilitated by abuse
of Medicare billing codes that
reflect the range of care
delivered and the time it takes.
Many doctors have steadily
billed the higher-level — and
more lucrative — codes, while
spurning those that pay less.

• DATA: Medicare claims data obtained
from the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS).
• 5 percent sample of national
Medicare Part B data that contain
claims for medical procedures, such
as doctor office visits and emergency
room procedures

• FINDINGS: Nearly 800 cops from a dozen agencies drove

90 to 130 mph on Florida highways in one year. More
than half were officers outside their district.
• Since 2004, 21 people killed or maimed by speeding
officers.
• RESOURCES: SunPass Toll data,
• GPS device to measure distance
• Read how they did it in the Spring 2012 IRE Journal

Investigating the Fire
• FINDINGS: In a 44 minute special presentation, KMGH
exposed how a controlled burn went horribly wrong and
turned into a fatal forest fire. The station illustrated the
communication breakdowns between emergency personnel
and mistakes by state employees, including the burn area
being unstaffed
• RESULTS: spurred legislative change

• DATA: Fire Department dispatch data
• FINDINGS: Fire Department falls short of the standard that
rescue units be alerted within one minute on 90% of 911
calls
• In the more than 250,000 medical dispatches last year, the
department took 75% longer, on average, than the
national standard.

• FINDINGS: Nearly 32,000
K-8 grade students — or
roughly 1 in 8 — missed
four weeks or more of
class during the 2010-11
year.
• The paper found striking
racial disparities in
elementary attendance.
Youth with learning and
emotional disabilities
also missed far more
school.

• DATA: Internal studentlevel attendance data
from the Chicago Public
Schools

Unfair Game
• FINDINGS: A top ten player in the country on state basketball
championship team questionably transfers mid-season. WFAA
uncovered the mother’s false reasons. A coach on the same
team tried to illegally recruit another player and was fired
after story aired.
• Resources: HUD lease agreement, mom’s Twitter feed,
meeting minutes

• Results: governing athletic board was overhauled, firings

• FINDINGS: The state declined to investigate 40 percent of the
elderly abuse reports, and of that 40 percent, 53 of the victims
later died. When the elderly died, evidence of abuse or no,
the agency simply closed the cases without investigating at all.
In 20 separate stories, BND detailed mistreatment and the
government’s lack of enforcement.
• RESOURCES: A year’s worth of calls to a state hotline for
investigating cases of elder abuse

• FINDINGS:USA Today found dozens of men who the Justice
Department knew were innocent but kept in prison anyway.
Many of the inmates didn’t know. The court ruled one suspect
was “factually innocent” but not “legally innocent.”
• RESOURCES: Court records and tips
• Online graphics
• RESULTS: Many of these men were later released because of
the paper’s reporting

• FINDINGS: Sverige Radio uncovered one of the most secretive
projects in Sweden: the illegal financing and construction of an
advanced weapons factory in the Saudi Arabian desert in
violation of the country’s strict human rights criteria. The
country’s Defense Department set up a dummy corporation
and used military intelligence cash to hide the government’s
complicity in its secret partnership with the Saudi
government. These reporters stood their ground as the
defense minister repeatedly lied about the existence of such a
project, even when confronted with the official documents.
• RESULTS: Forced Defense Minister and his staff to resign and
construction of the weapons factory halted.

