Follow the incentives
Christina Jewett, The Center for Investigative
Reporting
@JewettCIR
cjewett@cironline.org

More widgets = more money
 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel: Cashing in on Kids
 http://bit.ly/XI8fH
 More babysitting, more money
 The program was designed to give low-wage working

parents assistance with child care, encouraging them to get
.. jobs, rather than stay on welfare. While the need in many
of the 34,000 cases is genuine, the system allows child-care
providers and parents to easily con the system..
 “The state has overpaid day care providers at least $13.7
million in recent years - including millions of dollars spent
on bogus child care that was never delivered, according to
the state's own records.”

more widgets = more money
 Bloomberg: Dental Abuse of U.S. Poor Dodges

Ejection from Medicaid
 http://bloom.bg/LnwZns
 More root canals, more money
 “some dental management firms charge Medicaid for
unnecessary procedures and get around laws that say
only licensed dentists can practice dentistry.”
 “A review of 244 root canal procedures performed at
the Manassas center found that 104, or more than 40
percent, were medically unnecessary, according to the
lawyers familiar with the matter.”

More widgets = more money
ambulance rides
 Houston Chronicle: Private ambulances take

Medicare, taxpayers for a ride
 http://bit.ly/oH0rYf
 “The ambulances are but specks among hundreds of
emergency medical vehicles across Harris County
making millions of dollars off the poor … whether they
need a costly EMS lift or not.”
 Many of the patients are (not debilitated)..and there is
no medical emergency. Their reason for traveling in an
ambulance…is a mystery even to some of them.

Medical necessity be darned
 Very similar, often overlaps with, more widgets = more

money
 This shows up in dental care, ambulance ride
articles
 Another example: Hospice care to people who are not
at death’s door
 Bloomberg: Aunt Midge Not Dying in Hospice
Reveals $14B Market
 http://bloom.bg/tpisdt

Medical necessity be darned
 More on hospices:
 Boom: “base of Medicare-covered patients that

doubled to 1.1 million from 2000 to 2009.”
 Compensation based on enrollment numbers, pay to
nursing- home doctors who double as hospice medical
directors, and gifts to the nursing facilities have helped
fuel the boom”
 “They wanted us to admit, admit, admit,” said Joyce
White, a former marketer for Vitas Healthcare. … “You
lived or died by your numbers.”

Widget/necessity
ER admissions
 CIR: Chain profits by admitting ER patients
 http://bit.ly/Lg1dLf
 Prime admits 63% of patients from ER into hospital; at

other large for-profit chain in CA, rate is 39%
 Patients and their families have described feeling
trapped by doctors and administrators working at
Prime (hospitals) They entered the emergency room
and were stuck in a “Twilight Zone,” as one family
member described it, unable to see their own doctor at
another facility or faced with treatment that seemed
unnecessary.

“gold mine”
 Former Prime employees have described an

orchestrated campaign of admitting Medicare and
Kaiser patients – moving them from the emergency
room to a hospital bed – in the interest of changing
the fortune of a money-losing hospital.
 The chain’s founder and board chairman, Dr. Prem
Reddy, once described the emergency room as a “gold
mine” of Medicare and Kaiser patients, according to
the former medical director of Desert Valley Hospital
in Victorville.

http://bit.ly/noSpwg

Sicker patients = more money
nursing homes
 Washington Post: Review heightens concerns over

Medicare billing at nursing homes
 http://wapo.st/aLPCDl
 More than a decade ago, Congress set out to squeeze the
fraud out of Medicare billing at nursing homes … It created
new "ultra-high" billing categories intended to be used for
only 5 percent of the patients needing highly specialized
care …
 Since then, the numbers in the ultra-high categories have
quadrupled, and the amount of waste and abuse could
reach billions of dollars a year, according to nursing home
experts and a Washington Post examination of the
program.

Sicker patients = more money
hospitals
 CIR: Decoding Prime
 http://bit.ly/qkoAlC

Kwashiorkor: African wasting
disease

How do I find these stories?
 Think about structures – fee for service? Managed

care? Resource-utilization groups? DRGs (disease
related groups)?
 A solid Medicare resource:
http://www.medpac.gov/payment_basics.cfm
 Start small. Smart coverage draws out smart tipsters
 Focus on something measurable. Some ideas/tips will
never lead to more than anecdotes
 Survey think tanks, academe for reports on the topic
and talk to experts, find out how they dug into the
topic

…how to do these stories
 Get the data and analyze it for outliers
 Brace yourself: it gets complicated

 Find a sherpa into the unique ecosystem
 Scour the landscape for people affected by the problem
 Get out of the office!

