Kevin Crowe, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
kcrowe@jrn.com, @kcrowebasspro
Will Evans, The Center for Investigative Reporting
wevans@cironline.org
Michael LaForgia, Tampa Bay Times
mlaforgia@tampabay.com
Mc Nelly Torres, Florida Center for Investigative Reporting
torres@fcir.org

Enterprise on the education beat

School Alarm: Public money flowing to a controversial private school
Will Evans
The Center for Investigative Reporting
wevans@cironline.org
@willCIR @CIRonline
In my community, a private religious school that forced its students to beg – and allegedly
abused them – also padded enrollment figures to reap more taxpayer money than it deserved.
The money flowed through the state Department of Education and the local school district, but
no one was paying attention.
● What’s happening in your community?
The story: http://californiawatch.org/school­alarm
What kind of school is this anyway?
● Interviews, of course
○ At St. Andrew, former students said they would be punished if they didn’t
panhandle for hours at night. They said the pastor’s son, a teacher and church
leader, would hit, kick and throw things at students.
● Check federal court records at Pacer.gov
○ At St. Andrew, the pastor/principal pleaded guilty to theft of government money for
taking his deceased father’s Social Security payments.
● Local court records
○ Pastor’s older son, who works at the school, convicted of felony welfare fraud. In a
custody case, he was accused of threatening to slap his stepdaughter if she didn’t
panhandle for the school.
● Is it accredited? Check Acswasc.org or similar accrediting orgs
○ St. Andrew claimed to be accredited by the Association of Christian Schools

●

●

International – but it wasn’t.
If it has an affiliated college, check that too.
○ St. Andrew advertised advanced degrees from its theological and academic
university. But it wasn’t authorized to operate by the CA Bureau of Private
Postsecondary Education.
Charity tax filings (Form 990s)? Sorry, churches are exempt.

Where does the money come from?
● Federal Title I funds for private schools: Provides additional instruction for struggling
students, based on the number of low­income students at the schools. In 2010­11, CA’s
districts spent $15.6 million on private school students.
○ At St. Andrew, the principal’s son – accused of abusing students – made $40/hr
for tutoring, though he had no credential or degree. He also got $100/hr for fixing
computers the kids say they weren’t even allowed to use.
● Title II funds for private schools: Provides professional development/training for teachers.
Based on total enrollment (no low­income students necessary.) Even the most elite prep
schools sometimes benefit from this funding.
○ At St. Andrew, the principal’s wife made $100/hour for teacher training
● Where to look: The local school district should keep records of how much money goes
to each private school in its jurisdiction. Oakland also had contracts with each private
school teacher approved by the school board. In CA, districts also report some of this to
the state in what’s called a Consolidated Application. The state was able to break out
data on how much Title I money each district spent on private schools. It didn’t track data
for Title II.
Who’s in control?
● The state sends federal money to the local school district.
● The district is supposed to maintain control of the funds, to benefit private schools
without simply handing it over. Private schools don’t get money, they get services. One
safeguard: those hired with the money need to be “independent” of the private school.
○ The principal’s son and wife hardly seemed independent. The state ended up
citing the district for violating this rule in St. Andrew’s case.
● The state performs occasional audits of the local school district’s use of federal funds. In
CA, it’s called “Federal Program Monitoring Notification of Findings.”
○ It found the Oakland district violated several regulations, mostly because it was
ceding control of the program to private schools.
Are the numbers padded?
● All private schools file a private school affidavit annually to the CA Dept. of Education
● It has basic information like enrollment by grade, and # of graduates
http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/si/ps/index.asp
● It’s signed under penalty of perjury ­­ but no one checks to make sure it’s accurate (and
no one gets in trouble when it’s not)

○

●

St. Andrew’s reported 195 students (15 in each grade) every year since 2003
except for one year when they reported 265
fact­check the enrollment:
○ fire department permit inspection (Inspector observed 15­20 and set legal limit of
58.)
○ ask current/former students/parents (No more than 30, they said.)
○ stake­out the school (I observed 15 one day, 6 the next.)
○ court records (In a bankruptcy filing in 2004, school rep stated they had no more
than 20 students)

Lesson learned: Call elected representatives. Nothing happened when I confronted school
district officials, even after the story published. But when I called individual board members ­­
who have to get elected ­­ they ordered an investigation and cut off the funding.

Mc Nelly Torres, Florida Center for Investigative Reporting
torres@fcir.org

@WatchdogDiva
Statewide Projects and collaborations: While producing these type of projects could be
challenging and complex, it’s not impossible. Whether is how school districts spend Title I
funding, deal with their budgets which as you know have suffered bloody cuts around the
country, teacher evaluations and student performance, there’s plenty to go around.
Data: Look at your state department of education and what data they have available. That would
help you develop story ideas. Also, search for any research that has been done on the topic you
want to write about but be aware which group is behind the research.
Online: Always think about how you can put that data to good use. Education has tons of data
and data visualizations and maps can tell great stories when you use them wisely. It also
provides a great public service by providing something to the audience that they didn’t know
about.
Sources: I spent a great deal of time talking to my sources, experts and researchers to
understand the issues I’m trying to write about. Let’s face it, education is a complex beat and no
issue is black and white.
Characters: Florida is a big state and one can get overwhelmed when writing about issues from
the statewide perspective so selecting several school districts to illustrate your points are the
best approach. Let the data reveal the findings. Look for patterns. Use the most revealing pieces
of data in the story and leave the rest for interactive data visualizations. Data can tell stories too.
Stories:
http://fcir.org/2012/12/03/13th­grade­how­florida­schools­are­failing­to­prepare­graduates­for­coll

ege/
http://fcir.org/2012/02/12/poverty­homelessness­rising­sharply­among­florida­students/
http://fcir.org/2011/09/21/polk­county­education­officials­delayed­return­of­federal­funds/
http://fcir.org/2011/09/21/school­of­hard­financial­knocks/

Tracking attendance in public schools
Kevin Crowe, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel: kcrowe@jrn.com
Why does it matter?
­ In most states, a significant amount of public school funding is tied to average daily
attendance (ADA).
­ If kids aren’t making it to school, they’re not getting an education, and they’re schools
will end up with even less funding. This is a bigger problem in urban school districts,
most of which are already facing lean budgets.
Data?
­ Tons of data are available for districts, but attendance can be a bit harder to track
depending on your state’s department of education.
­ We requested ADA information directly from all of the school districts in San Diego
County and got a pretty good response.
­ Many school also keep detailed lists of chronically absent students. Request those, too.
Some kids end up missing half of the year.

Investigating voucher schools:
­ Wisconsin has had a taxpayer­funded vouchers for private schools for more than two
decades.
­ While they receive taxpayer money, the schools do not have to hire certified teachers
and are not subject to the same testing or curriculum requirements as public schools.
­ When we tracked the enrollment figures and how many voucher students schools
reported, we found that many schools had 90 percent or more of their students on
government vouchers.
Where to look:
­ Most voucher schools are nonprofits and have to file 990s with the IRS. Check these
filings for salaries and spending habits. We found a director of a voucher school had

started a transportation company and gave himself a $200,000 annual contract.
­ We also found that some small schools operated as family businesses, with parents,
brothers, sisters and cousins filling all of the positions. Most were not certified teachers.
­ If the schools are receiving state money, they probably have to submit some budget
information to the state. Request those and compare them to what they put on their
form 990s for the IRS. You may find some serious inconsistencies.
­ Be sure to talk with students’ parents and current and former employees. They proved
to be invaluable resources.
Investigating subsidized tutoring
View the slideshow online:
http://slid.es/mlaforgia/investigating­subsidized­tutoring

