IRE Conference 2013
Policing the Police: Investigating Law Enforcement
Sally Kestin, Sun Sentinel
Lawrence Mower III, Palm Beach Post
Nate Carlisle, Salt Lake Tribune
Moderator: Shawn McIntosh, Atlanta Journal-Constitution

Sally Kestin
•

Request department policies on police behavior. This will help you identify
violations that may not be obvious. If there are no policies, that’s a story, too.

•

Request internal affairs complaints and investigations. These are public in many
jurisdictions, and most agencies keep logs that can help you identify cases of
interest.

•

Be suspicious when cops investigate themselves. Contact witnesses and request
transcripts or tapes of their interviews. Look for inaccuracies or omissions in the
official police version of events.

•

Look for other sources of the information you’re seeking if the police agency is
stonewalling or refusing your records request. State and federal agencies often
keep data and statistics on crime, forfeitures, disciplinary actions, etc.

•

Go outside the department for perspective on whatever you’re investigating.
Police oversight boards, academy instructors and former/retired cops can be
good sources.

•

Request video/audio of interviews and questionable incidents. Many departments
record their activities, and patrol cars often have cameras that capture traffic
stops and roadside arrests.

•

If you will be naming individual officers, contact them directly rather than through
the police department. If they ignore telephone calls and email, send certified
letters to their homes that clearly state your findings and request an interview.

Lawrence Mower
Ask for a policy handbook and department roster:
These are the two things I go back to time and time again. Get a roster of all department
employees, their ranks, hire dates, employee/badge numbers, salaries, etc. And get the
department’s policy handbook, or equivalent. Keep in mind that individual units and
sections, such as narcotics and SWAT, might have their own policy handbooks, in
addition to the department-wide policies.
Understand the investigation process:
For many agencies, officer-involved shooting investigations follow two tracks: the
criminal side, where investigators - typically homicide detectives - look for whether the
officer’s actions were legal; and the internal side, where internal affairs investigators
probe whether the officer(s) violated department policy. Build your knowledge of this
process and look for gaps in oversight. Do the internal affairs investigations end with a
decision by a shooting review board? Those boards are often rubber stamps. When
does the state/district attorney get involved? In Vegas, we found prosecutors let police
decide whether their own officers should be charged - not surprisingly, police never
recommended charges.
Understanding investigations will also help you unlock public records. For example,
when we were looking for discipline data on Vegas cops in shootings, we couldn’t get it
through internal affairs files, which aren’t public there. But because we understood the
process, we discovered we could get the information through records of the
department’s Use of Force Review Board instead.
Know what police track - and what they don’t:
Nobody tracks police shootings on a national level, and I know of no states that do. In
Vegas, when we asked departments for their records on officer-involved shootings, they
never gave us records for all incidents on the first try. They weren’t being nefarious they simply weren’t keeping track. When we asked agencies across the country for raw
numbers of shootings by year - a very simple statistic for such important events - many
couldn’t provide them.
Know what data you’re asking for:
Police are historically accomplished at playing around with statistics, so be careful. For
officer-involved shootings, be specific: Ask for ALL shootings by officers outside of
training scenarios, including accidental discharges and shootings where nobody is
injured. DON’T include animal shootings unless you really want to - the two occur under
very different circumstances and are investigated differently. “Solved” or “cleared”

homicides sound like they led to an arrest - in reality, some departments can “clear”
them if they believe the suspect is dead.
Look beyond the police mantras:
“Officers have to make split-second decisions.”
“If we didn’t chase suspects, everyone would run away.”
“The suspect would be alive if he did what the officer told him to do.”
These are popular police PIO sayings, but they either deflect the real issues or ignore
reality. An officer might have to make a split second-decision to shoot someone, but did
they place themselves in a situation that forced them to make that split-second
decision? There’s a reason why police departments have curbed their foot and car
chases: both are dangerous to cops and civilians. And guess what? The same people
who run were the ones who ran before. The best departments analyze their critical
incidents well before their officer pulls a trigger. Reporters should, too.
Who’s doing it right?:
Unless you’re Lebron, chances are whatever you or your organization is doing,
someone else is doing it better. The same goes for police. The best departments look
for critical outside eyes for improvements, and there are several organizations that are
happy to oblige. Their reports provide invaluable insights on how agencies are screwing
up, and how they should be improving. The best departments keep a close eye on what
these groups publish:
- Police Assessment Resource Center (PARC) - Run by Merrick Bobb, the new monitor
of the Seattle PD and former LASO monitor, the non-profit has done reviews of cities
big and small, and the studies are on PARC’s website.
- Department of Justice COPS office - Google their “Collaborative Reform Process” of
Las Vegas police. It’s probably the most thorough culmination of deadly force “best
practices” and analyses out right now.
- Department of Justice Special Litigation Section - Google their “cases and matters,”
and go to the law enforcement cases. Read up.
- Police Executive Research Forum (PERF) - Their “free doc library” touches on a
variety of helpful law enforcement subjects.
- International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) - This largely pro-police
organization has several valuable publications and model policies on almost every
aspect of policing. They used to be happy to provide their model policies to the media
for free, but they’ve been unresponsive of late.

Law enforcement accreditations are worthless:
Police love to tout that they’ve been accredited by “XYZ” organization, but those
endorsements aren’t worth more than the paper they’re printed on. Their accreditations
aren’t critical and don’t ensure agencies are complying with “best practices” in the most
critical areas, such as deadly force. Unless you want to point out how the accreditations
are flawed, don’t bother citing them in your story. Likewise, be cautious of some groups
that “study” police actions. Many are biased.
Lawyers and lawsuits:
This might seem basic, but it can’t be overstated: lawyers and lawsuits are great
sources of information. If you’re having trouble simply identifying police shootings, for
example, look for lawsuits against the department. You can find incidents, officers,
subjects, and depositions of interesting people - such as internal affairs investigators that your department probably won’t give you access to.
Find the handful of lawyers in your area who routinely sue police. Not only do they often
have an intricate knowledge of the department, but they’ll have boxes of department
policies, records, training manuals, etc., that they’re often willing to share.
Also, check public records of your local government, which are often more helpful than
the police department. They might have a list of all lawsuit settlements, which would
identify the subject and cost to taxpayers.
Things to ask for if you’re investigating officer-involved shootings:
- Criminal case file or summary, typically done by a homicide or violent crimes detective.
These are often sent to the state/district attorney for review. Afterward, they’re
considered “closed” cases, and therefore should be public.
- Internal affairs case file or summary.
- State/district attorney opinion letters.
- Department’s annual reports or studies on use of force.
- Records of the department’s use of force (or shooting) review board, if applicable.
- The raw numbers of shootings, by year (be careful - they might include department incustody deaths).
- Lawsuit settlements.
- Policies on all uses of force, restraint procedures, etc. (just ask for all of their policies).
- Training requirements: How often do police have to undergo reality-based training?
Firearms qualifications? Taser training? Do supervisors attend and participate with the
officers, too?
- Arrest reports for the suspects/subjects of officer-involved shootings.

Nate Carlisle
Sourcing and sources
When in 2012 The Salt Lake Tribune began investigating misconduct and inequalities in
the Utah Highway Patrol, knowing who worked at UHP was valuable information, but
knowing who used to work there — the more recently the better — was just as valuable.
The police force should publish a directory of employees or provide a list of employees,
positions and salaries. Keep and maintain the directories or lists for as many years as
you can to see who is coming, going and advancing through the organization.
There may also be a police union, benevolent society or a Fraternal Order of Police
chapter that publishes a newsletter, a website or a Form 990. Any of these documents
may announce retirements, terminations or other valuable information. The Salt Lake
Tribune found some of the best sources for the UHP investigation because their recent
retirements were announced in a trooper’s association newsletter.
Some misconduct, or allegations of such, lead to reprimands, firings and employment
disputes. Some of these disputes lead to lawsuits, but more result in administrative
appeals. Learn the employee appeal process for your police force. There is probably a
city, county or state office or administrative court with records of employment disputes.
In Utah, the Career Service Review Board had records related to disciplined and
terminated state troopers. One trooper's file included a list of internal affairs cases — a
list UHP previously said it didn't have.
Both prosecutors and defense attorneys get to know police officers, and some of the
problems with them. Cultivate both groups as sources. Prosecutors will sometimes send
letters to police chiefs or sheriffs when one of their officers is found to have problems
and can no longer be a witness. The Utah Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
maintains files on police misconduct and notes of incidents where police officers were
found to have lied in reports or on the witness stand.
Records requests to make:
-- Database or spreadsheet of internal affairs cases. If your state records laws won't
permit the officers' names to be included, ask them to redact the names or other
identifying information.
-- Notices of claim or intent to sue. In Utah, for example, you typically cannot sue a
government agency without first sending a letter stating you have a claim against it. This
gives the parties a chance to settle the claim out of court. That brings us to…
-- Claims or lawsuit settlements.

-- Discipline or personnel records. The records available vary state to state. In Utah, any
misconduct allegation that was sustained is a public record. Compare the results of this
request to settlement records. UHP was paying to settle claims of civil rights violations
but there was no record of discipline against the troopers.

