Why does college cost so much and where does the money go?
Stories and resources
Investigative Reporters & Editors -- San Antonio 2013
Holly Hacker, The Dallas Morning News, hhacker@dallasnews.com
Janet Lorin, Bloomberg News, jlorin@bloomberg.net
Scott Thurm, The Wall Street Journal, scott.thurm@wsj.com

Administrative bloat
Hiring Spree Fattens College Bureaucracy - and Tuition – Wall Street Journal
Some university administrators see big raises as TX schools lose funding, students pay more The Dallas Morning News
State’s community colleges spend millions on duplicative administrators – California
Watch/Center for Investigative Reporting

Financial aid
Amid limited budgets, colleges grapple with merit-based aid – The Boston Globe
Colleges Confuse Students With Letters Offering Aid That’s Debt – Bloomberg News
Cornell Joins MIT in Scaling Back Aid Even as Endowments Rise – Bloomberg News

Loan debt - parents
No income? No problem! How the government is saddling parents with college loans they can’t
afford – ProPublica and The Chronicle of Higher Education
Parents Snared in $100 Billion College Debt Trap Risk Retirement – Bloomberg News
New Peril for Parents: Their Kids' Student Loans -- The Wall Street Journal

Loan debt - students
Indentured Students Rise as Loans Corrode College Ticket - Bloomberg News
Medical School at $278,000 Means Even Bernanke Son Has Debt – Bloomberg News
More college students defaulting on federal loans in Texas, U.S. - The Dallas Morning News
Students Pay SLM 9.25% or JPMorgan 10.25% From Exploitive Loans – Bloomberg News
Yale Suing Former Students Shows Crisis in Loans to Poor - Bloomberg News
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, www.newyorkfed.org, has downloadable data on
student loans.

Project on Student Debt, www.projectstudentdebt.org Find out what percentage of students
graduate with debt and their average debt load. State- and college-level data.

Online classes & degrees
Colleges Adapt Online Courses to Ease Burden – The New York Times
Several Texas colleges are using private recruiters for online classes – The Dallas Morning
News
The Fine Print – Inside Higher Ed

Salaries for new college graduates
Trapped by $50,000 Degree in Low-Paying Job Is Increasing Lament – Bloomberg News
College Measures, collegemeasures.org, is starting to track first-year earnings of graduates by
college and field of study. The site has data for five states (Arkansas, Colorado, Tennessee,
Texas and Virginia) with more to come (including Florida and Nevada). First-year salaries tell
you only so much, of course, but it’s a good start.

State funding for higher education
Per-student spending on public higher ed drops to 25-year low, The Hechinger Report
Who can still afford state U?-- Wall Street Journal
Shift to Merit Scholarships Stirs Debate – Wall Street Journal
SHEEO (State Higher Education Executive Officers Assn.) www.sheeo.org How much money
do public universities get from their state? How much comes from families via tuition and fees?
How has the balance shifted over time? This site tracks state-level data over time.

U.S. Department of Education data
College Navigator, nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/
Click on “Cohort Default Rates'' for student loan defaults, “Financial Aid” for data on average
loans taken and Pell grant recipients, and “Net price” to see how much students are paying.
Federal Student Aid data at ifap.ed.gov Includes Perkins loan data and the federal student aid
handbook.
Title IV student loan reports at studentaid.ed.gov/about/data-center/student/title-iv

