Ziva Branstetter
Enterprise Editor
Tulsa World
Ziva.branstetter@tulsaworld.com

 Began with a tip about remaining funds 17

years after the Oklahoma City bombing.
 History: 168 killed 850 were injured
 $40 million consolidated into one fund
 $14.7 million remained about a year later.
 Fund controlled by Oklahoma City
Community Foundation
 Checked 990s to find what remained: $10
million

 Money donated to pay for medical needs, living

expenses and college for those who lost one or
both parents.
 Executive director said direct payments would
jeopardize non-profit status
 Foundation said it had to provide services rather
than money.
 Operated on “last option/last resort basis for
survivors.
 Central characters in the story: Deloris Watson,
Timothy Hearn, Falesha Joyner, Gloria Chipman

 Many survivors said they were never

contacted about receiving help after first few
years.
 Several surviving families lost their homes
due to the loss of income from a spouse who
died.
 Foundation said it had done a good job of
managing the money, making it last for
future needs.

 Public statements made by foundation exec

director, Nancy Anthony:

◦ “Culture of victimhood, made up of people whose
identity as Victim of the Oklahoma City Bombing
gave them importance and visibility they'd never
had before."
◦ "The perception of people, unfortunately, is that
you need to give people money and that money will
make them feel better. Well, it probably does make
them feel better. But heroin makes them feel better
for a short time, too."

 Foundation spent $4.4 million on other

things besides helping survivors, including
$400,000 to other disaster relief funds in
Joplin and Alabama.
 Survivors called on governor to call in Ken
Feinberg and distribute funds.
 Foundation hired an auditing firm but kept
scope of audit secret.
 Never answered the central question: How
many requests for help were denied. They
didn’t keep the records.



When disaster strikes, keep a record of promises
made:

◦ Statements by policy makers and groups raising money
◦ Save letters, emails etc. asking for donations.
◦ I set up a Google alert for tornado and donations

Talk to regulators about how those charities are
being operated. Are they separate funds? Placed
under Red Cross or United Way?
 If a church is raising funds, will it issue a public
report about how money is spent? (Religious orgs
don’t have to file.)
 Ask for documents early from groups raising or
collecting money: policies on distribution, are they a
last resort fund? Who decides who gets the money
and how much each gets?


 Get the policies:

◦

 What happens to the interest?

 OKC Foundation “reallocated” $4.5 million in interest in2005,
saying the remaining $5.5 million “should be more than
sufficient.”
 Foundation later funded a new building with no building
campaign.

 Ask for data that includes interest earned.

Consult experts about how funds are invested
and how the policies are set up.
 Ask for records from any public bodies working
with the non-profits: emails, follow-up reports
etc.

 How widely is the group publicizing that funds

are available? What about survivors who move
out of state?
 To deal with confidentiality issues, ask those
willing to do so to sign a waiver allowing you
access to their information.
 Before you focus on a survivor, do your
homework. What documentation do they have?
 Survivors may have a network that you can use to
pose questions to the group.


 University funding:

Life insurance funding schemes
 Pay for top officials at private universities can
include coaches, others
 Most efficiently operate charities in your
community.
 Which non-profits are growing fastest or
stagnating?
 Focus on one sector: the arts, youth sports
leagues etc.


