Overview of the Mexican Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) laws
By Alejandra Xanic von Bertrab
Freelance journalist in Mexico City
xanic@hotmail.com
For IRE Conference session: Cracking Corporate Corruption at Wal-Mart
June 21, 2013
Access to information is considered a constitutional right in Mexico. The first law, that binds the federal government,
was instituted in 2002; now, all states and municipalities have transparency regulations. These are mandatory also
for the legislative and judicial branches.
Each state and the federal government must have a Transparency Institute. This entity is in charge of the electronic
FOIA-request system. In addition, it resolves disputes between a citizen and a government office over an information
request.
You may post information requests to state, municipal and federal agencies through these institutes’ websites or
through each agency’s website or in person at the agency’s transparency office. Online, you need only to create an
account. Some key institutes:



Federal government: https://www.infomex.org.mx/gobiernofederal/home.action
For the Distrito Federal for Mexico City, which is like the District of Columbia for Washington:
http://www.infomexdf.org.mx/InfomexDF/default.aspx

The judicial and legislative branches have their own transparency sites.




Chamber of Deputees: http://transparencia.diputados.gob.mx/index.php?nodo=1
Senate: http://transparencia.senado.gob.mx
Supreme Court of Justice: www2.scjn.gob.mx/ssai

Agencies, in poor states, may require a request in paper, since they lack the necessary infrastructure to go online.
Any person can file a FOIA request. In the past, a few states had provisions that allowed only Mexicans or only
residents to file a request, but I believe this has changed. Also, you may have someone else make the request and
pick up the information on your behalf. The online FOIA request forms give you that alternative.

What is available
Transparency laws open access to all “information” that is in the hands of the State (produced, administered or
guarded by the State). This is a pretty large sphere of materials and includes handwritten documents, printed copies,
electronic documents, audio, photos and video. But keep in mind that the 2002 federal transparency law and the
state laws that followed brought new rules for archive administration, and it is taking a while to put in order decades
of mess and to take the bureaucracy in this new direction. For example, you’ll find not all governments consider a
public official’s appointment book or emails as information. Apparently, some governments don’t have clear
procedures or the equipment necessary to preserve emails.





You may ask for information in any of these modes: plain copies, certified copies, electronic copies sent
online or copied to a CD or electronic device. Some states offer shipment of paper documents within
Mexico, but that may be very slow.
Databases are available in electronic form.
The price of copies varies, but it is usually in the range of 4 to 10 cents (U.S.) per page; $1 (U.S.) per page
is the most expensive I have run into. A copy on a CD can go from $1-2 (U.S.). There are no discounts for
reporters.
There is one other helpful choice, particularly when you fear officers may decide to cross out key
information. You can ask to review the documents personally (“Consulta directa”) in their offices.

Federal agencies have 20 workdays to respond and may extend this deadline once, for 20 more days. The time
periods may differ from state to state. There is no express service for reporters. You can check the status of petitions
online.

Not all agencies are equal
In my experience, access to information is easier in the executive branch than it is in the court system or legislative
branch.
While the Federal Congress has made available a large collection of documents, you will hardly ever find records of
the discussions held within the legislative commissions, where the policies are really negotiated and shaped. Among
the documents that are available: transcripts of public sessions, information on how legislators vote, online versions
of legal initiatives, budget and spending information.
The justice system also has a set of public records online. But access to investigations and to actual trial documents
is limited and varies from state to state, and court to court. In my experience – and I’m not a justice system reporter
-- journalists rely heavily on leaks.
For many years, the Attorney General’s Office and the states’ attorneys contended that their investigations were not
subject to release. But in February 2013, a resolution by the Supreme Court invalidated their arguments.
In Mexico, most trials occur in writing, and access to case files has also been limited. But some states are now
promoting oral (and public) trials, which is making access to information possible. That’s the case in the northern
state of Nuevo León.
Other interesting trends:


There is no such thing as a docket, but more courts around the country are uploading sentences or posting
information about the procedural stage of cases. According to experts, some courts are opening access to
actual documents, free or with charge.



The Supreme Court of Justice has an online search engine of solved and ongoing cases:
www2.scjn.gob.mx/red2/expedientes/. Its plenary sessions are transmitted live on cable TV and online at
http://www.sitios.scjn.gob.mx/canaljudicial/



Also, some companies are selling access to judicial records, such as: mx.datajuridica.com (I do not know
how reliable they are.)

The route of an information request
Each agency has a transparency officer in charge of receiving information requests, which arrive either at their office
(called “Unidad de Enlace”), through the agency’s website or its Transparency Institute’s website.
This person sends other officers (transparency liaisons) to search and come back with documents in a certain time.
The documents then go to an internal transparency committee, which determines if the documents are public,
reserved or confidential.




Information can be reserved, or withheld, according to the government, if its release undermines national
security, affects the country’s finances, puts someone at risk, or compromises law enforcement.
Confidential information, which is also withheld, includes citizens’ personal information, such as address,
phone number, political records, religious or medical information.
The committee can also grant partial access by crossing out confidential info in the documents.

Note:


It’s worth talking to the transparency officer before you make a request and during the search. Ask if the
agency can send scanned documents and, if so, how many scanned pages does its system support per
request. This information will help you anticipate whether it’s best to ask for paper copies, rather than
scanned documents. You may also be able to break up your requests so that the agency can send it in
parts.



http://www.infomex.org.mx gives you the option to receive alerts by email about your request. Some
agencies may have questions about your request, and email makes it easier to respond in the required time
frame.

If you are unsatisfied with the agency’s response, there is a deadline for you to file an appeal (“ Recurso de
Revisión”) at its Transparency Institute. A commissioner will study the arguments of both parties, present a

Page 2 of 4

resolution in a plenary session and then put it to a vote by five commissioners at the Federal level. This process may
take months.
If you aren’t happy with the institute’s ruling, you may appeal in court. Legal counsel is recommended.

How to ask
Search other people’s FOIAs: Some transparency websites have a search engine that allows you to look at what
other citizens have asked for and what they obtained. These are not very friendly engines, and you’ll need to put
long hours into this, but it can be worth the time, considering a response to a request will take at least 20 days.
The federal government’s www.infomex.org.mx has two search engines:
Option 1: Click the icon “ZOOM” on the main webpage, and you’ll be able to search with keyword. Names of
other petitioners are private, but you can search with names of agencies, officers, subjects, etc.
Option 2 takes more work: The main page of Infomex has another link that reads “Consulta pública de
solicitudes,” which gives you searches within specific time frames and agencies, but no keyword search.
You also can sometimes get good results if you include the terms “Sisi” or “Infomex” in a Google search.
The government should be posting all the information it hands out, but there can be a backlog. If that is the case,
you may want to call the transparency officer and learn how you can access the documents given for another
citizen’s similar request; you need to give the correct FOIA-request number as a reference. The officer may advise
you to file a formal information request, but the response can be faster than normal.
Be careful what you ask: The Mexican transparency laws allow officers to give you only existing information.
They cannot “generate” information, perform analyses or respond to questions.














Also, they tend to attend strictly to what you ask for – otherwise they may be at fault. It is therefore
important to reach out to them while phrasing your request and also during their search.
Each agency has a transparency officer that relies on the work of liaisons in the agency's departments.
Contact the liaisons directly. You may learn more about how documents are named, organized and kept.
Federal and state laws regulate the number of years a document must be kept on hand in an agency and
where it goes after that. This information can also help you phrase a request.
Often, transparency officers and their liaisons aren’t well known within agencies. You may reach the top
transparency person’s contact information by going to the “transparencia focalizada” or “transparencia” link
on the agency’s Web page; click on “Unidad de Enlace."
Transparency officers usually look for paper documents. Put in writing that you want information in all
formats available, so they extend their search to electronic, audio, photo and video records.
Since officers may respond only to your request, don’t ask for specific documents (say, a “Memo”) unless
you are certain that’s the name that sort of document has.
The online request forms allow a limited number of words, but the sites offer the option to attach a Word
document with your complete information request.
Make one request per FOIA. With multi-faceted requests, the transparency officers will withhold what
they’ve found until they have everything you’ve asked for.
I generally make two types of requests simultaneously: one asking in a more general manner, and another
asking for specific documentation.
Be willing to help in the search. Call the officers; give them more information. Or, ask to hunt for the
information yourself. They may then help you find it.
The federal government’s Transparency Institute (IFA) put together this guide:
http://inicio.ifai.org.mx/_catalogs/masterpage/AIP-Como-realizo-una-solicitud-de-informacion.aspx?a=m2
Here is a sample FOIA request (PDF): http://inicio.ifai.org.mx/Formatos_AIP/solinf.pdf

Access to other useful records


Property, mortgage and business-registration records. State and sometimes municipal governments
hold this information. Few have an online search engine or an online tool to submit a request. Typically, you
must stand in line, submit your petition, pay a fee and pick the records up. The free website,
OpenCorporates.com, says it has information on more than 800,000 Mexican companies.



Birth, marriage, divorce records, IDs and licenses are not considered public information in Mexico.
Some private investigators offer access to such records, but these may come from illegally obtained
databases.

Page 3 of 4

There is a legal way around this obstacle, but it is a long route. People and companies must submit basic
information each time they start a proceeding in government. Say a person has asked for a construction
permit from a municipality. You would be able to review the person’s basic documents if you ask to see*
the permit’s supporting file.
(*Transparency officers will likely cross out personal data if you ask for copies of the file, or an electronic
version of the documents, but usually will leave them unredacted if you ask to make an in-person review of
the material, or “consulta directa” in Spanish).


All public officials must present Assets Declarations on these occasions: an initial declaration when they
enter government or move to a different agency (“Inicial”), an annual declaration every May (“Modificación
Patrimonial”), and a “Final” declaration when they leave.

Officers must disclose: total income, spending, real estate purchases, savings and investments, and other
sources of income. They normally write a brief description of their purchases: cars, furniture and real estate.
These declarations are considered confidential unless the official decides otherwise. An official can also choose
to withhold just some of the information. You can look up a Federal employee’s government-employment record
and his Assets Declarations at: http://www.servidorespublicos.gob.mx [This link may lead to a page with the
message – “Sesión expirada” – and the sentence: “Sesión expirada, tiene determinado tiempo para la búsqueda
de información, vuelva a entrar a la aplicación aquí” On the page, click aquí. You will arrive at the Search page.
Then click “Búsqueda” to search.]
Click each link to an Asset Declaration, and you’ll learn if it is a public record or if the official decided to keep his
declaration confidential.


There is a database of federal government employees sanctioned from their positions:
http://rsps.gob.mx/Sancionados/main.jsp



The Federal government operates an online database of all contracts and purchases, and lists of current
providers and companies fined or banned from working with government:
http://www.compranet.gob.mx



If you wish to corroborate the academic background of any person (for example: if you wish to check
whether someone has a legal or medical degree and is authorized to practice):
http://www.cedulaprofesional.sep.gob.mx/cedula/indexAvanzada.action

Page 4 of 4

