Surveillance News Explained
Julia Angwin

Patriot Act 215: Known Knowns
 Who: Verizon, AT&T, and SprintNextel.
 What: Records of every single domestic and
international telephone call, including the
“comprehensive communications routing information,”
the serial number of the phone, the number dialed and
the duration of the call, according to FISA court order
obtained by Guardian.
 Where: Turned over to the National Security Agency
daily

 When: Ongoing for the past seven years, according
to Senator Dianne Feinstein (D-CA)

Patriot Act 215: Known Knowns
 Why: To “make connections related to terrorist
activities over time,” according to the Director of
National Intelligence.
 How: Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
authorizes record collections with a court order
every three months. Analysts are required to
have “reasonable suspicion, based on specific
facts, that the particular basis for the query is
associated with a foreign terrorist organization”
before querying the database of call records,
according to the DNI.

Patriot Act: Known Unknowns
 Is it legal? Senators including Ron Wyden and
Mark Udall have accused the government of
secretly reinterpreting the law.
 The law says: Section 215 of the Patriot Act
allows the FBI to order any person or entity to
turn over “any tangible things” for “for an
investigation to protect against international
terrorism or clandestine intelligence
activities.”

Patriot Act: Known Unknowns
 Does it prevent terrorism? National Security
Agency Director Keith Alexander told
Congress that telephone data contributed to
halting dozens of terrorist threats.
 Have intelligence officials lied about the
existence of the program? Maybe. Sen. Wyden
has asked Director of National Intelligence
James Clapper to explain his previous denials
to Congress.
 Last year, National Security Agency Director
Keith Alexander told Congress “we don’t have
technical insights in the United States.

Unknown Unknowns
 What are the long
term effects on a
democratic society
of “Hoovering” up
all the data about
citizens?
 Does the program
violate the
Constitution’s
prohibition on
unreasonable
search and seizure?

Prism Surveillance: Known Knowns
 Who: Microsoft, Google, Yahoo, Facebook,
YouTube, Skype, AOL, Apple, PalTalk , according to
leaked slides.
 What: Content of Internet communications
including e-mail, chats, instant messages,
according to the slides.
 Where: The government can only use this
capability to target persons “reasonably believed
to be outside the United States” even though the
electronic communications may travel through
United States computer services.

Prism Surveillance: Known Knowns
 When: Since 2007, tech companies have worked
to build systems that let the government collect
this data, according to the slides.
 Why: The government says it needs this capability
to investigate terrorism, hostile cyber activities
and nuclear proliferation.
 How: The government must obtain a search
warrant from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Court.

Prism Surveillance: Known
Unknowns
 Is this blanket surveillance? It’s not clear.
Before the 2008 law was passed, the
government had to identify the target of
surveillance. The 2008 law allowed the
government to issue “programmatic
warrants” – essentially broad warrants to
cover all communications from Yemen, for
instance. It’s not known how broad these
warrrants have become.

Prism Surveillance: Known
Unknowns
 How is the data technically handed over? We
don’t yet know all the technical details.
Companies have said they don’t provide
“direct access” but that doesn’t preclude
other ways of sharing bulk data.
 What happens to innocent people’s data? The
law requires the government to minimize the
use of data about U.S. persons.

Prism: Unknown Unknowns
 Is this a targeted
Surveillance program?
(stick vacuum) or is it
a Hoover?

Juliaangwin.com

