Developing your own bulletproof methodology
Ellen Gabler, reporter/assistant editor
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
egabler@jrn.com | @egabler

1. Understand the science, the regulations or the process of whatever you are
investigating. You can’t explain something until you know how it works. Figure out who
regulates an industry and how they do it. If a story is science related, understand the
science. Be specific. Maybe you want to test for lead in toys or paint. There is a
difference in total lead content and lead that leaches out of a product. Investigating
conflicts of interest in medicine? Determine what constitutes a conflict of interest - direct
payments to docs? Research funded by drug companies? There are differing opinions
about what is an actual conflict..
 Don’t jump to conclusions or make assumptions. Report.
 Be very specific. Make officials or experts explain their exact methods or
processes.
 Question things that don’t make sense - it can become part of the story. In Illinois,
the Office of the Inspector General was supposed to investigate claims of neglect
or abuse of disabled/elderly people. But if a patient was dead, they were no longer
eligible for “services” so the abuse or neglect was never investigated. (Belleville
News-Democrat story)
2. Read the studies and reports. Government reports and academic and scientific
studies can be a reporter’s best friend. You’ll find out what has already been done. You’ll
find humans sources to call and organizations to mine for data and stats.
 Read the footnotes! This will lead you to other research and sources.
 Check for reports from the Government Accountability Office and Office of the
Inspector General. Request audits by local, state and federal governments. Even
old audits help because they provide a roadmap for how an agency works. Search
PubMed for scientific studies.
 But don’t believe everything you read. A study might be flawed or funded by
industry.
 Also, don’t be afraid to question experts’ own methods. A story I did about lead
in Chicago drinking water revealed that the Environmental Protection Agency
was testing water in a way that could miss lead content entirely. That issue
became part of the story.
3. Find the experts. There is some expert, somewhere on every single subject. Find
them, talk to them, turn them into a source. Ask for their advice and guidance. People
love that.
4. Develop your plan. Once you truly understand the agency, industry, or issue you are
investigating, develop a specific plan to build your methodology. You will have to make
decisions, but at this point you will make informed decisions.





Lay out the parameters. What is your time period? Are you looking at all
complaints or just those that were substantiated? How will you deal with subjects
who cannot be reached?
Think about how you will ultimately present the information and your findings to
your readers. You will want to quantify a problem and not be boring or confusing.
Get comfortable in the gray zone. Not all of your examples are going to fit neatly
into your methodology. Account for that, accept it, and set up guidelines for how
to deal with it. When investigating the possible suffocation of babies, we had to
determine how to classify a death when a medical examiner listed cause of death
as SIDS, but police found the baby face down against a crib bumper or blanket,
indicating suffocation.

5. Test your methodology. This is a must before you get in too deep. Run your
methodology by your editor, experts, your sources and if possible, your critics.
Be specific and transparent about how you came to certain conclusions.
 Poke holes in your own methodology.
6. Don’t be afraid to do things no one has ever done before. In fact, shoot for that.
Sources or government agencies will often say things like, “we don’t track that” or “no
one knows the answer to that question.” Enter: You. While investigating infant deaths, I
discovered that a federal agency had reports of deaths but had not taken the time to
investigate what actually happened to the children. So I investigated their deaths by
requesting police reports, medical examiners reports, and more. It wasn’t that difficult
and was something the agency itself had failed to do.
8. Stay organized and be meticulous in your record keeping. Organize your data in
spreadsheets and keep your paper files neat. This will save you time at the end of your
reporting and during fact-checking.
 Assume that your notes, spreadsheets and methodology could be viewed by the
public.
9. Be transparent. Secrets are bad (which is why we investigate them.) Be open about
your methodology.
 Run your analysis AND your findings by your subjects before the story runs.
 Give them time to respond. It is only fair.
 Write a “nerd box” that runs with the story, explaining your methodology to
readers.
10. Communicate with graphics, video and interactive staff early. Let them know
what you are up to so they can help make your story the best it can be. They often have
ideas for visual or interactive elements and need you to gather specific information as you
report.

