TIP SHEET
G.W. Schulz
Center for Investigative Reporting
IRE San Antonio
June 20-23
Border security: a case study in better project organization
Better organizing yourself isn’t the sexiest subject in the world. I get it. Particularly among
journalists. We romanticize the image of Walter Pincus and the giant mound of coffee-stained
government documents that bury his desk.
“Don’t mess with my system! I know where all of my stories are in this monster pile of paper!”
That’s the common refrain, but it’s nonsense and nothing more than an excuse to not clean up
your desk, and ultimately, your journalism. Better organization means you can juggle numerous
stories at one time both inside and outside of a major ongoing project. And using digital
technology to improve your organizational skills means fewer messy piles of disorganized
documents.
I’m going to use our border security project at the Center for Investigative Reporting as an
example. My reporting partner, Andrew Becker, and I have been reporting on the Department of
Homeland Security for several years now. When we decided to begin looking more closely at the
border, and specifically the Border Patrol, I immediately began organizing a series of folders to
help get us started.
We already had an idea of what we wanted to look at. The Border Patrol has grown at a
phenomenal rate in just a few short years under various congressional mandates. The questions
were simple. What are the consequences of a law enforcement agency ballooning so rapidly and
suddenly being infused with billions in new taxpayer dollars?
I titled the folders on my computer with a slug I wanted to guide me along and help me stay
focused. We weren’t just writing about immigration. We weren’t just writing about drug
trafficking. We were writing about border security, and that’s what the Border Patrol is
responsible for.
So I created a folder titled “BorderSecurity.” Inside it were subtitled folders for news clips,
interviews (typed-up notes or digital files from my recorder), Congressional Research Service
and Government Accountability Office reports, open-government requests, data, etc.
For my news clips folder, I used CutePDF to turn news stories into PDFs and gave them smart
file names so I could easily retrieve them again: April2013NEWSnytdruginformer for the
blockbuster New York Times story earlier this year about a Mexican government official hiding
in the United States.

The subfolders are titled like so: bordersecurityACADEMIA, bordersecurityCONGRESS,
bordersecurityMULTIMEDIA, bordersecurityDATA, and so forth. Academic research is
separated from reports produced by special-interest groups so I’m distinguishing in my mind that
one may have more of a political motivation than the other. I even have subfolders for my
expenses associated with the project and internal project memos. More deeply, my subfolders
have subfolders, like folders in bordersecurityCONGRESS for the House Homeland Security
Committee and the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee.
The point is that I want to neatly manage what I know will be a quickly growing mass of
information as the project evolves. So I’m moving material around as the stories emerge. This
year so far our bigger stories showed that the Border Patrol primarily busted U.S. citizens with
drugs, the Border Patrol repeatedly apprehended many of the same people for immigration
violations who were not intimidated by various programs intended to deter them, and Border
Patrol checkpoints have generated thousands of low-priority drug cases that land in small, local
courts when the Justice Department declines to prosecute them.
In my bordersecuritySTORIES folder, I have subfolders for each of these stories that also have
all of their own subfolders. For instance, data are moved into each story folder as the stories
advance (dataIMMAPPPROS for data on immigration apprehensions obtained through FOIA
requests).
Each and every item going into these data folders and subfolders is getting a smart name that
allows me to locate an original, untouched Excel file I obtained directly from the government
and any subsequent Excel files I created to perform analysis. This way, I have an audit trail that
enables me to double and triple-check my work when it’s time to do so.
The reason this system is so valuable to me is because once my folders are set up, I can file away
useful information for stories I may not get a chance to do for one, two or even three years down
the road. Each morning, I scan dozens of email newsletters and over 100 RSS feeds and file
away anything that might be relevant to both short-term and long-term stories. I’ve spent a lot of
time this year reporting about the border, but I also happen to be interested in surveillance
technology and how it intersects with law enforcement. So my folder system permits me to keep
track of growing surveillance trends and any open-government requests I submit outside of a
major project.
The point is that I can keep an eye on a array of subjects, even if I won’t be able to report on
them all in-depth for some time.
The Internet can seem overwhelming when it comes to these sorts of things, but I truly believe
that with good personal organization, it’s possible to wrangle the Web and effectively manage
the fire hose of information. By 10 am or so each day, I should have a really good idea of what’s
happening across my big subject areas, even though they are truly big subject areas: criminal
justice, homeland security, national security, intelligence, privacy and security.

