Getting to Know You: Source Development off the Beat
IRE 2013
Matt Apuzzo
The Associated Press
mapuzzo@ap.org

Do A Rolodex Checkup
Terrify yourself. Imagine the biggest stories that could happen on your beat – a plane crash, a
school shooting, a plant meltdown, a sex abuse scandal. Do you have the sources to survive?
If your best, most reliable source is the official spokesman, you do not know what’s going on. It
doesn’t matter if you’re his favorite, if you get all the best tips ahead of the competition. Flacks
are not there to help you. Have a good working relationship with them. Respect each other. But
do not labor under the faulty belief that flacks are there to help. They’re not. They are there to
build a brand, to project a message, to cast their organizations in the best possible light, to
minimize negative attention and to align every interview with a marketing strategy.

Read everything on your beat
Your paper’s internal archives are a huge resource. I like to run a Nexis search for the keywords
on my topic, then save the full text of the entire output into a giant, chronological PDF file and
put it on my iPad. Now you have the story of your beat. Read it on the bus, in bed, over
breakfast, etc. Make notes of every name you see. Add those names to your list.
I’m also a big fan of annual reports, employee lists (FOIA’ble from gov’t agencies), trade
publications, etc. FOIA for the daily calendars of officials you cover. Not only will it give you
great stories, but it will tell you who has influence and who’s in the know. Anywhere there are
lists of people. LinkedIn is incredible for this stuff.

Think Broadly About What You Cover And Which Sources You Need
You don’t cover City Hall. You cover whether the government is making good on promises that
have been made to people. You don’t cover a company. You cover a world of customers,
employees, executives, suppliers, and retailers.
Write this broad beat on a piece of paper along with the key questions central to your beat. Then
make a list of everyone who has a stake in the answers. Think big. More people know than you
realize. Don’t worry about names at this point. You cover Acme Inc.? Your list will contain:
company executives, lawyers (inside and outside counsel), former executives and lawyers,
analysts, politicians, state and local economic development officials, whistleblowers,
competitors, suppliers, employees/retirees, contractors, unions, shippers, regulators, lobbyists,
auditors, accountants, major customers and more.
Now you have a roadmap to the sources on your beat (this is also the way I start an investigation,
with a clear question and a long list of people who have a role in shaping the answer).

Have candid conversations
Think about the screwiness that goes on in your office. How and where do you talk about that?
You talk about it over drinks, at lunch with your friends or at home with your family. You do not
talk candidly about it in the middle of the newsroom, on your desk phone. Yet we expect people
will do this for us. Nonsense.

Work from the outside in
If you’re new to the beat, embrace your harmlessness. You can work with the press office to get
coffees and lunches with whomever you need because you are just learning the ropes. Once
you’ve made a name for yourself, that effort becomes harder. People become more suspicious.
I have more luck starting on the outside and working in. People on the periphery of the system,
as well as former employees, government officials, aides, investigators, etc., are easiest to
persuade. Sit down with them. Take them for coffee or lunch. Ask them what lessons they took
away from their jobs. What should you know? How did their days go? Who holds power? Who
doesn’t? How do decisions get made?
References from former employees are priceless. These are the people who mentored the current
crew. Ask if you can drop their name. Maybe they can make introductions for you. Maybe next
time it’s lunch with the three of you.
The single biggest obstacle to this effort is the voice in your head that says, “He won’t talk to
me.” If this were easy, everyone would do it.

The first date
I like to use the first meetings to get to know my new source. I love, “Walk me through your
day” and “What’s the biggest issue you’re facing over the next 12 months?”
You want to learn the machinery of the beat – the way information, money, documents, product
and influence move through your world. It doesn’t matter whether it’s a police department,
Apple, the CIA or the local zoning board. Simply knowing that the most important part of the
day is the 9 a.m. meeting and knowing who’s in that room is invaluable.
Send “thank you” notes after each meeting, along with another copy of your business card. The
one you gave her over lunch is probably lost at the bottom of her purse or crinkled in her jacket
pocket. The one you send in the follow-up note is the one she opens at her desk and puts by the
phone, a subtle reminder that you’re a nice, thoughtful person.

