IRE Tipsheet: The Get- how to execute “unexpected” interviews.
Craig Cheatham, KMOV-TV
First Steps.
Check your equipment before you leave for the interview. Tapes, batteries, whatever…. You don’t want
to be rushing up to your interview and have the batteries die.
Talk with your photographer about your plan, get photographer’s input on everything, especially how
interview will be shot, layout of the approach area, obstacles, escape routes for interviewee, and you, if
you get in trouble.
Be prepared. Do your homework. Check documents, bring your file and make the documents easy to
find and useable. If you catch the person in a lie, can you produce the document that proves it?
The parking lot, or the family room, many of the same rules apply.
These ”surprise” interviews are about confrontation and accountability. They should usually be the last
resort, always go for the sit down interview first, if you have the time and the person is willing to do it.
Document how many times you requested the interview so you can refer to that in your story.
I try to have most questions answered before the interview. Questions should focus on “why.”
Wear a lavalier microphone and hold a stick mic in the parking lot, two clip mics in a sit down.
Plan your strategy with photographer. Where? When? How? Discuss the big picture, too.
A big part of this type of interview is the interaction between reporter and other person, make sure we
see the interaction (two shot).
Try to walk toward them at the beginning so you can see the person’s face. Try to stand between them
and their escape route, but don’t prevent them from leaving.
Introduce yourself first, unless you know each other. Ask the most important question first. If they
dodge the question, ask it again. Keep asking questions until they leave, or demand that you leave. Keep
them talking as long as possible.
Don’t make it personal. Don’t touch them. Don’t curse at them. Don’t do anything that shouldn’t be
seen on television.
In a sit down, how much time do you have for the interview? Start soft, or go with fastballs right away?
If I have more time, I ease into the tougher questions, but leave plenty of time for the hard questioning
that will probably be the focus of the story.
Never tell people that you are “going to get” someone. You are getting a story, not a person.
Don’t back down.

