Preparing for and managing investigative blowback
IRE 2013, San Antonio
Saturday, June 22, 10:50 a.m.-11:50 a.m.
Presenters:
 Ellen Weiss [ellen.weiss@scrippsnews.com]
 George Rodrigue [grodrigue@dallasnews.com]
 Susanne Reber [sreber@cironline.org]
Moderator: Maud Beelman [mbeelman@dallasnews.com]

1. The context we work in.
a. Clever PR people and shifty politicians have long known that if the
facts are against them, it can be easier to argue with the
messenger.
b. Technological changes render us just one messenger among
many; our story subjects can in effect create their own publishing
system if they wish.
c. “Bulletproofing” used to mean making stories perfect. Now, it also
means preparing to respond to unfounded attacks from selfinterested story subjects.
d. The keys are to be above reproach, and to document your virtue;
and to be ready to vigorously defend yourself against blowback if it
happens.
2. During the reporting process.
a. First things first….Get your ducks in order
i. Who is on top counts. The most important ingredient for
preparing for blowback is a leadership that has a
spine…because as we all know, you can get everything
right, and still face enormous blowback that can cause even
the most established news organizations to get scared and
retrench.
ii. Make sure you have legal support and a pool of money set
aside for legal protection. Again, even if you do everything
right – you will get letters from big lawfirms and you need a
lawyer to respond. For non-profits, build legal costs into any
grant application…
b. Be above reproach – and document your virtue.
i. Create a record proving that you’ve given your story subjects
a chance to address any allegations against them. You want
to demonstrate you went to the “ends of the earth” to give
them a chance to tell their story. Not just emails and calls,
but registered letters, sitting outside their offices if needed
ii. Demonstrate also that you’ve given them adequate time.
DEALING WITH BLOWBACK - IRE SAN ANTONIO 2013 1

iii. Document any potentially controversial processes you use in
your reporting. If necessary, make a video.
iv. Seek feedback, in writing, from your sources about important
technical or evidentiary questions. It’s the right thing to do,
and it creates a record proving you offered them a chance to
comment.
v. Footnote your drafts. It expedites fact checking and legal
review and it lends another lawyer of credibility. ProPublica
launched as feature a couple of years ago called “show our
work” that essentially annotates a reporters story so that a
reader can click on a fact or number and get to the
underlying documentation.
vi. Make sure your sources have nothing to hide, nothing that
could be embarrassing if it gets out – because it will get out.
vii. Be honest with your sources about the potential for blowback
and about how far you can go to protect them. You can
promise you are willing to go to jail – but will your company
be willing to face bankruptcy?
c. Be aware that your communications can become part of the story.
i. Write every e-mail and conduct every phone conversation as
though it could be replayed to the world by a powerfully
motivated liar, under the worst possible circumstances.
ii. Build into each communication enough information to
prevent others from later mischaracterizing your motives.
d. Remember that blowback can occur even before you print the story
– both outside and particularly inside your organization.
i. Prepare a “how we got this story” or a methodology sidebar
– and be ready to use it in advance of full publication if
needed.
ii. Treat incoming challenges as an opportunity to strengthen
your reporting – keep your reporters focused and don’t be
defensive.
iii. Keep your bosses and other important people advised of
important developments in your research, particularly if
they’re likely to touch off a reaction. No surprises.
iv. Advise your bosses in advance of arguments that a story
subject may make to attack or derail your research, and
provide counterpoints; don’t let your editor or publisher be
surprised by a source or story subject.
v. Recognize that the media these days can be part of the
blowback and don’t be passive. The prelaunch attacks can
and will leak out through blogs and other sources even
before you have published a word or aired a second. And
you can no longer afford to wait until you are ready to
release the full project to respond. At the same time, you

DEALING WITH BLOWBACK - IRE SAN ANTONIO 2013 2

don’t want to become the story – you want to defend and
then refocus attention on what you have uncovered.
3.

When working with partners.
a. The Main tactic during a blowback event will likely be:
“Divide and Conquer”.
b. Even a true partnership will be tested by blowback.
c. Subjects will often send letters/queries/complaints to just one
partner.
d. They may try to evaluate which partner is the “weak” link or
calculate the pressures that partner faces, funding, political
pressures.
e. Sometimes the partner that is targeted may retreat into prior
systems that predate the partnership causing stress to the
collaboration
f. Above all the goal is to keep all partners informed of what is
happening and keep on top of any action taken so there is
one voice, one response, not several conflicting ones.
g. This will test the editors of the collaborative reporting. The
resolve during blowback is rarely about editorial, mainly
about powerplay, so get strength from the collective
willpower of the partners.
h. Your own newsroom may begin to doubt the worthiness of
collaborations during this blowback phase. They will
question you and perhaps even belittle the partners,
sometimes in your presence, mostly behind the scenes.
i. Stay focussed and insist that all communications and
meeting include representatives of the partnership, even if
they have to be on the phone.
j. It is not easy, but you will actually gain momentum and
strength from a “united front”. The tactic “divide and conquer”
does not work if the partners stick together. More brains,
more legal support = smarter tactics.

4. During the writing and production process.
a. It’s never too late to ask a clarifying question, in writing, of a
reluctant our evasive source.
b. Avoid clogging your story with “defensive writing,” but try to include
things readers need and deserve.
i. “Humility paragraphs” can clarify the limits of our knowledge.
ii. Truly elusive sources may not want to offer any comments
in their own defense, but friends, colleagues, or impartial
experts may have thoughts that can make your report fairer.

DEALING WITH BLOWBACK - IRE SAN ANTONIO 2013 3

5. After the story runs.
a. Be aware that your story subject may respond via e-mail, social
media, or official publications, and may not tell you about that
response.
b. Be aware, also, that the response may go to people who never
read the story, thereby giving the sender the chance to frame your
story.
c. The reaction to your story may be picked up by other news
organizations whose reporters lack the understanding of the topic
that your team has developed.
d. When you learn of a response from your story subject, share it
immediately with your bosses, and be prepared to answer it
publicly.
e. “We stand by our story” is not a sufficient answer. It leaves a “hesaid, she-said” taste in the mouths of your readers, and it can lower
your credibility in their eyes.
f. Best practices for crafting an answer are very similar to best
practices for writing a story in the first place – but you can be more
focused and more detailed.
i. You’ve spent a long time gathering and verifying the facts.
Cite them, and, time and infrastructure permitting, share
them visually.
1. If you have audio or video of a crucial interview,
provide a link to it.
2. If you have copies of original documents, post them
digitally, too.
ii. It can be worthwhile to reprint the story subject’s response
and to build your answers into that framework, because that
can show the depth of your rebuttal.
iii. If the story subject’s arguments are misleading or evasive,
don’t be afraid to point that out to your audience.
iv. At the same time, keep your tone neutral and polite. This
isn’t personal. It’s just an extension of our regular jobs.
g. Distribution of your response should, ideally, cover both your
readers and any other recipients of the attack on your work.
i. Your own Web site may be a starting point. If you have an
ongoing dialogue there with readers, this can be an
important part of it.
ii. If your story subject is a public agency and if it has used an
e-mail list to attack your work, you may be able to get a copy
of the e-mail list and respond to it, too.
iii. If your story subject has a Web site that allows comments,
you may be able to link, via that comment field, from their
site to your response.
iv. If other news media report on the story subject’s claims, you
may be able to link from their site to your response.
DEALING WITH BLOWBACK - IRE SAN ANTONIO 2013 4

