Kate Martin, Skagit Valley Herald
katie.martin.13@gmail.com, @KateReports or @Kate_SVH
Link to this tutorial: http://bit.ly/184K3hN
So you want to make a map. Great! Here’s how we get started
1) Get a file called a shapefile. For fun, let’s pull the Skagit County precinct shapefile off of the
county website:
http://www.skagitcounty.net/Common/Asp/Default.asp?d=GIS&c=General&p=Digital/voting.htm

2) Log on to http://www.shpescape.com. You have to give this website permission to access
your Google account. Once you do, you can upload the zipfile:

3) Now we wait. Once you click upload, you will have to go do something else. In my experience
it takes the program a few minutes to an hour to upload your work.

Now comes the fun part!

You now have a file that looks like this when you click on it:

You should be using the new view of Google FT or drive. Click the “map of geometry” tab at the
top.

What now?
4) Download more data! For fun, let’s see which precincts voted in favor (or against) same­sex
marriage in Skagit County.
Here is the county auditor’s updated vote tallies for the Nov. 6 election:
http://vote.wa.gov/results/current/skagit/
See where it says “precinct results”? Click there. At the very bottom of that page (after it lists the
precincts), it should say “Download CSV.” CSV stands for “comma separated values” and is a

format we can use in Fusion Tables.

We are now going to merge the map file with the CSV file of precinct results. From there we will
color code the map to show the percent of voters who approved the measure. But first, we have
to do a little math.
MATHS
(TL;DR version below)
The spreadsheet has three columns: The precinct name, and columns for the number of voters
who approved and rejected the measure. First, delete the first three rows. Second, create a new
row on top and label the columns. Call Column A “Precinct” for the precinct names, then Column
B “Approved” and Column C “Rejected.” Name Column D “Total.” Next, add column B and C of
Row 2 and put the result in Column D. The formula for that in Excel is “=B2+C2”. You should
see a number now in Column D, Row 2 (also called cell D2).
Now, copy down the formula. Here’s a trick.

Click on cell D2. In the lower right corner, there’s a little box. Hover your cursor over that box until
you see a solid plus sign +. Double click the box when the plus sign is active, and it will copy
down the formula all the way down the columns.
Next, click on the D for the column, which will highlight the entire column. Right click and select
“Copy.” Next, with the column still highlighted, select “Paste special” and then pick “values” from
the paste menu.

Next, let’s create a column for percentages. Call Column E “Percent in favor” (this matters later
due to the way Fusion Tables displays information).
The formula for calculating the percent of voters in favor is “# of voters in favor” divided by “total
voters.” Type “=B2/D2” in E2. Then, copy the formula down using the trick mentioned above.
After that, copy the entire column and paste special + values.
Fusion tables does not display percentages well in maps. We need to convert this to a whole
number. In F2, use the formula =E2*100 to bring the percent back to a real number. Copy the
formula down, then copy the column and paste special + values. Now we have a number
followed by a bunch of decimals.
Highlight the column and right click and select “format cells,” then from the menu select number,
and display only 1 decimal point.

TL;DR version
If you are already good at Excel you don’t need to do all of these steps. Instead of making all of
those columns, you can just use this formula: =(B2/(B2+C2))*100 and after that you can format
the number to show only one decimal place. You might remember such formulas from Algebra.
If you are not familiar with the Order of Operations I suggest you become familiar with it and be
very careful about using math in your spreadsheets.
Save your file, upload it to Google Docs. Next you have to create a new Fusion Table. Click
“Create” then on the drop­down menu select “More” and then click “Fusion Table.”

Since you have already imported your election results into Google Spreadsheets, select that
option. Fill out the description if you want, then click next.
We now have two fusion tables: The results of Ref. 74 and a second table with the precinct
maps.
Let’s merge!
On the Ref. 74 table, click file and select “merge” and pick the precincts map we uploaded
earlier. If you are going to merge spreadsheets, make sure you have at least one column in each
spreadsheet that is the same. This is how we are going to link the two together.
In this example, the columns that match are in the “precinct” field.
● Make sure the precinct names match exactly. In this example, Sedro­Woolley will not
match with Sedro Woolley. Bay View will not match with Bayview.
● Oftentimes there could be a leading or trailing space in a field. Be sure those are all
deleted. To remove leading and trailing spaces, type “=TRIM(Cell#)” in an adjacent cell,
where Cell# is the cell you want to trim the leading/trailing spaces from. You can copy
this formula down to clean the rest of your data.

●
●
●

Click on a tab at the top called “map of geometry”
Click on “tools” then “map styles.”
Under “polygons” click “fill color” and select the number of buckets you want. You should
probably pick at least four, with an even number of buckets so the division is at 50
percent. Depending on colors, you should have something that looks like this:

Edit the Info window:
●
●

Click “Tools” then “Change info window layout”
Select the items in the check boxes of what you want to display. If you want, you can
rename items between the <b> tags.

Here is what that looks like:

You can also include a map legend. Click “tools” then “map styles” and at the bottom, select
“automatic legend.” Pick where you want the legend to show up and whether to display the
source.

Finally, you want to share your product and embed in your website. Zoom to the extent you want
your viewer to see the map, then click on “Tools” then “Publish.” You also need to change
visibility to public.

A link to the final viz here.

