Tracking U.S. Government Contracts
IRE 2013, San Antonio
Danielle Ivory
Bloomberg News
danielle.ivory@gmail.com
Twitter: @danielle_ivory

First, some basics..
U.S. government contract spending has ballooned from about $215 billion in fiscal
year 2001, which ended about a month after 9/11 attacks, to about $512 billion last
year. Spending dipped from about $530 billion in 2010. About 70 percent of this is
military spending.
Behind every juicy government story, there’s probably a great story about
contracting..
The government uses contracts to buy almost everything. Agencies buy goods, like
guns or helicopters or computers or toilet paper. Agencies also outsource services.
Those could include private security in Afghanistan or along the U.S.-Mexico border,
food service on military bases, environmental consulting, entertainment costs
(google “GSA” and “mind reader”), PR and advertising, or even FOIA processing. The
next time you submit a FOIA, you may find yourself talking with a government
contractor. For more on FOIA contractors, click here:
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-10-09/transparency-outsourced-as-u-shires-vendors-for-disclosure-aid.html.
Competition: Before the agency awards a contract..
When the government wants to buy something, a contracting officer generally puts
out a request for proposals (also known as an RFP) or some other kind of
solicitation document. Then, companies compete with one another for the work by
submitting bids.
Or, instead, an agency might award the contract without competition. Go to the next
section for more information on that.
Whether a contract is subjected to competition or not, you can track the pre-award
process, almost in real-time, at Federal Business Opportunities:
https://www.fbo.gov, which looks like this:

Use the advanced search and make sure you click the button (shown in the bottom
right corner of the screenshot, below) to search both recent and archived
documents.

You can search for solicitations by agencies and even track agency changes in realtime.
If you’re investigating a non-competitive contract that hasn’t been awarded
yet..
The government might decide that a contract needs to be sole sourced to one
vendor, meaning that it would be awarded without competition. It may be that only
one company provides the service. Or it may be that the government needs the

product urgently and doesn’t have time to hold a competition. These are considered
legitimate reasons for bypassing the competitive process. Here is where you can
find other justifications for non-competitive contracting, according to the Federal
Acquisition Regulations (the FAR), which govern federal contracting:
http://www.acquisition.gov/far/html/Subpart%206_3.html.
Even with a justification, the government must prove its case. Generally, agencies
must publicly release a justification document, called a J&A, which stands for
Justification and Approval (and sometimes, Justification and Authorization). In it,
the contracting agency explains the justification and what sort of market research
was performed. You can find those documents at FBO.gov as well.
After the government awards a contract..
When the government awards a contract, a lot of information becomes available
online for free. Note: There is usually a bit of lag time. Military contracts generally
lag by about 90 days. However, you can find some information about large military
awards on the Defense Department’s contract announcement page, which is
updated daily (do not use this site to calculate obligated dollars – these are
estimates): http://www.defense.gov/contracts/.
To find information on awarded contracts, go to the Federal Procurement Database
System, found at: https://www.fpds.gov/fpdsng_cms/. This is the homepage:

You can get into the site by clicking into the ezSearch bar and pressing the return
key. Then you’ll see this:

You can search the contracting database just like you’d search Google, or you can
use the advanced search. Here’s what happens when you type “Lockheed” into the
search bar. Lockheed Martin happens to be the No. 1 U.S. contractor.

These are called contract actions. They are not individual contracts, but are, instead,
parts of contracts. You can think of them as snapshots of contracts that get taken
every time the awards are modified (ie. If the government obligates money, changes
the time period, cancels a contract altogether, etc.)
You can download this information as a CSV file (see the top right corner). Beware
that FPDS only lets you download a small amount of information at a time, so make
sure the number of “results” (more than 372,000 in the case above) matches the
number of rows you get in Excel. You can also scrape the website.
Here is a resource if you want to download large amounts of data from FPDS:
https://www.fpds.gov/wiki/index2.php/ATOM_Feed_FAQ.

Let’s go through one contract action..
I’ll take you through one contract action piece-by-piece, so you can see what
information is available online before you even pick up the phone to start calling
sources.
Here is the top part of a contract action. This happens to be an Army contract,
awarded to McCann World Group, a public relations firm.

You can see the email of the last person who modified the contract, the contract
award number (a unique identifier), and the amount of money obligated on the
contract (and next to that, when it was signed and when it’s supposed to be
completed.)

If you scroll down on this contract action, you’ll see this:

You can see the contracting agency and awarding agency (sometimes, these are
different), the name of the contractor (usually not the parent company), and any
socio-economic information about the company. If McCann were a small business,
there would be a lot of data, such as whether it was women or minority-owned, etc.
Note that the “annual revenue” and “number of employees” are listed here as well.
Don’t trust this information without checking it. It’s often inaccurate.

If you scroll a bit further in the contract action, this is what you’ll see:

You can see where the work was performed, including the congressional district.
Local and regional reporters: Look up contracts in your area!
You can also find clues about what the contractor has been hired to do. Note the two
industry codes, the produce service code and the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) code. Triangulate these codes with the “description of
requirement” to pinpoint the nature of the contract. Beware: The “description” is
sometimes gibberish. You can also use the solicitation number to find more preaward information about the nature of the work at FBO.gov.

If you scroll to the bottom of the contract action, here’s what’s you’ll see.

You can see the extent to which the contract was competed. In this case, the contract
was awarded using “full and open competition.” Had it been sole sourced, it would
be marked “not competed.” There is a lot of room between full and open
competition and non-competitive contracts – some contracts are set aside for
certain minority groups, for example.
This part of the contract action will also tell you how many individuals or companies
bid on the award. There were four in this case: McCann won, and three companies
lost. If you want to know the names of the companies that lost, you can try
requesting the information through FOIA, but you’ll probably have better luck if you
talk to sources from the winning company, within the government, or in Congress.
Keep an eye out for contracts that are marked with “full and open competition,” but
only have one bidder. That can be a red flag.
At the bottom of the page, you can see whether the business that won the contract
was categorized as a small business or not.
A note on subcontracts..
There isn’t a good database for subcontracts. Some subcontracts show up at

USAspending.gov, but the information is very inconsistent (or non-existent). This
area could use more sunlight. It’s rich territory for stories.
Some more of my favorite online resources..
SAM: https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM
Search basic records for all contractors and look up suspended and debarred
contractors.
Small Biz: http://dsbs.sba.gov/dsbs/search/dsp_dsbs.cfm
Search records of small business contractors. This is great for finding small business
sources quickly.
Protests: http://www.gao.gov/legal/bids/bidprotest.html
When companies lose a contract, they often protest. They can challenge the award at
the agency, at the Government Accountability Office, or at the U.S. Court of Federal
Claims. Protests at the GAO are most common because they are cheap and because a
timely protest triggers an automatic 100-day delay to the work while the GAO
makes a decision. You can search GAO bid protest records at the link above.
The FAR: http://www.acquisition.gov/far/index.html
The Federal Acquisition Regulations govern federal contracting.

