Investigation of a giant energy boom at a small or mid-sized daily:
An examination of oil waste spills
Mark Collette / Corpus Christi Caller Times / caller.com / collettem@caller.com / 409750-0404 / @callerMC
Every time an oil or gas well is drilled, thousands of gallons of drilling “mud” are pumped
down the well and later retrieved. Oil-based drilling muds are used to lubricate
machinery and bring cuttings back up from the well. They contain petroleum products –
usually diesel - and toxic heavy metals and have to be shipped somewhere for proper
disposal.
Energy booms are a big draw for independent truckers who may be from other regions
or out of state. They may not know the rules. That means wastes are being transported
in vehicles not equipped to handle them, and are probably being dumped in places
they’re not supposed to.
Truckers may travel hundreds of miles, even across state lines, to reach a disposal site.
Communities near or en route to disposal sites may have big problems with spills. The
material is toxic, smelly, costly to clean up, and slick on roadways, leading to accidents.
This is one way to bring the local impact of a big story home to your readers.
Find the waste in your area:
Texas Oil & Gas waste permits:
http://www.rrc.state.tx.us/environmental/environsupport/wastfac/index.php
Map of Pennsylvania waste sites: http://tinyurl.com/PAwastes
North Dakota: Industrial Commission https://www.dmr.nd.gov/oilgas/
Your state agency may not be much help in isolating the problem areas. Turn to local
law enforcement, angry residents, rural school districts (whose students may have to
navigate roads prone to spills), environmentalists.
Remember energy booms are not just about business and the environment:
Look for stories along these lines:
Sexually transmitted diseases, health access and other health stories associated with
population influx
Infrastructure inadequacy (everybody talks roads, but what about electricity? water?)
Housing shortages and rent gouging
Workplace injuries (See tip sheet from Jennifer Hiller, San Antonio Express News)

