Getting beyond the gates: Covering the shale drilling boom when access is a problem
Jennifer Hiller
San Antonio Express-News
210.250.3159 | jhiller@express-news.net | Twitter: @Jennifer_Hiller
Oil and gas drilling has boomed across the country but access is a problem for reporters.
Drilling happens on private land, and often in remote areas. There are gate guards, so you
can’t just drive up and watch the activity. You’ll need the cooperation of the landowner
or the operator if you want to get close, but companies are often media shy and don’t
want to talk.
Here are some tips for finding information anyway:
Know why they’re here.
Are companies drilling for crude oil or natural gas? How profitable is the field? If prices
rise or fall, what will happen with drilling in your area? Know where your field stands in
comparison to others.
Sources:
Analysts and professors can provide great information on the business side of drilling.
Mine the corporate filings – Many operators are reluctant to talk to the media but will talk
with analysts at length, giving details about how much wells are producing, where they
are sending the product and what sort of prices they are getting for the product. They’ll
detail how many rigs they are running and their plans for drilling. You can listen in on the
calls or use these sites:
SeekingAlpha.com. This site has free registration and gives you the transcript of all calls
with analysts, usually within a day or two of the quarterly call.
Securities and Exchange Commission: http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
Follow the Baker Hughes Rig Count to track drilling activity in your state or region. This
comes out at noon Friday and you can download an Excel sheet that shows how many
drilling rigs are working in every county in the country, if they are horizontal or vertical
wells, in which field they are operating, whether they’re targeting oil or natural gas. This
won’t tell you company names, but is a good way to follow the activity and see trends:
http://www.bakerhughes.com/
Click on “Rig Count”
Scroll down and click “Interactive US Rig Count Maps” (A map of U.S. rigs will appear).
In the vertical toolbar, click on “Show Attributes.” Export to Excel from here.
Fracking chemicals – find out how much they’re hiding
Hydraulic fracturing uses a mix of water, sand and chemicals – as much as five million
gallons per well. Chemicals make up 1 percent of the mix, which companies like to
emphasize. But that 1 percent adds up to a lot.

Most companies now report well-by-well on the industry-supported FracFocus website.
Trade secret regulations allow companies to avoid reporting the exact mixture of
chemicals they’re using.
Resources:
FracFocus.org – clunky and gives information only in pdf form, but it’s useful if you’re
looking in a very small area or for a specific chemical.
SkyTruth has fracking chemical data available for download from January 2011 through
August 2012 in 24 US states. It’s not complete, thanks to trade secret claims, but it’s
FREE.
http://frack.skytruth.org/fracking-chemical-database
Pivot Upstream Data in Houston keeps a database of hydraulic fracturing chemicals.
They use it to sell to analysts and others who do things such as track the market for
commodities like guar gum, which is used in fracking. The company seems open to
working with the media. They ran some simple searches for me and sent an Excel sheet
that we could use show how prevalent “trade secret” claims are in Texas.
Of 12,410 instances of hydraulic fracturing in Texas between April 2011 and early
December 2012, companies used terms such as “proprietary, ” “secret” or
“confidential” 10,120 times while reporting data on the FracFocus.org website,
according to data collected through early December by the Houston-based Pivot
Upstream Group and analyzed by the San Antonio Express-News.
In the Eagle Ford Shale, the South Texas field that has become one of the hottest oil
and gas plays in the nation, the trade secret exemption was used 2,297 times in 3,100
fracturing events.

http://pivotupstreamgroup.com/
Tracking deaths in the oil field
From John Tedesco, jtedesco@express-news.net, 210.250.3477
Drilling is a dangerous business and there are many injuries and deaths in the field. Most
companies are not going to send out press releases.
When there's a fatality or an accident that injures at least three workers at a work site, a
big case file is available from OSHA when that inspection has concluded. You can ask
for all the "fatality and catastrophe investigation " files by company name or industry SIC
code. You can also request that OSHA include digital copies of jpeg photos or video
taken at the site. It usually takes months for these investigations to conclude though. You
send the FOIA request to your local OSHA office.
OSHA's web interface lets you quickly look up summaries of inspections and accident
investigations: http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html.

NICAR sells raw OSHA inspection data, and it's also available here:
http://enforcedata.dol.gov/data_summary.php
OSHA is conducting more inspections of the upstream oil and gas industry in Texas:
http://www.osha.gov/dep/leps/RegionVI/reg6_2013_02_00_013.pdf
Several of the victims in the Eagle Ford Shale were flown by helicopter to San Antonio
hospitals, where they died. So the Bexar County Medical Examiner was called in on
those cases. You can request an autopsy report, but there's another type of record that's
pretty cool that not many people know about: the medical examiner investigator’s report.
Costs $25 in Bexar County. It gives you a narrative tick tock of what happened to the
victim. It's almost always helpful.
OSHA releases weekly fatality figures. These didn't help a whole lot because sometimes
hard to tell where the deaths occurred, but it's a possible resource:
http://www.osha.gov/dep/fatcat/dep_fatcat.html.

