2013 IRE Presentation: The Nuts and Bolts of Open Records Battles
Wendell Cochran, Daniel Gilbert, John Tedesco and Tom Williams
Tipsheet is online at http://bit.ly/IRE2013Records
General tips:
●

Starting out: You might be able to avoid an open-records battle altogether by beginning

a conversation with the agency before filing your request. Learn what kind of information is
available and try to make the process informal and not confrontational. At smaller agencies,
the employees might be unfamiliar with open-records laws. You might have to be patient
and educate them on how things work. Be sure to check to see whether the records you want
have been released to someone else. At the federal level agencies are supposed to post records
previously released if they believe there might be additional interest in them.
●

Do your homework: Check policies, regulations, statutes, records retention schedules

and the agency’s website to learn what documents or databases the agency is supposed to be
storing. Using Google’s filetype: search, you can look for pdf, doc, xls and other types of file
extensions on an agency’s website that can lead you to specific forms and documents. This
way, you can learn what information the agency has, which will help you write a focused openrecords request and give you ammunition if the agency claims it doesn’t keep the information.
You might also find the specific information you’re looking for on the agency’s website.
●

Anytime a bureaucrat tells you a record isn’t public, file a written request and make them

cite the exemption under state law or FOIA. Insist they put the denial in writing in order to
preserve your right to appeal. You don’t have to argue why a record should be public – they have
to come up with a legal reason why it’s not.
●

Information a government agency is refusing to release might be released by a different

agency. The Express-News relied on this strategy for stories about deadly wrong-way drivers
on San Antonio highways. The Texas Department of Transportation refused to release internal
documents, such as memos and emails, detailing efforts to stymie wrong-way drivers. But
TxDOT was working with the city of San Antonio, which had the same information. The city
released everything the newspaper requested.
●

If the agency is stonewalling, write news stories or blog posts about it. Not vindictively.

But an agency spending taxpayer dollars to hide information from taxpayers is news. It’s also
news if the open-records dispute reaches the courts. There are legal issues involved in those
cases that affect the public. The coverage might also spark new legislation to address the lack of
transparency by the agency.

●

If it becomes a legal battle, dig in for the long haul. Some open-records cases last years

and cost thousands of dollars as they wind their way through the trial and appellate courts.
However, a judge might require the government agency to pay for your news organization’s legal
fees if you have a strong case. And if its a worthwhile battle, a victory means the records are
open to everyone.
●

Don’t simply send one of the boiler plate FOIA request letters. Tailor your letter to your

request and the agency in question.
●

Sometimes a regime change at the agency will open doors for you. Resubmit your

request; maybe the new administration will more receptive and give you everything you want.
FOIA tips for federal agencies:
● Here is a link to federal FOIA contacts: http://www.foia.gov/report-makerequest.html
● Be sure to check to see whether the records you want have been released to someone
else. At the federal level agencies are supposed to post records previously released if they
believe there might be additional interest in them. They store these under what they call “FOIA
Library,” such as this one from Immigration and Customs Enforcement: http://www.ice.gov/
foia/library/
● In your request, note that it is from a “representative of the news media” and ask that
fees for search time be waived. However, if possible, don’t ask for a complete fee waiver as
it can add to processing time and also give the agency reason to inquire into the purpose of
your request. As a member of the news media, you get 100 pages of copies free; agree to pay a
reasonable amount beyond that (say $50 or 500 pages) and ask to be contacted if it will exceed
that amount.
● If you are experiencing delays or other processing problems, you can seek help from
the agency’s FOIA Public Liaison. If that fails, you also can ask the Office of Government
Information Services (www.ogis.archives.gov) for assistance.

Texas and state tips:
● Get familiar with “super” public records listed under section 552.022 of the Texas Public
Information Act. This section lists specific types of documents that are public.
● If the agency seeks an attorney general opinion in an attempt to withhold documents,
you can also write the AG to tell them the context of the request and why the information should
be public. The AG lawyers often don’t know the whole story behind the request, and many of
them get just as outraged as journalists when an agency tries to hide information.

● You can research other AG opinions on its website: https://www.oag.state.tx.us/open/
ogindex.shtml. Plug in the agency name, see what others have requested, and find out if that
info is public.
● Many states offer open-records hotlines: In Texas, you can call 877-OPEN-TEX to make
a complaint about an agency that isn't providing public records. The AG will contact that agency
on your behalf.
● The Freedom of Information Foundation of Texas also has an open-records hotline for
anyone who wants to talk to a lawyer about the state’s open records and open meetings laws:: 1800-580-6651
● If you’re in a hurry: There's a common misconception in Texas that agencies have
10 business days to release public records. Not true. They have 10 business days to seek an
attorney general opinion to withhold that info. The law actually says public information must
be released “promptly.” If an agency is delaying in giving you a document that’s obviously
public, you can cite section 552.221 of the Texas Public Information Act: “An officer for public
information of a governmental body shall promptly produce public information for inspection,
duplication, or both on application by any person to the officer. In this subsection, ‘promptly’
means as soon as possible under the circumstances, that is, within a reasonable time, without
delay.” It gives you a legal reason to be pushy.
● If you can wait: Occasionally a government agency will forget to respond to your request
or to seek an AG’s opinion. The lapse creates a unique opportunity. Public agencies have 10
business days to request an AG opinion. If you don’t need the records right away, keep quiet
until the deadline passes, then pester them. Under state law, they are now required to give you
everything you asked for, even if the record would normally be exempt. The only exception is
when some other Texas statute makes a record private or there’s some “compelling” reason.
● You can use this same technique when the AG comes out with an opinion in your favor.
If you can wait 30 calendar days, don’t call the agency until that deadline passes. This is the
amount of time they are given to appeal the AG opinion in court. If the agency waits, it’s too
late.
● At the IRE presentation Saturday, Ken Martin of Austin Watchdog offered a useful tip: If
you believe an agency is violating the Texas Public Information Act, check out section 552.3215:
Declaratory Judgment or Injunctive Relief. This section allows you to file a complaint with the
county or district attorney or the Texas attorney general, depending on the agency. The law
requires the attorneys’ office to decide within 31 days whether a violation occurred. If so, it
must decide upon a course of action to take against the offending agency. For the requester, this
process is free, and could be a good way to avoid the time and expense of filing a lawsuit against
the agency.

