IRE National Conference 2013
Boom! Go! Go! Go!
Joe Ellis – KXAN TV – Austin, Texas
Joe.ellis@kxan.com
INVESTIGATING HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL SITE DISASTERS
1 – It’s important to remember communities are devastated and mourning. Keep a level head and avoid knee-jerk
reactions and speculation.
2 – Distinguish roles for reporters/producers and determine areas of focus for each in your coverage.
3 – Come up with a list of critical questions you will answer for viewers. For example: how did this happen? Could it
have been prevented? What is the safety history of this facility? What sort of oversight did this facility have?
4 – Determine what information would be most beneficial to viewers. Know what is immediately available online, what
data might be available and how easily it can be obtained and analyzed.
5 – Online Resources for safety/compliance/enforcement history for hazardous chemical facilities:
- Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) – workplace safety inspection and enforcement history
- Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) – environmental compliance and enforcement history
- U.S. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) – under U.S. DOT – search for incidents
and enforcement actions regarding transport of hazardous materials
- RIGHT TO KNOW NETWORK – risk management plans online compiled by RTKNET.org (EPA will only let you
review them in person and not allow copies)
- Your State’s Environmental Quality Agency – in Texas it’s the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) which allows for complaint and enforcement tracking online
6 – If you are investigating an accident that didn’t happen in your immediate viewing area, find ways to localize the
story. Check to see if any similar facilities are in your area, possibly putting the community at risk.
7 – Learn and understand the Emergency Planning & Community Right To Know Act, which is meant to facilitate
community awareness of hazardous material sites and access to information about them. The EPCRA also mandates
“emergency action plans” to be coordinated by state and local governments and the establishment of “local emergency
planning committees” at the local (county) level. It also requires reporting of hazardous chemical inventories to state
and local governments.
8 – Check with your state department of public safety and state health department as well as your local fire
departments for data on sites storing/distributing hazardous materials. Your state has a “Teir I” and/or “Tier II”
hazardous chemical reporting system per the EPCRA. Request the Tier I or Tier II reports for any or all facilities in your
state. Various hazardous materials will have varying reporting thresholds.
9 – Check to make sure counties you cover have a Local Emergency Planning Committee and see whether it’s active.
10 – Check to see how often your local fire departments and emergency management coordinators inspect local
facilities and request reports

