Writing the Investigative Story:
Some Insights from the Judges
Jennifer S. Forsyth
US Editor
The Wall Street Journal

IRE 2013

What You Don’t Want
“This story is really original and has strong local reporting …. But it's much too long.
I'm also not quite sure what it is about it, but it seems to fail to nail down exactly who's
responsible for the problems.”
“They got hold of a good story, but essentially told it over and over and over. One
wonders how many of those stories readers actually read. That said, they certainly got
the goods. Great data work.”
“I agree that this reporting was tenacious. The stories were very long and personally I
think could have used some editing clarity.”
“Major scandal. Shocking findings. Clever reporting. Lots of data and FOIAs. Difficult
info to obtain. Huge abuse of public trust. The downside, however, is that this is in
need of better editing. It's difficult to parse what the stories are saying or not saying.”

Conceiving of the Project
• Is it original? You’re looking for something that breaks new
ground—something that readers don’t think they’ve read
before
• Is it important? Can it make a difference in people’s lives? Is it
interesting? It doesn’t matter if it’s important if it’s too long or
too boring.
• Is it quantified? Do you have the facts and data to back up this
story beyond the anecdotal?
• Is it written for today’s audience? Does it have strong graphics
that add value and help clarify? Can it be read on a
smartphone?

Some basic suggestions
• Don’t lard up with top with apologies for what’s
coming, in an effort to be “fair.” Be clear about your
allegations and then give plenty of room for response.
• Stories should pass lawyers’ concerns but not read like
lawyers wrote them.
• Make your findings clear. If you have multiple findings,
consider having a story for each instead of an omnibus
story that tries to encapsulate everything.
• Read the stories aloud to someone and note when the
listener stops paying attention.
• Stick to the facts and avoid overblown, prosecutorial
language.

A quick couple more
• When possible, after the lede, nutgraf and
findings, write the story in chronological order
• Spread out your goodies. Keep the writing
alive throughout. Reward readers with
pungent quotes or jaw-dropping facts at
intervals

What You Want
Some Examples

The Seattle Times
• http://seattletimes.com/elephants/
Glamour Beasts: The Dark Side of Captivity
By Michael Berens
“This is a textbook example of an investigative project. It's innovative
in its genesis and scope. It's beautifully presented. It's insightful and
clear. It has moral force. Yes, this isn't a life and death story about
people. But it's breaking new ground and a model for other
reporters to follow.”
--Useful and understandable interactives and great use of video
--Problem was powerfully and clearly quantified through data
--Ah, but then the writing…unconventional wind-up. Takes time to
breath.

Justice in the Shadows
http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/specials/immigration

“Disturbing, extremely important. Also very
moving. The writing was vivid, a surprisingly fast
read for so serious a topic. Very well done.”

Courts Inside Prisons, Far From Public View
Frightened, confused, and often held far from home, thousands of immigrants find
themselves at the mercy of a legal system that, for many, amounts to an assembly
line toward deportation
Wait beneath a canopy of razor wire for a
security guard to buzz open the first towering
gate. Then, the second. Walk through the
chain-link fence onto a concrete path, toward
the tiny sign that says “courtroom.” To the left
is a door marked “public access.”
The door is locked.

Charlotte Observer/The News and
Observer
Prognosis: Profits
http://www.newsobserver.com/prognosis-profits/
--Five part series: All under 3,000 words. Some under 2,000.
--Extensive use of much shorter sidebars and graphics.
“Subsequent reads of it made it look even stronger than initial one;
good melding of data and shoe leather reporting, great public
records scrub including use of unusual sources, hard target to
penetrate due to privacy, good outrage factor (huge markups on
chemotherapy drugs, hospitals make billions but are relentless and
often wrong in pursuit of destitute patients who can't pay bills),
example of collaboration between two newspapers.”

Prognosis: Profits
Some North Carolina nonprofit hospitals, chartered to benefit their
communities, are providing little charity care for the poor and uninsured.
Johnnika Pyles, a 19-year-old student from Roxboro, had no insurance when
she was discharged in June 2009 from Person Memorial Hospital.
When the $5,486 bill appeared on Pyles’ credit report, her mother called the hospital
to ask if her daughter might qualify for charity care – free or reduced-price care for
low-income patients.
Chief Financial Officer James Leis encouraged Pyles to file and mailed her a
four-page charity care application and a written agreement called a promissory note.
If Pyles paid off half of her debt, the promissory note said, the hospital would write off
the other half.
But this arrangement was not charity. It was profit.

