Investigating habitat conservation plans
Robert McClure (rmcclure@invw.org/@rmcclureiw)
Executive Director, InvestigateWest

IRE Annual Conference
June 2013
San Antonio, TX

What they are: “Habitat Conservation Plans,” or HCPs, supposedly protect endangered species from
losing the fields and rivers and forests and other habitats where they live. But our “License to Kill”
investigation for the Seattle Post-Intelligencer showed, they often would be more accurately called
“Habitat Destruction Plans.”
The background: Congress passed the Endangered Species Act in 1973 (the 40-year anniversary is later
this year), and in 1982 authorized HCPs. Only 14 had been put into effect by 1994, when, under pressure
to repeal the ESA after Republicans took over Congress, the Clinton administration sought to defuse the
repeal movement by promising administrative reforms. The most important was a “no surprises” policy
in HCPs, i.e., the agency would never come back to a landowner to ask for better treatment/more
habitat for a threatened or endangered species once the Habitat Conservation Plan is approved – even
if, for example, additional species are designated as endangered later, and need additional protections.
(There is an exemption for “extraordinary circumstances,” but it has never been used, to my
knowledge.) That led to a massive increase in the number of HCPs, usually by developers, mining
companies, logging companies and other private parties. By the time we did our series in 2005, local and
state governments were increasingly proposing them. And while HCPs were largely a Western and
Southern phenomenon in the ‘90s and early 2000s, they were spreading to other regions.
What we found: Our 2005 series found:
• 57 percent of the plans failed to say how many creatures would be harmed or killed.
• 45 percent failed to even quantify the number of imperiled animals on the land in
question.
• Only 53 percent predicted the project's effect on the species' overall survival.
• 73 percent contained no criteria to determine whether the landowner's good works
actually benefit the species.
• 72 percent contained no provisions for change should the species take a downturn during
the course of the plan.

How you can do this story: Every regional office of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National
Marine Fisheries Service (ask NOAA Fisheries) maintains records on habitat conservation plans. You
should be able to get these without filing a FOIA, although some offices may require one. Look at the list
above. You can ask those questions for any given HCP.
To do this, you will want to read the HCP itself as well as the “biological opinion,” or BO. The two
documents should answer the questions above. If not, that plan is faulty. Obviously, interview relevant
scientists, activists, government officials, and so forth. While our series looked at the program, it’s a
perfectly worthwhile story to look at any individual plan and ask: Does this comply with Congress’s
intent?

(OVER)

Theoretically, landowners promise to take actions to benefit the species in exchange for permission to
destroy some of the species’ habitat. In practice, though, this often doesn’t happen. For example, an
HCP for a 100-acre piece of habitat may require that 50 acres be preserved. Net loss: 50 acres.
The result of the HCP process is issuance of an “incidental take permit,” or ITP. It absolves the
landowner from responsibility under the ESA so long as he does not intentionally harm species.

More information: Unfortunately, the main stories from our 2005 Seattle P-I story is no longer online.
However, here are some URLs that will get you started:
http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1192&context=facultywor
kingpapers (2009 scholarly paper by Northwestern University law professor David Dau, arguing that
Congress should reform HCPs, for example allowing citizen enforcement suits and requiring stricter
reporting requirements to determine the effects of HCPs on imperiled species.
http://ecos.fws.gov/conserv_plans/PlanReportSelect?region=9&type=HCP (Relatively unhelpful online
database listing where HCPs are in place)
https://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/files/Kareiva%20Using%20science%20in%20habitat%20conservation%20pl
ans.pdf (late 1990s review of program by conservation biologists who found the program lacking)
http://www.hcn.org/issues/111/3481 (1997 High Country News article)
http://web4.audubon.org/campaign/esa/hcp-guide.html (pretty good primer; by the Audubon Society,
though)
http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-132114316.html (Highbeam Research reproduction of the top of
the Seattle P-I “A License to Kill” series.

