Investigating parks conversions
Robert McClure (rmcclure@invw.org/@rmcclureiw)
Executive Director, InvestigateWest

IRE Annual Conference
June 2013
San Antonio, TX

The nub of the story: State and local governments are routinely violating federal law by allowing parks
purchased, built or improved under the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act to be converted to other
uses, including private uses.
The background: When Congress decided to allow offshore oil drilling in the 1960s, it declared that $900
million a year would be set aside from the royalties, to be split between the federal, state and local
governments. The money, the Land and Water Conservation Fund, was to be used to purchase lands to
provide outdoor recreation for the public. The deal was that the local or state government had to
promise to keep the land open to the public forever. If not, any parkland converted to other uses has to
be replaced with parkland of equal financial and recreational value.
Initially a federal agency called the Bureau of Outdoor Recreation was set up to administer the program,
including policing conversions of state and local parks to other uses – of which the agency found many.
But that bureau was abolished and swept into the National Park Service after Ronald Reagan was
elected president in 1980. The number of employees has been reduced over the years from about 100
to approximately 25 today (and that represents a significant staffing up from the Bush administration.)
Meanwhile, the number of grants awarded to state and local governments has ballooned to about
40,000. As years have gone by and local and state officials have forgotten about their predecessors’
promises, and with government budgets sagging, it has become ever more likely that parks are being
illegally converted to other uses.
What we found: Because of budget cuts at the state and national levels, resources for policing
conversions have been left in tatters. One park became a Las Vegas hotel. Another was almost turned
into a beachfront McDonalds. Another is being converted into an upscale private resort in Oklahoma.
And in New York City, the National Park Service allowed the New York Yankees, the nation’s richest
baseball franchise, to build a parking garage atop public ball fields in the poorest Congressional district
in the nation, where needy kids didn’t see replacement ball fields for six years. (NPS regulations say any
parkland taken out of service for more than 180 days is no longer considered a temporary conversion,
and it must be replaced. The loophole is that the regulations *don’t* say anything about how long the
local government has to actually *open* the replacement parkland.)
How you can do this story: First, remember that 2014 is the 50th anniversary of the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, so you have a natural time peg if you’d like to use it.
Is there a park in your area that is being converted? This sometimes creates controversy, and you’ve
probably heard from the neighbors at one time or another – or maybe such a controversy is going on
right now. InvestigateWest took a virtually unusable National Park Service database, scraped it and put
it on the web where you can check whether any of these parks were supposed to be replaced.

I personally know of people who have called us from Mississippi, South Carolina and Tennessee after
finding our series and database while fighting park conversions in their communities. Contact me if
you’re interested in getting in touch with them.
Resources:
 InvestigateWest’s database, produced by Jason Alcorn, is available at
http://www.invw.org/article/lwcf-grants-database-1283
 There are very few activists on this issue. The only organized group we could locate is Defense
of Place, founded by former elected California state official Huey Johnson. His cel is 415-3091641 and his email is hdj@rri.org. (The umbrella group is Resource Renewal Institute.)
 Luann Kozma is an activist in Michigan who stays on top of this issue in numerous states. She
has at times been affiliated with Defense of Place; I’m not sure what her current status is. She is
at luannekozma@gmail.com.
 The National Park Service inspector general did a worthwhile report on this in 2008. (It was
actually done by OMB, but it’s presented as an IG report.) The old version,
http://www.doioig.gov/upload/2008-G-0013.pdf, has been taken down but should be available
on the Wayback Machine; the guts of it are on DocumentCloud at
https://s3.amazonaws.com/s3.documentcloud.org/documents/357982/2008-progressevaluation.txt. I have a PDF and will be glad to email it to you.
 At the National Park Service, Joel Lynch, chief of the state and local assistance programs division,
is fairly accessible at 202-273-3656. The agency also has individuals assigned to try to keep an
eye on this in various regional offices. You will want to locate that person and get in touch with
him or her.
 Your state parks department will also have someone who at least theoretically is supposed to be
policing these conversions, but even the NPS admits that this is not always happening.l

