GOVERNMENT TRANSPARENCY: Getting past "No" when government pushes back
2013 IRE National Conference
Angela Galloway, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Seattle, WA, www.dwt.com
(206) 757-8274 * angelagalloway@dwt.com

Basic Concepts
• FOIA: All records of the agencies of the federal government must be accessible to
the public unless specifically exempt.
• Nine categorical exemptions under FOIA
• Generally, the federal statutory exemptions permit an agency to withhold
access to agency records; they do not require an agency to withhold. But there
are exceptions. And, in practice …
• State public records acts:
• Operate similarly but there are major differences among state statutes and
between them and FOIA. Best advice: know your state.
• Sometimes provide better enforcement (e.g., penalties in some states).

I. Starting off on the Right Foot: How to establish a strong position for dealing with
government resistance
A. Choosing the Best Agency:
1. State or federal?
• For federal info, check the US Government Manual
(http://www.gpoaccess.gov/gmanual/index.html), which describes
agency functions).
• Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press’ state and federal Open
Govt guides (http://www.rcfp.org)
2. Were the documents shared with a second agency? (If 2+ agencies share
regulatory authority, or one agency shares records with a second: is one
more willing/able to cooperate?)
3. Once you select an agency, check its online resources, FOIA policies and
documents already posted online. (The policies usually identify the
specific employee responsible for processing FOIA requests.)
4. Know the record-retention policy (for timing and global picture of what’s
retained).
5. Know the records law in your state AND the agencies’ policies
B. Format: It’s often more prudent to submit in writing
• Some agencies require requests be in writing
• A writing establishes your legal rights & agencies’ legal duties
• Writing is helpful for tracking & evidence
 Create a paper trail by submitting via email, registered mail or
http://www.foia.gov/report-makerequesst.html.
 Get tracking number
• As you prepare to file, offer to discuss any anticipated, or determined,
withholdings or redactions in order to speed the process
DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

1

C. Content:
• Scope: the more precise your request, the likelier success. Still, broader
requests leave room for negotiation.
• Consult record-retention schedules for sense of what’s available.
• For databases, know the record layout, etc.
• Include a “Reasonable Description”: (This is critical.)
• Other content:
 Address fees
 Make clear that you expect a response within the statutory time limits
 Remind the agency that the FOIA requires the release of all reasonably
segregable portions which are not themselves exempt
 Consider noting that you are aware of your administrative appeal rights if
you expect push-back
A “reasonable description” is one that “enable[s] a professional employee of the
agency who [is] familiar with the subject area of the request to locate the record
with a reasonable amount of effort.” H.R. Rep. No. 93-876 (1974) at 6.
⇒ Does this request contain a “reasonable description?”: “All correspondence,
documents, memoranda, tape recordings, notes, and any other material
pertaining to the atrocities committed against plaintiffs, including, but not
limited to, the files of various government offices.”
 Court said no. See Mason v. Callaway, 554 F.2d 129 (4th Cir. 1977)
(broad, sweeping requests lacking specificity are not permissible).
⇒ Perhaps a better approach: Assuming Mason believed his June 10,
1976 termination from Panama Canal Co. (a federal agency) was
unlawful: “I hereby request access to and copies of all documents in
your possession relating to Panama Canal Company’s termination of
Mason’s employment on June 10, 1976.” (Note: Potential Privacy Act
issues.)
⇒ Does this request contain a “reasonable description?”: A request to the IRS
for: “1) all files indexed and maintained under my name or social security
number; and 2) all documents containing my name.“
 Court said no: No. See Keese v. U.S., 632 F. Supp. 85, 91 (S.D. Tex.
1985) (“[r]equests for all documents containing a requester's name are not
reasonably specific as required by the FOIA “).
D. Request expedited treatment? (often a long shot)
• FOIA requires expedited processing if requester shows “compelling need.”
• Typically granted if health/safety at issue, or if requester is journalist with
urgency to inform the public about an actual or alleged governmental activity.
• Agency must grant or deny request w/in 10 days.
• If an agency grants expedited processing, it will take the request out of order.

DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

2

Content of request for expedited treatment:
• Describe the circumstances you feel warrant expedited processing;
• “Certify” to the agency that the reasons you give are true (the statute allows
agencies to require certification).
E. Misc. notes re. fees
• Media (and other requestors seeking records for non-commercial use) are
generally exempt from FOIA search & review fees & first 100 pages of
copying.
• Request itemized breakdown of estimate
• Consider fee-waiver request
• On-time-or-on-us: fed government cannot charge for duplication if documents
are tardy
Requesting a fee waiver:
• Agencies have discretion to grant full or partial waivers.
• Agencies are more likely to waive fees if they determine that release of the
records would benefit the general public.
• Sometimes, you’ll want to avoid asking for fees because that can result in
greater scrutiny of your request.
• Samples available at RCFP, SPJ websites, etc.
F. Tracking: Keep careful track of your request in the ordinary course of business
(consider a spreadsheet)
 When requested
 What requested
 Of whom requested
 When response due
 All communications (notes of calls)
II.

Resisting the Pushback: What do when agencies resist
A. Typical Issues
 Partial or full denial of request;
o Study the exemption cited!
 Inadequate search;
 Untimely response;
o Fed agencies routinely violate 20-day deadline.
o An agency can take an additional 10 working days to make its
determination under “unusual circumstances.”
o Clarification exemption: Agency may stop the clock one time.
o If an agency blows deadline, can go straight to court
o Acknowledgment of request is not sufficient response under FOIA, but
it might be in your state.
 Excessive fees;
 Denial of a fee waiver request;
 Denial of a request for expedited processing.

DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

3

B. Pushback Step 1: Negotiate
• Communication by writing is prudent (email works). But consider calling.
(Take notes.)
⇒ If you have modified your request – or if there is any risk that the
agency will perceive or later argue you had done so – be sure to
follow up and clarify in writing.
• Can be helpful whether it’s productive: Should you ultimately sue, your
cooperation can be relevant & helpful evidence when the court considers
whether the agency was reasonable.
• If agency refuses, write a story (re. public’s right to know); FOIA
correspondence re. your request
• Sometimes, you should take care re. describing the “purpose” of your
request, or the “angle” of your story. Besides potentially creating an
expectation, the info might justify an exemption, e.g., the Federal
Education Rights and Privacy Act.
C. Pushback Step 2: Administrative Appeal
What can you appeal?
 Denial (full or in part);
 Adequacy of search;
 Failure to issue a timely response;
 Excessive fees;
 Denial of a fee waiver; and/or
 Denial of expedited processing.
Appeals
 Appeals are made to the head of the agency involved (e.g., the attorney
general or the secretary of defense).
 If possible, file your appeal within 30 days after the denial, even though
agencies generally permit a longer time to appeal. Definitely know the
deadline for appealing in your jurisdiction.
 Content: What should be in my appeal letter? (See sample letter and info
at RCFP website.)
 Identify yourself;
 Identify the specific FOIA request made;
 Identify the specific FOIA action you’re appealing;
 Note you expect a reply w/in 20 business days of receipt, as required
by law;
 Request a list of withheld documents covered by the request, and
which exemptions are claimed;
 Offer to discuss (ideally via email) your request and appeal with the
appropriate agency representative.
 Appeal, cont.
Appeal officer may:

DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

4

 Grant (all or part);
 Deny (all or part); or
 Extend time limit by up to 10 days if
o Voluminous records must be searched,
o Records must be retrieved from various offices, or
o Several agencies must be consulted.
D. Pushback Step 3: If federal records, seek assistance of the federal Office of
Government Information Services (http://ogis.archives.gov/)
E. Pushback Step 4: Lawsuit
When can you sue over FOIA*?
 If no response to request w/in 20 days;
 If appeal denied; or
 If appeal not responded to w/in 20 days.
* Often, whether you’re allowed to sue and when it makes sense to sue are two
different questions.
Time to sue?
 Beware: bad facts lead to bad law.
 Filing a complaint in federal district court brings financial expenses, but
sometimes it’s a relatively inexpensive and simple step.
 If you can demonstrate need for prompt consideration, you can ask the
court to expedite. But that’s often a tough sell.
 File a Motion for Vaughn Index (formal request the court order the agency
to provide an index describing the documents it withheld & the
justification it claims for each piece of info. See RCFP website for sample.
Benefits of filing suit:
• Agencies sometimes relent at the filing of suit, or at a formal threat to file suit
(sometimes that warning can include a demand for both records and a
financial settlement)
• If you win, a judge will order the agency to release the records and might
award you attorney’s fees and costs
• Some state laws permit penalties
• When govt agency answers your complaint to the court, that can provide a
fairly good indication of how strong or weak its case is and the potential cost
to continue suit.
⇒ Benefits of settlement:
 Faster
 Cheaper
 Sometimes can avoid 3d-Party notification/ reverse FOIA suits (3d-party
litigation often does not qualify for attorneys’ fees)

DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

5

III. FOIA / Open Record Resources
A. Organizations
• The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press: http://www.rcfp.org
o FOIA request generator: http://www.rcfp.org/foia/
o State Open Government Guide (database of state open records and
meetings laws) http://www.rcfp.org/ogg/index.php
o Federal Open Government Guide: http://www.rcfp.org/federal-opengovernment-guide
o Federal FOIA Appeals Guide: http://www.rcfp.org/federal-foia-appealsguide.
• First Amendment Coalition: http://firstamendmentcoalition.org/
Provides free legal consultations for reporters an others regarding First
Amendment rights and open government issues, sponsors “strategic” litigation,
online training, and resources, policy advocacy
• The Society of Professional Journalists’ FOIA resources:
http://www.spj.org/foi.asp
Tools, reports and open-government advocacy (check local chapters, too)
• The National Freedom of Information Coalition: http://www.nfoic.org
An alliance of journalistic, academic and other organizations, and lawyers
(Provides resources and training; also awards grants to support open government
efforts and administers the Knight FOI Fund, which helps defray opengovernment litigation costs).
• Government Attic: http://governmentattic.org/
Archive of Federal Government documents obtained under the FOIA.
• GWU National Security Archive: http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
Articles and archives.
• The Sunshine in Government Initiative: http://www.sunshineingovernment.org/
Coalition of news orgs (e.g., AP, ASNE) and other industry groups (e.g., RCFP)
that promotes open government policies
• Student Press Law Center: http://www.splc.org/
B. Government
• U.S. Department of Justice (FOIA fundamentals, reports, etc.)
o FOIA basics: http://www.foia.gov/ (provides extensive info on filing
FOIA requests, agency FOIA reports, etc.)
o FOIA portal: http://www.foia.gov/report-makerequest.html
o The “Office of Information Policy” website has additional info on FOIA
compliance, etc.: http://www.justice.gov/oip/oip.html
• Office of Government Information Services: https://ogis.archives.gov/
Federal FOIA resource center and ombudsman
• Obama’s official open-government policy statements:
o http://www.justice.gov/ag/foia-memo-march2009.pdf
o http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/TransparencyandOpenGover
nment/
o http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/FreedomofInformationAct/

DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

6

C. Publications
The Art of Access, Strategies for Acquiring Public Records, David Cullier and
Charles Davis, CQ Press (2010). A practical guide to accessing public records and
using them to write compelling

DWT 22235395v1 0085000-002030

7

