Try these sources to identify gaps and flaws in regulatory oversight:
Compendium of Unimplemented Recommendations. Every year, the EPA inspector
general issues a report on its recommendations that the agency had, essentially,
ignored or rejected. It’s a great guide to loopholes – a study guide for those who
want to squirm through them.
Here are some highlights from the most recent report. These could be the basis for
stories about vulnerabilities in your community:









The EPA may not be able to fully protect public health and the environment
in case of another terrorist attack, because it is behind schedule in
implementing the Radiation Ambient Monitoring System.
It’s difficult to hold sources accountable for meeting air quality requirements
because of weaknesses in monitoring provisions and enforceability.
The agency’s use of contractors to conduct clean air risk management
program inspections goes against court orders in some states.
There are concerns about EPA’s ability to prevent oil spills, and it needs to
establish a national oil program database with a detailed history of
compliance and inspections.
EPA needs to work on guidelines on how to dispose of meth lab waste, with
an eye to children’s health and environmental justice
EPA needs a program to assess the safety of chemicals to children,
particularly lead, mercury and formaldehyde.
Workers who were exposed to asbestos fibers when unapproved methods
were used to demolish buildings need to be notified of their health risk. The
agency also has yet to notify the surrounding public of potential exposure.
The Toxic Substances Control Act confidential business information
classification guide needs revamped and time limits set, with the goal of
allowing eventual public access to health and safety data for chemicals.

The Improper Payments Reporting Compendium. Here you’ll find improper
payments identified through OIG audits and state single audit reports.
Chemical Data Reporting Rule. New in 2012, manufacturers must highlight
information on chemicals used in products intended for children.
EPA Enforcement and Compliance History Online. The Integrated Data for
Enforcement Analysis has hundreds of thousands of records on compliance and
enforcement data for industries regulated by federal, state and local pollution
agencies, details about toxic pollution releases and data on court and administrative
penalty cases.

Consent decrees. Try searching the Federal Register for proposed consent decrees,
such as the recent proposal for Dover Chemical Corp. for violating the Toxic
Substances Control Act by manufacturing new chemicals in Ohio and Indiana. (You
can use Scout to set up alerts for these Federal Register postings.) Try Lexis and
Pacer for other court orders related to environmental regulations. Be sure to check
to see if consent decrees have been amended.
Professional licensing boards. Is the EPA attorney actually licensed in your state?
What are the credentials and disciplinary record of other licensed professionals
involved in environmental capacities? Also check job requirements for employees of
state regulatory agencies – do they have to have specialized training or degrees?
State and federal agency inspection reports. Check the inspection dates; the training
and equipment available to inspectors; and state law on enforcement powers. Find
out if companies were notified in advance of inspections. Were these full-scale
inspections or a sampling? Are the inspectors specifically trained for this kind of
industry? In Georgia, the state was inspecting large animal feeding operations each
year. But operators left blank key parts of the inspection records, and the state had
no enforcement power to require operators to complete the reports. Some operated
without permits.
Industry self-reporting data. Check to see if the EPA or state agencies do anything to
make sure data reflects reality. Do they even analyze the data industry sends in?
Congressional testimony, Congressional Research Reports, GAO. There was a
Congressional Research Report issued after the West, Texas explosion that found
that the fertilizer distribution facility broke the law, and it also highlights some
regulatory weaknesses. CRS also researched the proposed Coal Ash Recycling and
Oversight Act to see if it would authorize EPA to set a national minimum standard
for management and disposal of toxic ash from coal-fired power plants. CRS said it
would be left up to each state to decide minimum protection.
Complaints filed with authorities. These could flag you to issues and sources to talk
with.
Citations by local authorities, such as fire department or code compliance and
criminal violations.
Fines data, particularly regarding how much of a levied fine is actually collected.
Scientific studies. Be sure to check who paid for the research and if the researchers
have financial ties to outside interests. Also, look at the Science Advisory Board of
the EPA
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Information on toxic substances.
You can search for substances by state.

