Income inequality:
A journalist’s guide
IRE annual conference
San Antonio, June 2013
Paul Overberg, USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
College students learn to do a “lit review” before writing a research paper. It’s a structured way of learning
what’s known and what’s not. It reveals sources, best methods, disagreements and schools of thought. British
students learn to “read around” as they start thesis research. It’s a broader, more immersive, persistent approach.
Both methods can help journalists, who most often cover an issue one report and voice at a time. This is
especially useful on something as complex as income inequality, which has an active research literature that
spills into a busy policy literature. It also supports a hefty opinion literature in various journals, magazines and
blogs.
Basics
U.S. income inequality has grown for about 40 years. But for much of the previous two generations, it
shrank. This puzzled researchers and produced a lively debate about data sources and yardsticks for years before
it shifted to focus on causes and consequences. There’s general consensus that the dispersion is uneven – that
top levels are pulling away. But debate continues about which levels are pulling away and by how much.
There’s also debate about effects of the Great Recession and what may be signs that the trend has slowed.
There is lively debate about what to do, if anything, about growing income inequality. This handout does not
cover that subject.
Measurement
Income inequality is surprisingly hard to measure. It depends on accurate information about household
income at all levels, especially the upper extreme. The Census Bureau takes a nationally representative income
survey each March of about 60,000 households. This is the data most researchers use. However, public versions
of this data are “topcoded” – incomes above a certain level are reported as standard lower values – to protect
respondents’ anonymity. Even restricted-access versions, open only to researchers sworn to secrecy, undergo
some anonymizing first. But the Census Bureau only measures pre-tax income. This misses the effects of tax
deductions and safety net programs. The definition also excludes capital gains, which are erratic and would
often be smoothed out in topcoding.
The IRS also produces a household income file that reports adjusted gross income. It is used by some
researchers. A restricted version is used by the Congressional Budget Office and Congress’ Joint Committee on
Taxation. The IRS data does a better job of portraying income at the very top, but it doesn’t have the
demographic detail that researchers prize in the Census files.
Thomas Piketty of the Paris School of Economics and Emmanuel Saez of the University of CaliforniaBerkeley did archival research to build their own data set of top-level income and wealth shares for developed
countries over the last century. Their work has spotlighted how explosive and unusual the U.S. trend has been.
Another international center for income inequality data and studies is LIS, based in Luxembourg.
For local journalists, the best bet is to use the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey data through
American FactFinder. Values are computed without topcoding. They include tables for the Gini index (B19083),
shares of household income by quintile (B19082) and upper limits to household income by quintile (B19080).
These are produced for states, congressional districts, metros, counties, cities and even smaller areas.

Causes
When U.S. income inequality began to grow in the early 1970s, researchers debated whether the change was
actually happening. By the mid-1990s, growing evidence produced consensus that it was, as well as agreement
that several causes played at least some role: globalization, eroding labor institutions and technological changes
that placed a premium on skill.
One summary is a 2003 paper by David Autor and Frank Levy of MIT and Richard Murname of Harvard.
They documented how the rapid drop in the price of computing power let firms substitute capital – money spent
on ever-cheaper computers – for labor, especially work that is routine.
“As the price of computer capital fell precipitously in recent decades, these two mechanisms—substitution and
complementarity -- have raised relative demand for workers who hold a comparative advantage in non-routine
tasks, typically college-educated workers,” they write. They estimated that information technology created 60
percent to 90 percent of the increased demand for college-educated workers from 1970 to 1998.
The shift hits some occupations harder than others, Autor found in 2010 research: “… Job opportunities are
declining in both middle-skill, white-collar clerical, administrative, and sales occupations and in middle-skill,
blue-collar production, craft, and operative occupations.” This hits male workers especially hard because they
predominate in such fields.
Such a rapid shift could be offset by boosting the number and level of U.S. workers with college-level skills.
But that hasn’t happened. The shrinking U.S. lead in educational attainment is often cited in the growth of
income inequality. Evidence is summarized by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz, both of Harvard University,
in a 2007 Brookings Institution paper and a 2008 book, “The Race Between Education and Technology.”
Example: U.S. young adults, once No. 1 in educational attainment, rank in the middle of the pack among the 34
highly developed nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. They point out that
U.S. high school completion rates have stagnated for three decades if you set aside general equivalency degrees.
Also flat: completion rates for four-year college degrees among students born after 1950, especially men.
Some of the most-cited causes, especially by advocacy groups, don’t hold up well under study. Aaron
Steelman and John A. Weinberg of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, distilling recent research on wage
inequality in 2005, pointed out that growing U.S. trade with low-wage countries and booming U.S. immigration
didn’t seem to play much of a role.
Effects
One worrisome possibility created by growing income dispersion is growing social dispersion. If an upper
class pulls ways from middle-class institutions like public schools, the thinking goes, it could weaken all kinds
of middle-class institutions and cultural norms. This topic has been addressed by two recent papers in the
US2010 Project, a broad data-driven look at U.S. demographic and social trends sponsored by the Russell Sage
Foundation. Sean F. Reardon and Kendra Bischoff of Stanford University document the growing segregation of
families by income in the last 30 years. John Logan of Brown University, the project’s director, reports the
racial dimension of this pattern: Even affluent black and Hispanic households live in neighborhoods that are
poorer than those of lower-income white resident.
Review
The Great Recession has drawn more journalistic attention to income inequality. Timothy Noah of Slate
wrote a series of articles that was published last year as a book, “The Great Divergence: America's Growing
Inequality Crisis and What We Can Do about It.” Don Peck wrote a review and essay titled “Can the Middle
Class Be Saved?” in The Atlantic in September 2011, pointing out that the effect of growing income inequality
is worsened by studies that show slowing income mobility – the movement of people up and down the economic
ladder. Boston Review produced a readable multi-author review titled “What to Do About Inequality” in MarchApril 2012.
Among recent articles are a 2012 series by Reuters titled “The Unequal State of America”, and a look at
variation inside the top 1% of households by The New York Times.

