Local immigration/crime
investigations
IRE 2013

The Railroad Killer

What data does the government keep?
IDENT/ENFORCE (EARM) – Enforce Alien
Removal Module
EID – Enforcement Integrated Database
Secure Communities –Poor data collection
287g – ICE refusing to give out recent data for
remaining participants.

SC Stats/state/county

Ice.gov/foia/library/

http://www.ice.gov/doclib/foia/sc-stats/nationwide_interop_stats-fy2013-to-date.pdf

Secure Communities data limitations
• No everyone who crossed the border illegally
will produce a “hit” through a Secure
Communities check.
• Data on criminal convictions are limited. (ICE
only has arrest charge information on half of
those removed through the program,
according to GAO)
• ICE changed classification, skewed statistics

State public records request
• Ask district clerk and/or sheriff for “holds”
filed in court system
• Get A#s if you can
• State public records request based on a
keyword search – try sheriffs, jails, probation
officials, city/county officials

Privacy Act
• Sweeps of “criminal aliens” “gang members”
and “associates,” but no names.
• NYT Co. (Boston Globe) just won a lawsuit to
obtain names of immigrants with criminal
convictions released under Zadvydas vs. Davis.
• TRAC Syracuse FOIAs for individual case and
charge information

Alternative federal agencies
• Office of Immigration Statistics – Enforcement
section of Yearbook due out in July
• Executive Office for Immigration Review –
impact of prosecutorial discretion
• DHS Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties –
Secure Communities complaints

Overall ‘criminal alien’ removal data

Employer Sanctions
IRCA created employer sanctions for the first time in
1986.
There are 155.7 million people in the U.S. workforce.
About 5 percent of the nation’s workforce is
undocumented, according to Pew.

In FY 2010, ICE made 444 arrests on criminal charges. One
in four was considered a “managerial employee” – owner,
manager or corporate official.

Worksite enforcement data
No names of those criminally charged (with
exception of PACER and press releases)
E-verify database (request from USCIS)
SB744 would mandate E-Verify participation,
increase penalties for knowingly hiring people
without legal status.
I-9 audits

1-9 data: WSE consolidated monthly
tracking spreadsheet

S744
Ineligible if convicted of a felony or three
misdemeanors or “aggravated felony” as
defined by the INA.
Increases the penalties for certain criminal
activities, making it more difficult or
impossible to become a legal resident due to
drunk-driving convictions, gang activity,
domestic violence, passport fraud, and
identity theft.

Why FOIA?

