10 tips for doing great work in challenging times
Greg Borowski, assistant managing editor/projects and investigations,
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
gborowski@journalsentinel.com (414) 224-2252
@GregJBorowski

2013 IRE conference
Session: Coordinating an
investigative team

This tip sheet is aimed at managers who reject the idea that smaller operations can’t do worldclass work and who scoff at the notion cutbacks mean less quality. And for those who believe
there’s never been a better time for project-length journalism.
1. The tone starts at the top: The staff picks up on your approach, from being open to ideas, to
staying positive, to insisting on excellence down to every cutline. Find things to get excited about
every day, from a good turn of phrase in a story to a major reform driven by your team’s work.
2. Ban the phrase, “If only …”: The phrase is an insidious one -- if only we were bigger, if only
we had more time, had the right data, knew how to build it. It immediately lowers a project’s
potential, and staff morale along with it. Instead, turn the conversation to “What would it take …”
That points out roadblocks you can eliminate and creates opportunities for growth.
3. Don’t put limits on who can do the work. Don’t limit investigations and projects to those on
the investigative/projects team. If everyone in the newsroom has the potential to work on a
project, you instantly expand your capacity and bring new ideas and skills to the table.
4. Everyone can do it, but …: Not always alone and not all at the same time. Provide support -extra editing, training, a teammate – when necessary to assure stretch assignments are
successful. Identify ways to work projects and investigations into a reporter’s daily routine.
5. Accept all ideas … and then reject some: Encourage the sharing of ideas, especially those
that generate off from a news event. Then choose wisely the ones you will pursue. Answer these
questions: Why is it a story now? Why is it a story for you and your organization?
6. Solid singles count: Require a mix of short-term, mid-range and long-term pieces. Too many
project reporters are looking for the long ball and wait … and wait … for the right pitch. Look for
singles, doubles, triples. It keeps reporters sharp and in the paper – and keeps sources calling.
7. Pick the right partners: Pair investigative reporters with beat reporters, record diggers with
shoe-leather reporters, crisp writers with hard-core data reporters. Nothing kills morale faster than
taking a beat-driven idea and giving it to the “projects team.” Rather, use beat expertise to
accelerate a project and add instant expertise and sourcing to the mix.
8. Projects are a team sport: Involve photographers, graphic artists, interactive designers, app
developers early. Give them a voice and let them help shape the project and determine how to
best tell each piece of it. They are journalists, not a service shop.
9. Be a process person: Every story is different, of course. But for a successful project, certain
things have to happen in a certain order for a smooth landing. Establish a process, from the
vetting of an idea to final production, that works for your newsroom -- and then trust the process.
10. Set benchmarks before setting the final deadline: This helps assure progress is being
made and allows you to scale things back of an idea doesn’t pan out. Regular conversations and
meetings keeps you plugged in to the work and allows you to steer things right sooner than later.
Bonus: Keep calm … and provide candy: When roadblocks hit or plans go awry (as they
invariably do), always have a fallback plan -- and a bag of candy in your cabinet drawer.

