Tisha Thompson
Investigative Reporter
WRC-TV NBC4 Washington, DC
tisha.thompson@nbcuni.com
202-885-4480

The Get: Asking the Right Person the Right Question
Remember…we’re all human
We all have family, kids, vacations & job troubles
We all know pain – pain of watching someone get hurt or die or pain of losing a job, money or our reputation
Before you call, try to anticipate what they’re worried about
Will I lose my job, my money or my life? Will I go to jail?
Who ratted me out? Who is the whistleblower? If they know, who else knows? How much do they actually know?
Do I need to call a lawyer? Do I need a news conference?
Is my house a mess? Do I need to clean? Will I look fat, stupid, ugly or all of the above?
Getting People Who Have Been Hurt
“This will be hard. But I wouldn’t ask you to do it if I didn’t think it would help other people.”
“We can’t fix this problem without your help.”
“The bad guy is getting all of the attention. We want to make sure people know what your daughter was really like.”
Getting Companies, Government, PR & PIOs
Be honest. Lay it all out there. Tell them what you got. Don’t burn them.
“I’m trying to get both sides here. I suspect you have a different version of what happened.”
“It’s your chance to say you’ve taken a look at it, you didn’t find anything wrong, you’re going to make a change,
whatever you want to say.”
“You really don’t want me to camp out on your boss’s yard and hit him up with cameras blazing when he gets his
6am paper. But I will do that.”
Interviewing People Who Have Been Hurt
Remember, they may be afraid…of the camera, of themselves, of the other side, of their own emotions
Walk in without cameras or notepads and explain in detail how the interview will go
As others are setting up, talk to them about something they are proud of…Look for family portraits, medals & plaques,
the kids’ chore chart, home décor, sporting & hunting equipment, yard work…
Remind them they are being smart and brave. They are handsome and beautiful.
Tell them this is going to be really hard and you can stop anytime if it gets too hard
“What was your favorite thing Jane would do?” “I never knew Jane. What was she like?”
“What is that little thing you never thought much about that you now miss so much?”
“OK…let’s start from the very beginning…how did the day start?”
Let them talk. They’ve rehearsed what they’re going to say. Let them plow through it without interrupting.
Then go back and hash over the details you really care about.
Don’t be afraid to challenge them. “But when we told Bad Guy what you said, he said…” “Are you sure that’s
what happened? How do you know?” “Is there any chance you made a mistake?”

Interviewing Experts
th

Avoid hyper-technical jargon, statistics & acronyms by reminding them that the average TV viewer has a 6
grade education. “How would you explain it to your kid’s class?” “Can you show me?”
Get them out of the office. Make them demonstrate. Know what they are going to say before they say it.
Avoid “policinese” by letting them just say whatever they’re prepared to say and then go back over the details
Interviewing The Accused in a Controlled Interview
“This is going to be hard. I am asking you these questions because it is my job. Just l ike it’s your job to answer
them. It’s not personal. It is your chance to tell your side of the story.”
Plot out with your photographer exactly what you’re going to say to all of the possible responses
Have follow-ups planned for every possibility
Take advantage of their assumptions – if they think they’re smarter than you, all the better!
Interviewing The Accused in an “Unscheduled Interview”
Get all of your video before you call
NEVER trespass
Practice and choreograph with your photographer
Bring a third person if at all possible to videotape you & the photographer…and to call 911 if necessary
Give them your business card along with the name & contact info for your news director if they “think of
anything else they want to make sure we know.”
The Golden Rules
Always shake their hand
Tell the truth
Get out of the office
Don’t lose your cool…ever
Be polite, compassionate and kind
Be firm
Avoid yes and no questions
SILENCE IS YOUR BEST FRIEND
If you don’t understand…neither do a lot of other people
Don’t be afraid to challenge people – even the people who have been hurt
Don’t be afraid to ask the same question over and over again
It is never, ever personal. If gets personal you need to pass the story on to someone else

