3 4 South Third Street  Colum bus Ohio 4 3 2 1 5  (61 4 ) 4 61 -5000
For m ore inform ation, contact Jill Riepenhoff: jriepenhoff@dispatch.com ; 61 4 -4 6 1 -52 92



ON CAMPUS:

Com plimentary cars. Ev ery major college athletic department has special relationships with
car dealers. Giv e a car to a coach, get a bundle of tickets to the games. At Ohio State, the football
coach’s wife gets a shiny new Lex is every six months. The marching band director drives a
donated a 1 997 Buick LeSabre with 94,000 miles.
Flight m anifests. Trav el to the biggest games typically attracts a couple plane loads of people.
One will carry the team, athletic department staff and important boosters. Another will carry the
president, dignitaries, politicians and other muckety mucks.
Occasional m eal form s. NCAA allows boosters to take a team to dinner as long as they get
approval from the athletics department
Will-call tickets. Most athletes and coaches are allowed to inv ite people to games. Former Oh io
State running back Maurice Clarett had a bookie on one of his lists. Current football players had
car dealers and drug-dealing tattoo artists.
Car registration forms. Most major universities require athletes to fill out forms detailing
what kind of car they are driving, how much they paid for it, who co -signed for the loan, etc. They
often are works of fiction.
Sum m er job form s. The NCAA requires every athlete to fill out a form telling the athletics
department what they’re doing for the summer. The mo st prestigious athletes get jobs arranged
by coaches. Fiv e months after winning the national championship, Ohio State football players got
jobs for $1 8 an hour for what records describe as "public relations," v isiting nursing -home
residents. This arrangement led to an NCAA v iolation.
President’s box . Who has been inv ited to the best seats in the house and what do they do up
there during the game? They eat a lot of ex pensive food.
T icket database. Who has gets the most tickets?
NCAA v iolations. Schools are required to report when rules both big (boosters gave
quarterback money) and small (coach accidentally sent a tex t message to a recruit). There are tons
of stories there. NCAA publishes the major infractions database on its website (ncaa.org) by
school with full report of what went wrong. Be warned, all names hav e been removed. Most
schools also keep a summary sheet of all v iolations – quick way to see what’s going on. V ery
limited information, though.
NCAA financials. To get a complete picture of a school without pouring through a budget,
request the financial document sent to the NCAA every January. Avoid Equity in Athletics
Disclosure Act data from the U.S. Department of Education – it’s often wrong. USA Today
collects and analyzes the NCAA financial documents every y ear.
Com pliance-department audits: Each D-I school is required by the NCAA to have an audit
ev ery four years. Some schools, such as OSU, do them annually . Most recent audit at Ohio State
showed problems with athletes’ car registrations – they were driving cars that didn’t belong to

them – and missing equipment and apparel. Federal agents recovered lots of OSU equipment
during a drug raid.
Em ails and phone records: who is talking to who. Coach Jim Tressel made lots of phone calls
– including two to an FBI agent – when he learned of NCAA v iolations. He called lots of
interesting people – just not the ones he should hav e called.
Academic Progress Rate and graduation rates. This is how the NCAA now measures the
academic success of college athletics. Teams that don’t make the grade risk punishment. For
Div ision I, there are two sets of graduation rates – one compiled by the NCAA and one compiled
by the U.S. Department of Education. Both hav e their pros and cons. The NCAA rate measures
ev eryone, regardless of where they graduate. For example, if an athlete transferred from Ohio
State to Ohio Univ ersity and then graduated, Ohio State is not penalized for a drop out. The
federal rate penalizes schools for drop outs even if they graduate elsewhere.
Coaches’ contracts. Find gems like this: At 1 7 5 pounds, Ohio State football coach Jim Tressel
already is worth more than his weight in gold. The new $2.6 million contract trumped a 2003
agreement that had guaranteed Tressel $1.6 million this season, rou ghly the v alue of his weight in
gold. Now, he's platinum. These day s, many assistants at top-tier programs also have contracts.
Coaches’ outside income reports. From Jodi Upton at USA Today: This record documents
all the other sources of coaches’ income such as speaking engagements, shoe contracts and what
not.
Univ ersity police blotters. Find unruly fan behavior inside stadiums and at tailgates during
sporting ev ents.
Media guides. Ex amine, for ex ample, the majors of football and basketball players to s earch for
clusters of majors. Most guides are online.
Personnel files. They are public records in many states. It’s a good way to find out if a coach
has been admonished for breaking NCAA rules.
Public-record requests: FOIA the FOIAs to see who is asking for what because there may be
other ty pes of documents reporters want that you aren’t familiar with.
eBay . Who is selling what?


OFF CAMPUS:

Court records. College athletes get a lot of traffic tickets. Track their routes home and check
records in ev ery county along the way. Who se car were they driving? Athletes also get into other
kinds of trouble – i.e. 1 7 Ohio Univ ersity football players were arrested in recent y ears but faced
little, if any , discipline from the team.
Health-code v iolations. ESPN’s Paula Lav igne ex amined food violations at sev eral major
professional stadiums, “What’s Lurking in y our Stadium Food,” July 2010. Makes y ou wanna
think twice about that half-time dog.
State ethics board records. The Seattle Times’ Ken Armstrong says records from the
Washington State Ex ecutive Ethics Board document their inv estigations of all kinds of things
inv olving the UW athletic department. These included investigations of the coach's contract (in
particular, payments from Nike), as well as the coach's u se of a booster's priv ate jet and the
ex penses racked up by the university during a Rose Bowl trip.

State univ ersity-oversight agencies. In Ohio, it’s called the Board of Regents. They collect all
kinds of data, documents and records. During a rape inv es tigation at the Univ ersity of Iowa a few
y ears ago, the regents received a report on the allegations, which the university had fought to keep
secret.
IRS form 990. Check out how the Big 1 0, Pac 1 0 and others spend and divvy up gazillions of
dollars. Check out how much the conference commissioner is paid each y ear. Also check out
booster clubs finances. Also, at private schools, look at the highest paid employees – it’s often the
football coach. Ev en the football coach at perennial Div ision III football powerhouse Mount
Union in Ohio is among the highest paid at that school. Check with y our local campus library to
see if they hav e an account. www.Guidestar.org.


WHERE T O FIND IDEAS

Ex tra! Ex tra! Investigative Reporters and Editors’ story database always has a wealth of ideas.
Look under the sports category, see what’s been done and tailor it to y our own school. Imitation is
the best form of flattery . www.ire.org
NCAA.org. Wealth of information/data on injuries, doping, academics. Some information is
broken down by school; some is aggregated. But it provides a benchmark.
ESPN.com . Read the headlines daily and trends emerge.
NCAA By laws. These are the rules of collegiate athletics that regulate everything from text
messages to drug abuse. Ex plore how and why a particular rule came to pass.
Play ers blog of T he Chronicle of Higher Education. Libby Sander and Brad Wolv erton do
a great job of stay ing on top of all the important issues across all div isions.
http://chronicle.com/blogs/players/


OBST ACLES:

Fam ily Educational Rights and Priv acy Act (FERPA). But more and more courts are
finding that not ev ery piece of paper on campus is an education record. Student Press Law Center
is a great resource – www.splc.org
But FERPA doesn’t last forever. Ken Armstrong of the Seattle Times say s that s ometimes, y ou can
get a play er's academic file. At the Univ ersity of Washing, we got the files (including academic
transcripts and special c ourtroom assignments) for two players who died soon after leaving the
univ ersity. We argued that FERPA no longer applied because the players were no longer living.
(The right to priv acy dies with the person.) These files proved to be invaluable in showing how
some play ers managed to retain their academic eligibility.
US Departm ent of Education Equity in Athletics Disclosure data. Somewhat helpful to
peek inside athletic spending at private universities and lower NCAA divisions that aren’t
required to file financial documents with the association. But be a v ery wary bear. In some cases,
the numbers are complete works of fiction by the colleges. In other cases, there is a problem with
the input function that scrambles numbers after colleges electronically sen d it to the USDOE.
NEV ER publish or air a number without checking it with the school. Need a sterner warning, read
a 2004 Dispatch story about the data.

