Top 5 Sources of Information on a 990
Annual 990 tax returns filed by nonprofit organizations are notable not only for their time lag -- they are filed long
after the spending takes place -- but also for their lack of detail. Despite their shortcomings, though, they do
provide some useful information. This list offers a start for those who are not familiar with the documents.

1) Page 1 - Summary:
Provides a wealth of quick, useful data, including:










Employee Identification Number (EIN)
Number of employees and volunteers
State of legal domicile (can be -- and often is -- different from address)
Name and address of principal officer
Phone number of organization
Address (and whether the address has changed)
Type, such as 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), etc.
Notifications of termination, amendment, name change, and/or request for exempt status
Totals (revenue, grants, expenditures, etc.)

2) Page 7 - Board Members
Not a complete list of the individuals associated with the organization, but it does provide salary information and
the hours per week, on average, devoted to the organization.

3) Page 10 - Expenses
The most detailed breakdown of the group's expenses that a 990 offers. Though it lacks crucial details, it does give
the public a peek at just how a particular group is defining its activities to different agencies. To give one example,
American Action Network reported $18.9 million in election-related spending to the Federal Election Commission
(FEC) in 2010. But in its 990 filed with the IRS, it reported that $17 million of its $25.7 million in expenditures went
towards "lobbying." Both can’t be true, at least as most people would define those categories.

4) Schedule C - Political Campaign and Lobbying Activities
If the organization answered "yes" to one or all of questions 3 through 5 on Page 3, the organization is required to
file a Schedule C. Not all organizations file this schedule; some groups that spent millions in 2010, according to FEC
reports, didn't report any political spending to the IRS. In addition, the totals on Schedule C forms are often very
different from the totals reported to the FEC. Pay close attention to Part IV, which requires a description of the
group's Schedule C-reported activities.

5) Schedule I - Grants
If the organization reported grant totals on Page 1, line 13, the grants that it gave out will be reported in the
Schedule I.

BONUS: Page 8, Section B - Outside Contractors
Nonprofits are required to report the five most highly compensated outside contractors receiving more than
$100,000. This information is often useful not only because it contains names and addresses that can be
instructive, but it includes a (brief) description of the services provided (such as "media placement"). Though only
the top five contractors are listed, section B.2 requires the organization list the total number of contractors paid
more than $100,000.
QUESTIONS? Contact Robert Maguire, Outside Spending Researcher, at 202 354 0109, or Robert@crp.org.

