Excel Formulas – a quick list (Norwegian version)
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE

Here’s a brief cheat sheet for some of the formulas you’ll use often in Microsoft Excel. Use this
spreadsheet below to refer to for examples and remember: If in doubt, the help file is your friend.
(Search the help file by “worksheet function” to find an alphabetical list of Excel functions.) I’ve listed
the formulas below in Norwegian and English so you can tackle spreadsheets in either language. Please
note that if you see “( : )” this means that you’ll need to enter cell references to create a range within
the parenthesis such as (A2:A9). Examples are listed below each formula.

Figure 1

Basic math
ADDITION
To add up the total in English: =SUM( : )
To add up the total in Norwegian: =SUMMER( : )
Using the above spreadsheet, write a formula to find the total salary for this year:
-In English: =SUM(B2:B9)
-In Norwegian: =SUMMER(B2:B9)

AVERAGE
To find the average in a range of numbers in English: =AVERAGE( : )
To find the average in a range of numbers in Norwegian: = GJENNOMSNITT( : )
Find the average value for “Last year” in the above data using this formula:
-In English: =AVERAGE(C2:C9)
-In Norwegian: =GJENNOMSNITT(C2:C9)

MEDIAN
To find the median in a range of numbers in English and Norwegian: MEDIAN( : )
1

Find the median value for “Last year” in the above data using this formula:
-In English and Norwegian: =MEDIAN(C2:C9)
SUBTRACTION
To find the change (difference) in English & Norwegian: =New value – old/original value
Using the above spreadsheet, write a formula to find the change in salaries between last year and this
year. (Remember, in this situation “This year” is the New Value and “Last year” is the old value.)
-In English and Norwegian: =B2-C2
PERCENT CHANGE
To find the percent change in English and Norwegian ask yourself, “Do journalists typically like to do
math?” The answer should be “NO” and our formula spells out “N-O-O”:
=(New value-old value)/Old value
Find the percent change from last year to this year using the above spreadsheet:
-In English and Norwegian: =(B2-C2)/C2

MAXIMUM
To find the maximum value in a list of numbers in English: =MAX( : )
To find the maximum value in a list of numbers in Norwegian: = STØRST( : )
Find the maximum value for “This year” in the above data using this formula:
-In English: =MAX(B2:B9)
-In Norwegian: = STØRST(B2:B9)
MINIMUM
To find the minimum value in a list of numbers in English and Norwegian: =MIN( : )
Find the minimum value for “This year” in the above data using this formula:
-In English and Norwegian: =MIN(B2:B9)

Figure 2

2

PERCENT OF TOTAL
When you’re working with categories, such as job titles or geographic areas, sometimes it’s useful to
find out what percent of the grand total is going to each category. When you want to do that you use
this formula (remember you need to anchor the base amount – the total – with “$”): =Part/$Whole
If you wanted to calculate the total for “This year” using the data in Figure 2, you’d enter the following
formula into cell C2.
=B2/$B$16

Simple formatting tricks
To change a cell from all upper or lower case to proper case, where the first letter of each word is
capitalized, use the following formula replacing “cell” with the cell containing the text you want to be
proper case.
In English: =PROPER(cell)
In Norwegian: =STOR.FORBOKSTAV(cell)

To change a cell so all of the letters appear in upper case use the following formula replacing “cell” with
the cell containing the text you want to be upper case.
In English: =UPPER(cell)
In Norwegian: =STORE(cell)
To change a cell so all of the letters appear in lower case use the following formula replacing “cell” with
the cell containing the text you want to be lower case.
In English: =LOWER(cell)
In Norwegian: = SMÅ (cell)

Conditional statements
You can use conditional statements to test your data and return information depending on whether that
test has a true or false answer. This is great for data cleaning and also for adding categories to your data.
Here’s how the formula works:
In English:
=IF(logical test, “result if the test answer is true for this cell”, “result if the answer is false for this cell”)
In Norwegian:
=HVIS(logical test; “result if the test answer is true for this cell”; “result if the answer is false for this
cell”)
If you wanted to add labels to the data in Figure 1 above to flag whether the salary was high or low, you
could do something like this:
In English: =IF(B2<25000, “Too small”, “OK”)
In Norwegian: =HVIS(B2<25000; “Too small”; “OK”)
The value in column B is checked. If it is less than $25,000 the phrase “Too small” will be your formula
result. If the value in column B is higher than $25,000 it fails the test and the “A-OK” phrase would be
the formula result.
3

Pulling things apart
String functions – to split apart a name (or any other text):
LEFT
The LEFT function will start from the left and return the number of characters you specify. Here is the
description of the formula:
In English: =LEFT(cellwithtext, number of characters you want returned)
In Norwegian: =VENSTRE(cellwithtext; number of characters you want returned)

Figure 3

For example, if you wanted to pull the year off of the date above in Figure three you would put the
following formula in cell B2:
In English: =LEFT(A2, 4)
In Norwegian: =VENSTRE(A2; 4)
RIGHT
The RIGHT function acts just like the left function except it allows you to begin from the opposite side of
the field. You will most likely use this function less than the others.
In English: =RIGHT(cellwithtext, number of characters you want returned)
In Norwegian: = HØYRE(cellwithtext; number of characters you want returned)

Figure 4

Using Figure 4 above, you would enter the following formula in cell C2 to pull of the day from the date
listed in column A:
In English: =RIGHT(A2, 2)
In Norwegian: = HØYRE(A2; 2)

MID
The MID function allows you to start from somewhere other than the far left or the far right of the field.
It allows you to extract information from the middle. Here’s how it works:
In English: =MID(cellwithtext, start position, number of characters you want returned)
In Norwegian: =DELTEKST(cellwithtext; start position; number of characters you want returned)

4

Figure 5

Using Figure 5 above, you would enter the following formula in cell D2 to pull of the month from the
date listed in column A:
In English: =MID(a2, 5, 2)
In Norwegian: = DELTEKST(a2; 5; 2)

SEARCH
Often last names aren’t the same length so you can’t use a simple number to retrieve them like you can
with the dates shown in the examples above. Rather, you need to look for a pattern within the data and
use that to help you slice and dice. First and last names are often separated with a comma. You can use
the SEARCH function to find the position of any character, such as a comma, within a cell. Please note,
the formula will return a number. This number specifies the location of the character you are searching
for within the cell. Here’s the description of the formula:
In English: =SEARCH(“text you want to find”, where you want to find it)
In Norwegian: =SØK(“text you want to find”; where you want to find it)

Figure 6

If you wanted to find the location for each comma using the data in Figure 6, you would write the
following formula in cell B2.
In English: =SEARCH(“,”, A2)
In Norwegian: =SØK(“,”; A2)

Figure 7

You can combine the information you got back from the SEARCH function (See Figure 7) with LEFT to
extract the last name. Here’s the formula you’d write in cell C2 to do that:
In English: =LEFT(A2, B2-1)
In Norwegian: =VENSTRE(A2; B2-1)
5

Since the comma is one character position after the last name, we need to subtract one and that’s how
the “-1” after B2 is necessary.

Putting things together
You can “concatenate,” or string things together, by using the “&.”

Figure 8

For example, look at Figure 8 above. If you wanted to put all of the pieces of each address into one line,
you could do that like this:
=a2&” “&b2&”, “&c2&” “&d2
Notice that any time you want a space or any additional character added to your string and it isn’t
already in a cell, you simply write it in your formula contained with quotes.

Dealing with dates
There are some simple functions that will help you pull apart pieces of dates. This can be useful if you
want to count the number of records in a particular year, month, etc. If a date looks like a date to you,
but doesn’t operate like one in Excel, that likely means that it is not in a proper date format. To get it
into a proper date format you’ll need to use the string functions above to manually pull out the pieces of
the date and then string it together using the DATE function, (DATO in Norwegian).

Figure 9
6

To break apart pieces of a date:
To return the YEAR
In English: =YEAR(Datefield)
In Norwegian: =ÅR(Datefield)
Using the data in Figure 9 above, you’d write the following formula in cell B2 to extract the year from
the date:
In English: =YEAR(A2)
In Norwegian: =ÅR(A2)

Figure 10

To return the MONTH
In English: =MONTH(Datefield)
In Norwegian: =MÅNED(Datefield)
Using the data in Figure 10 above, you’d write the following formula in cell C2 to extract the month from
the date:
In English: =MONTH(A2)
In Norwegian: =MÅNED(A2)

Figure 11

To return the DAY
In English: =DAY(Datefield)
In Norwegian: =DAG(Datefield)
Using the data in Figure 11 above, you’d write the following formula in cell D2 to extract the day from
the date.
In English: =DAY(A2)
In Norwegian: =DAG(A2)

Figure 12
7

Finding the DAY OF WEEK
To return the day of the week for a specific date (1 = Sunday, 2=Monday, 3=Tuesday, etc.):
In English: =WEEKDAY(Datefield)
In Norwegian: =UKEDAG(Datefield)
Using the data found in Figure 12 above, you’d write the following formula in cell E2 to find the day of
the week.
In English: =WEEKDAY(A2)
In Norwegian: =UKEDAG(A2)

Figure 13

To convert a date stored as text into true date format (necessary to sort on dates properly): Let’s say
the date looked something like 20100529. This date is actually 5/29/2010, (29/5/2010) but right now we
would say that it was text in YYYYMMDD format.
The first step to making it a true date is splitting the different pieces of the date apart so you can put it
back together properly. Because the date isn’t stored as a proper date, you won’t be able to make the
YEAR(), MONTH() and DAY() functions work on the cells like you did in the examples above. You’ll have
to use string functions in situations like this. You’ll use LEFT, RIGHT and MID (See above). Once you have
the different pieces of the date apart, you’ll be able to put them back together using the following
formula.
In English: =DATE(year, month, day)
In Norwegian: =DATO(year; month; day)

Figure 14

For example, to put the date together in Figure 14 you’d write this in cell E2.
In English: =DATE(b2, c2, d2)
In Norwegian: =DATO(b2, c2, d2)
See the results in Figure 15 below. (Note, you can change the format of the date so it reads like
“29/5/2010”):
8

Figure 15

9

