DANGER!! Look out for dirty data
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE
GIJC13 – Rio de Janeiro
Let me let you in on a little secret – all data are dirty. Now that we’ve got that out of the way, let’s talk
about some ways you can look for problems in data and bulletproof your work in the process.

Record counts
 Always be aware of how many records (rows or lines) make up your data.
 Ask the government agency (or whomever gave you the data) how many records you should
have.
 Use things you already know to check record counts.
 Ask yourself as you go if the number of records make sense.
Look at the data for problems with
 Data entry (misspellings, etc)
 Lack of consistency
 Format
 Missing information
 Codes
 Leading/trailing spaces
Techniques to find issues
 Before you do anything else, look at your data. Scroll through it. Write down what you notice.
 Look at the number of records. Does it make sense?
 Double check totals and other calculations.
 Check records against other sources.
 Sort columns different ways: Who gets the most? The least? What is the earliest date? Etc.
 In Access (or other dbase managers): Use “group by” queries to check data integrity. Sort them
ascending and descending.
 In Excel: Use pivot tables.
 Look at blanks. What do they mean?
 Do you have definitions for all codes? (Make sure you get all relevant documentation)
 Look for anomalies. (For example, does one year have triple the records of all others? That could
mean a problem)
As you go
 Always work off of a backup copy.






Keep careful notes of your work.
Identify issues within the data and write down questions you must answer.
Never hesitate to ask outside experts for help understanding data (inspectors, engineers, etc.).
Talk it through with others.

Cleaning data
 Always work off of a backup copy.
 Save your notes and your data often.
 Never alter the original data (add new columns).
 Once you’ve identified the problem, pick the best tool for the job.
 Double check your work.
 Look for patterns in the data. Use the patterns to help you solve the problem.
Tools for data cleaning in Excel
 Filtering
 Functions (String, IF statements, Trim, Date, etc.)
 Cool tricks (Paste special, Go to special, etc.)
 Text to columns
Tools for data cleaning in Access
 Update queries
 String functions
Tools for data cleaning in text editors
 Find/Replace
 Regular expressions

