IRE Oklahoma City 2013 Quick Hit Investigative
Nanci Wilson, nanciw@gmail.com 512-909-4919
Sign up for Journalist Express www.journalistexpress.com Use My Links for all of your best online resources.
Keep an open record requests/FOIA pipeline full for future stories: i.e. appraisal data, complaints filed, check registers,
contracts/performance benchmarks. Keep it to compare to later years.
Give out as many business cards as you can and ask people to call you when they see something odd or hear about something.
Make note on back of every card you get. Note where you met, topic of interest and willingness to do interview or help with story.
Keep contact list in one place and is searchable for quick reference.
Go where others don’t: Health Care Districts, Utility or Water Districts, small gov’t entities. Nobody pays attention=high risk
Goldmines for stories
IRE.org: Resource Center http://www.ire.org/resource-center/, ExtraExtra http://www.ire.org/blog/extra-extra/
Government Accounting Office reports: http://www.gao.gov/ Search for your state, city or county.
Congressional Votes: http://www.govtrack.us/ Check how your lawmakers voted and compare to what they say in public.
OIG Reports to Congress Every fed agency Office of Inspector General submits these to Congress.
Federal Single Audit Database: http://harvester.census.gov/sac/dissem/entity.html Look for “Adverse opinion”, “Going Concern”,
nd
“Significant deficiency”, “Material Weakness”, “Noncompliance”, or “Questioned costs”. (usually 2 page) Click Single Audit
Search Options - Go to Search for Entity Information – Advanced Entity Search. Click both 2011 and 2012. Type in Auditee, if you
have name or Auditee City. Click boxes to limit results to audits with issues to Adverse Opinion.
Audits: City, County, State, Special Districts. Check with Auditors Office for reports/investigations.
Comparisons: Tax appraisal increases on different sides of town; Tax exemptions; Salaries; Benefits; Holidays. Check data reported
to another gov’t entities and compare to what they are reporting publicly.
Budgets: What has grown and why? Does it make sense?
Government Health Care Plans: Show what plans are offered to Gov’t workers and officials. Do they pay premiums? How much does
the Gov’t pay? Compare what their plans with those of others in the community. Focus on small Gov’t entities.
Government Waste: Ask Gov’t workers for the biggest waste they see. File Open Records Requests: Take Home Vehicles (who?
Miles from home to work? Cost of gas and maintenance? Reporting as income to IRS? Is it necessary? Type of vehicle?) Promotional
items; Travel Expenses: Dues to similar orgs; Lawsuits against govt., Homeland Security Grants.
Civil Forfeiture cases: Check courts for lawsuits.
Unclaimed Money: State, City, County, Utilities, Banks. You’ll be able to find these people, why can’t they?
Untested DNA/Rape Kits: How many untested? Are they getting federal funds? What’s the hold up?
Street maintenance/ Pot holes. Where are most done? Where are they being ignored?
Complaints filed with City Hall. What are people complaining about? High weeds, sloppy maintenance, bad landlords?
Drugs: Medicare/Medicaid: What are the most prescribed meds? Viagra? Are prisons prescribing Viagra? Which physician
prescribes the most? What drugs are being prescribed to foster kids? Are name brand prescribed more than generics?
Overtime: Who, how much and why? How does it impact retirement benefits?
Superintendent contracts: What is the true cost to taxpayers? If it has clause that doesn’t specifically show $, ask for it.
Charitable Campaigns for Gov’t Employees: What kind of charities are listed? High overhead? Odd purposes? Is someone getting cut
of contributions to administer program?
Fees collected on utility bills: What does the bill say is the purpose? Are the funds used as intended?
Guidestar www.guidestar.com for non-profits: Does local gov’t entity contract with any non-profits? Are their filings up to date?
Government contracts : Are companies in good standing with State? Have any been disciplined? Sued? Have principals been in
trouble in the past?
Time off from work: How much does that cost? Who will do the work when they are gone? What does that cost? Sick time, vacation
time, holidays – Is there a take it or lose it provision? If not, why? How much $$ is owed?
Newsletters and Push Sites
http://www.newswise.com/ Science, Medical & Business News (sign up for news alerts) See “Expert Pitch” [on left side of screen]
for list of people who are willing to talk about issues in the news.
CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/

