CUNY Watchdog Workshop, January 2014
Hannah Rappleye and Lisa Riordan Seville
Some tips for grant writing
Think of it as a finely-tuned pitch, with a budget. Introduce characters, if you have them. Tell
a story. Make it compelling. And use facts to drive it home. For investigative grants, think about
developing a ‘minimum/maximum’ thesis for your project and including it in your proposal.
Report. Do your homework. Reporting is key to a winning proposal.Distill the story down to
something concrete--it’s a pitch, not a topic, a project, not an idea--and make sure to report
around your idea. Talk to experts, do clip searches, dig around in public records. Your proposal
will be richer for it.
Propose what you know. It generally helps to develop a kind of ‘beat’ as a freelancer, an area
or areas of interest that you cover regularly, whether through your published work, your
research or even through your Twitter feed. Writing a grant proposal that covers a topic you
know well, and are interested in, will not only help sustain you through the long-term process of
reporting and putting together your project, but also help you field questions like a pro during the
interview process. Having demonstrated some kind of ‘beat’ before applying for a grant also
helps prove to the organization that you have what it takes to see the project through.
Tailor your proposal to the grant. This seems like a no-brainer, but if you’re applying for a
short-term grant, don’t propose a massive investigatory piece that you know isn’t possible, due
to time or budget constraints. Suss out whether your proposed topic has the legs to withstand a
long-term investigation or is more of a short-term enterprise story. It circles back to reporting:
sometimes stories that seem like they have meat don’t turn out that way, once you start digging.
Good ideas often count more than experience. If you don’t have a large stable of clips or a
news organization behind you, think of other ways to show you can see an independent, longterm project through. Use self-published work, research papers, or other projects to show
funders you have what it takes. Grants are competitive, but organizations often pay more
attention to good ideas or particular topics their organization is focused on, rather than a
journalist’s career status. There are also many grants out there that cater to younger journalists,
without extensive experience.
Break down your budget. Most grants require that you write a detailed budget. Call
businesses or search online to get estimates. Depending on the size and duration of the grant,
you should also account for rent, health insurance or other costs related to supporting yourself
throughout the length of the project. Spend time differentiating between essential costs and
those you can budget. Be realistic, but don’t overdo it. You don’t want them to turn you down
just because your ask was too big, nor do you want to lose (too much) money on a story.
Remember also that costs will differ depending on the nature and location of the project. For
example, equipment insurance, catastrophic insurance, fixer fees, visas, petty cash for
incidentals (like bribes at the border) and international data plans are common costs for
international projects. For long-term projects, for example, think about costs that will go toward

CUNY Watchdog Workshop, January 2014
Hannah Rappleye and Lisa Riordan Seville
supporting an investigation. Industry conferences are often worth the registration fee.
Municipalities and states typically don’t waive public records request fees, for example, and
billing or jail records for a few years could end up costing you hundreds. Being able to take a
source out to dinner can also sometimes go a long way. Always give yourself a modest “misc”
line, to account for the unexpected.
Foster relationships with editors. While clips aren’t always a must, many organizations
require some interest or commitment from a publication. Keep up your relationships with editors
you have written for, and work to foster them with publications who get back to you on your
pitches, even when they say no. It gives you a stable of contacts to dip into when you want to
apply for a grant, and an initial eye to weaknesses in an idea or proposal.
Finally, keep applying. If you don’t get a grant during one year, don’t give up. Apply again, and
again, and again. Your idea may not have made the final cut due to a myriad of reasons. For
one, organizations often fund specific projects over others because they’ve decided certain
issues are priority for a funding cycle. But those funding priorities could change the next year.
Ask for follow-up calls with organizations who said no, and ask how your pitch or idea might be
improved. Keep a list of issues and stories you want to explore. File FOIA requests that you
think could bear fruit. Look for grants that more specifically address your project, or apply for
smaller grants that may fund only one trip, but could help you dig further into the story. Keep
digging.
Resources
The Investigative Fund at The Nation Institute
http://theinvestigativefund.org/
Media Justice Fellowships and the Open Society Foundations
http://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/grants/soros-justice-fellowships
The Fund For Investigative Journalism: The Board of Directors looks for stories that break
new ground and expose wrongdoing – such as corruption, malfeasance, or misuse of power - in
the public and private sectors, domestically or internationally. Grants average $5,000 and cover
out-of-pocket expenses such as travel, document collection, and equipment rental. There are
about three grant cycles each year. http://fij.org/
The Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting provides travel grants to cover hard costs associated
with upcoming travel for an international reporting project. Our ideal project offers print,
photography, radio, and video.
http://pulitzercenter.org
Alicia Patterson Foundation provides six-month and one-year grants for in-depth investigative
and enterprise reporting.
http://aliciapatterson.org/

CUNY Watchdog Workshop, January 2014
Hannah Rappleye and Lisa Riordan Seville

The George Polk Investigative Grants are given to experienced reporters to pursue reporting
projects relating to social justice. The intent is to promote public awareness of social problems
in immigration, housing, welfare, health, employment and other areas and to promote
investigative articles on the Web as well as in print. Grants will range from $2500 to $10,000,
depending on the duration and complexity of the project.
http://liu.edu/About/News/Polk/Grants.aspx
Kaiser Media Fellowships: The Media Fellowships and Internships Program provides selected
journalists with unique opportunities to gain an in-depth grasp of U.S. health and health policy
issues, through site visits, briefings and discussions with policy experts and fellow editors and
reporters. The focus is squarely on State, national and global health policy issues, with the aim
of encouraging and informing coverage of the complex economic, political and medical issues
involved for a broad range of audiences.
http://kff.org/media-internships-fellowships-2/
The California Endowment Health Journalism Fellowships: The foundation based at the
University of Southern California offers a variety of all-expenses-paid Fellowships aimed at
meeting the training needs of journalists from both California and other states.
http://www.reportingonhealth.org/fellowships/seminars
Knight Fellowships. Fellowships of all kinds from the Knight Foundation. They range from
subjects, like science, to general journalistic innovation for the tech and entrepreneurially
inclined.
The International Center for Journalists offers various grants and training programs for
international journalists based in the U.S. and abroad
http://www.icfj.org/
List of journalism grants and fellowships compiled by Columbia University:
http://www.journalism.columbia.edu/page/137-journalism-fellowships/436
List of international/investigative journalism grants compiled by the Global Investigative
Journalism Network:
http://gijn.org/resources/grants-and-fellowships/

