Graph now searches profiles, pages, posts, likes,
comments, photo captions, check-ins on facebook,
according to privacy settings.

*

Graph now searches profiles, pages, posts, likes,
comments, photo captions, check-ins on facebook,
according to privacy settings.

*

Graph now searches profiles, pages, posts, likes,
comments, photo captions, check-ins on facebook,
according to privacy settings.

*

X-ray search websites through Google or Bing. Try
Bing for Social searches, they have a deal with
Twitter and have access to Twitter’s firehose of
posts, pictures, etc.

Spokeo combines a search of social media sites
with some public records. The inexpensive paid
version of Spokeo gives you access to emails and
phone numbers. The free version still gives you
names, addresses and possible social media
accounts.

You can change this setting when you have a free pro account, after joining
LinkedIn for Journalists and taking the 30 minute seminar. On the top right, go
to your account settings (it’s usually your photo). Select privacy and settings,
then “
Select what others see when you've viewed their profile.” Then choose “you
will be totally anonymous.”

Click advanced to the right of the search bar for
people. Join LinkedIn for Journalists Group on
LinkedIn, and take 30 minutes seminar to get free
upgrade for 1 year.

Search for alumni at a certain school during a
certain time period.

If your LinkedIn search surfaces a “private” account
(blocked because you aren’t connected to that
individual), an X-Ray Search in Google using the
keywords from that profile and site:linkedin.com, will
give you the person’s name.

People can also specifically opt-out of being picked
up by a Google search, so make sure you search
Tumblr separately, in the x-ray search,
site:tumblr.com

Ban.jo has helps you locate instagram, twitter,
facebook and linkedin posts by geographic location.
They have a new web platform they are offering to
news organizations for free. Email
jennifer@teambanjo.com

Try the Storyful Multisearch Chrome App to search multiple social media sites
at once.

Twitter has a powerful advanced search feature,
that includes a search of conversations between
accounts. Direct link is https://twitter.com/searchadvanced

Use Tweetdeck as your personal newswire. https://web.tweetdeck.com/
Tweetdeck Protips: https://support.twitter.com/articles/20170322-tweetdeckpro-tips

Jennifer Preston from the NYT The Lede shared this tip with me, always follow
official sources and local TV News people for USG.

