THE FAST LANE:
SOME RULES
FOR THE ROAD

JENNIFER S. FORSYTH
US Editor
The Wall Street Journal

From: Bustillo, Miguel
Sent: Wednesday, April 17, 2013 10:52 PM
To: Forsyth, Jennifer; Audi, Tammy; Koppel, Nathan
Cc: Meyer, Tedra; Podd, Ann; Eaton, Leslie; Murray,
Matt
Subject: RE: Contacts for West, Texas explosion
Our plan has changed slightly. Here is latest:
Shelly Banjo is en route to West, Texas
Nathan Koppel is making calls by phone
I am trying to direct Nathan/Shelly
Tammy is on standby to assist if it turns out many
people are dead.
I am going to stay up for a while until we determine
the extent of the story.
Leslie is going to take over as needed in the
morning.

From: Forsyth, Jennifer
Sent: Wednesday, April 17, 2013 9:49 PM
To: Bustillo, Miguel; Audi, Tammy; Koppel, Nathan
Cc: Meyer, Tedra; Podd, Ann; Eaton, Leslie; Murray, Matt
Subject: Contacts for West, Texas explosion
We're using AP for 5 or 6 star, unless Miguel gets something
by phone that he feels like is worth adding in.
If Miguel needs more reporting heft tonight, he knows to
reach out to Tammy Audi who is standing by to help.
I'll be crashing soon but will be up again by 6:30 am. 917821-8469
Ann Podd is best contact until about 1 am eastern. 212-4162666 or cell: 646-404-1493
Tedra Meyer will be handling the story for us pages.
If you need to reach an editor overnight, you can email
onlinetoday. If you need a top editor for some reason,
email Paul Beckett or Ken Brown in Hong Kong.
To publish, use urgentnews or updatenews, as always.

 Assign someone to tackle the
agency/industry website
 Assign someone to work with graphics if
needed
 Look for data, documents, court cases.
Download if possible.
 Look for watchdogs (Inspector General
reports, General Accountability Office,
whistleblowers)
 Look for follow-up angles, keep a list

• Death Toll Rises to 14 in Texas Blast
• West: A Tight-Knit Town With Strong Czech Roots
• Blast Brings Grief to a Firefighting Family

• With apologies to Elton John, Don’t Let the
Sun Go Down without the Big Meeting
• Fill a whiteboard with the Big Questions
• Think visually
• Think of ways to simplify: Q&As
• Think ambitiously: Interactive graphics,
cartoon videos, mobile apps
• File any obvious FOIAs that need to get in asap

• What—precisely—caused the explosion?
• Why did 14 people die?
• Was the evacuation orderly?
• What do we know about the facility?
• What do we know about the owners?
• Are fertilizer plants inherently danger?
• Is the oversight agency on the ball?
• How is this kind of facility inspected?
• How are workers trained?
• Was this facility typical or unusual?

Deadly Explosion Prompts Fresh Look at Regulation
By Daniel Gilbert, Alexandra Berzon and Nathan Koppel
April 19, 2013
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324763404578433133700195590?KEYWORDS=deadly+explosion+regulation+west+texas

WEST, Texas—Fertilizer storage facilities like one that was the site of a deadly blast here on Wednesday are fixtures in farm
communities around the country, but many are off the radar of government regulators despite a thicket of rules that govern
chemical safety.
Now the explosion at West Fertilizer Co. that killed at least 14 people and injured more than 200 others, is prompting survivors,
safety advocates and some regulators to question whether such facilities are adequately monitored, and whether zoning laws
should separate them from homes and businesses. …
Chemicals stored and sold as fertilizer like those at the West facility are overseen by numerous state and federal agencies. But the
agencies each focus on particular chemicals or aspects of safety while leaving out others. For example, ammonium nitrate,
thought preliminarily to have been involved in the incident in West, is left out of many regulations since its danger is as an
explosive, not as an airborne toxic gas. …
As a small army of federal investigators descend on West, searching for clues on why the explosion happened, one focus is
whether the fertilizer facility avoided scrutiny by not self-reporting hazardous materials to federal agencies or downplaying
risks, according to several people familiar with the investigative efforts.
Homeland Security agents are looking into why the facility didn't report itself to the agency as storing large materials of
ammonium nitrate as it likely was required to do, a DHS official said. The department has requirements for facilities that store
ammonium nitrate, since it is considered a terrorist threat as an explosive device, but relies on companies to self-report their
materials. Around 4000 facilities are registered with DHS under the program for high-risk chemical facilities, which includes more
than just fertilizer operations, the DHS official said.
Investigators want to examine possible discrepancies in documentation classifying the activity at the facility and whether it
primarily was a processing or storage operation, according to people familiar with the investigation. They also are investigating
whether the company may have stored nitric acid, a chemical used in the processing of ammonium nitrate, without reporting it,
people familiar with the matter said. Both of those disclosures might have triggered more scrutiny from federal regulators,
according to people familiar. …

Question: What do we know about the tanks that leaked in West
Virginia and tainted the water supply?
Answer:
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304419104579323044229021018?KEYWORDS=west+virginia

Leaky Tank's Design, Age Probed
Vessel Dates to 1938, Built With Rivets, Not Welds
Jan. 15, 2014

CHARLESTON, W.Va.—As probes develop into a chemical spill here that tainted the
water supply, investigators are looking at the design, age and maintenance of the tank
that failed, a nondescript storage container sealed with rivets and installed in 1938.
Experts in storage-tank construction say modern standards and testing are
much stricter than they used to be, and almost all large steel tanks are now welded,
not held together with rivets. But an untold number of smaller companies across the
country still store chemicals in older, riveted tanks, they say.

Question: Could the water company have known about this
chemical being stored there?
Answer: Yes!
http://live.wsj.com/video/west-virginia-site-visited-five-times-since-2001/BAFC1BAB-70CF-4C8E-B85F-9AFF40BB3F9B.html?KEYWORDS=west+virginia+water#!BAFC1BAB-70CF-4C8E-B85F9AFF40BB3F9B

