Getting started with Excel
Helena Bengtsson, Sveriges Television

Excel – Entering data
Make sure that you figure out a structure before entering the data you want in your table.
Which are the important facts? Which data do I need to have in my table, and which of them
can I choose not to include. What is the logical order of the information? How do I want to
use the table once it’s finished? It’s of course possible to change if you should discover that
you’ve made something wrong, but I advise you to do your thinking before creating your
table.
As Excel starts you will already get an empty sheet to work with. Start by entering the headers
of your columns. Then select the header row by clicking on the number to the left of them, i.e
1, and choose Bold on the buttons in the tools field.
Include as much information as you can. You have to consider the price of your own time, but
know that patterns may emerge in a totally different place than the one you thought when you
started.
Put repeating data in rows - and put their properties in columns. For example: Every person is
a row and the columns have properties such as first name, last name, address, income, age. A
tip is to always separate first and last name. It will be much easier to sort by last name if you
make one column for the first and one column for the last name.
Exercise: Entering data. Make a simple table by entering information about the participants
in the work shop. Start by opening Excel and place the cursor in cell A1. enter the following
headers in cells A1 through H1: Last name, First name, City, Work place, Age and Work
years. Then enter all the information for each participant in the work shop in the
corresponding cells.

Enter the data you want and use the tab key to move to the next cell, cell just to the right of
you. If you make an error you can change by either double clicking in the cell and changing
the text in the cell or by changing the text on the function row just above your sheet. It’s often
easier to make the changes there since there is more room and you don’t have to double click
to change anything.
When you get to the last column you can just use the enter key or Ctrl and left arrow to get
back to the beginning of the row.

Excel will help you to enter data into the table. If you are making a list of people and several
of them live in Stockholm you just have to type Stockholm once. When you then start typing
Stockholm the next time you will notice that Excel automatically fills in the rest of the word.
This works whenever you have repeating information. You can also copy data from cell to
cell.

Moving around
The easiest way to move from one cell to the next is to use the arrows. But there are a couple
of short keys that are good to know:
Tab
Ctrl + right arrow
Ctrl + left arrow
Ctrl + down arrow
Ctrl + up arrow
Ctrl + End
Ctrl + Home

Moves to the next cell to the right
Move to the column (with data) furthest to the right on the same row
Move back to the first column on the same row
Move to the last row (with data) in the worksheet
Move back to the first row (with data)
Move to the last cell (last column, last row) with data
Move back to the first cell (first column, first row) with data

Column width
There are several ways to change the width of a column. Move the cursor at the top of the
sheet, just between two columns and you can see the cursor changing from a plus sign to a
double arrow. Select and change the width of the left column. It is also possible to double
click while the cursor looks like a double arrow. That makes the left column adjust it’s width
to the widest cell in the column. By selecting the whole sheet (click on the small square
between row 1 and column A) and then double clicking between two of the columns you
make all of the columns adjusting their width on the same time. This is also possible by
selecting a column and then choosing Format and Autofit columns on the Home tab. You can
use the same technique for rows – just choose Format and Autofit rows.

Panes
While working with a large worksheet it can be useful to be able to see your headers when
you are entering data at the end of the worksheet. It is then possible to lock the headers by
selecting cell A2 and then clicking on the View tab and Freeze Panes. You can then freeze the
top row, the first column or the position your cursor is right now. Remember that Freeze
panes always freezes the row above and the column left of the cell you’ve selected. That is –
if you also want to freeze the first column, you must select cell B2 before going to the View
tab and selecting Freeze panes. A very common error is to select cell A1 before freezing – in
that case Excel freezes the middle of the worksheet – shown as a cross in the middle of the
screen. You can then unlock that freeze by choosing the View tab, Freeze panes and Unfreeze
panes, then reselect the correct cell, A2 or B2 or which ever you like, to freeze the windows
again. Don’t forget do click on the Home tab to get back to where you started.

Selecting

You must select a cell, row, column or sheet before doing something with it, like changing the
font, the format or sorting your data. Select a cell by moving to it – or by using the mouse and
clicking. Note that the name of the cell is shown just beside the function field, if you are in the
third column and on the fourth row the name of the cell will be C4. You can also select an
entire row by placing your mouse on the beginning of the row, at one of the numbers, and
click. In the same way you can select a column by clicking on the letter above the column.
Finally it is possible to select the whole worksheet by clicking in the square between row 1
and column A.

Adding rows and columns
You can add a row by selecting the row below where you want to add the new row. Then
chose Insert at the Home tab. For columns you select the column on the right of where you
want to add the new column. Then choose Insert at the Home tab. Or right click after you’ve
selected the column and then choose Insert.

Copying
The usual short commands, Ctrl-C for copying, Ctrl-V for pasting, are used by Excel. Notice
that when you use Ctrl C the cell or the area that you have selected starts blinking, if you use
Ctrl-V to paste the area continues to blink, enabling you to copy more than once. You could
also just press Enter to copy. You can also find the Copy, Cut and Paste commands in the
menu at the Home tab. Excel also has another way: Select a cell by clicking. Move the cursor
to the lower right hand corner of the cell, the cursor changes from a fat plus sign to a thin one.
You can also see a small handle in that corner, select the corner with the thin plus sign and
pull down. The contents of the cell are copied to the cells next to the original cell.

Numbering
You can use this handle while numbering the rows. Enter 1 in the first cell and 2 in the cell
below. Select both cells and select the handle with the slim plus sign and pull. Excel then
continues the range of numbers you have begun. You can start your number series anywhere;
try writing 101 in the first cell and 102 in the next. Or try 10 in the first and 20 in the second.
This works with anything that has a sequence, Monday – Tuesday, January – February and so
on. And with dates – this is an easy way to make a calendar – Excel increments the dates with
the interval you have chosen in the first two, every day, every week or every tenth day…
Exercise: Number your table. Create a new column to the far right by placing the cursor at
column A and choosing Insert on the Home tab. Add the header No. Enter the number 1 in
cell A2 and the number 2 in cell A3. Select both cells and take hold of the copy handle in the
second cell. Pull down and watch how Excel numbers your rows from 1,2,3,4,5 ...

Sorting
Start by selecting the area you want to sort. In most cases you’ll be ok with selecting the
whole sheet, select that by clicking on the small square between row 1 and column A. Always
include all your columns when you want to sort, otherwise there will be a risk of destroying
your data. Select the whole sheet or select the rows you want to sort.
Chose Data and Sort in the menu. A sorting window opens where you can select which
column you want to sort on and also if you want to sort the column ascending or descending.
(Tip: Text is often sorted ascending, A-Z, and numbers descending, biggest – smallest) If you
have headers in your worksheet Excel might notice that by itself, otherwise tick the box that
says My list has Header Row.
Exercise: Sort the table to find out who’s the oldest. Select all by clicking between A and 1 in
the upper left corner of your sheet. Then choose Sort and Filter on the Home tab. Choose
Custom Sort and start by checking My data has headers. Then use the drop down menu to
chose Age and Largest to smallest to find out who’s the oldest.

Summing and calculations
There is a special button for summing – looks like a sigma sign (AutoSum) and located on the
Home bar in the left corner. Select a cell below or to the right of the cells you want to sum,
click on the button and Excel suggests an area of cells to sum. You can accept that area by
just pressing Enter or change the area. The easiest way to change an area is to drag the cursor
over all the cells you wish to sum. It’s also possible to enter the area by changing the formula.
The formula for summing is =SUM(cell to start : cell to finish), =SUM(B2:B14). This text,
formula, is found in the command field just above the work sheet.
By changing SUM to AVERAGE you make Excel calculate the average instead. Make sure
you don’t delete the equal sign or any of the parentheses while changing the formula.

Simple calculations also start with an equal sign, and you can use numbers or cells – or a mix
of the two. Example =234+12, =A3*10, =(F5-G5)/F5
Exercise: Calculate the collected work years of the participants. Position you cursor in the
cell just below the last participant’s work years. Click on the AutoSum button and watch as
Excel suggest the function: =SUM(G2:G7) Press Enter to accept the function.

You can also calculate the sum of peoples ages, but in that case it could be better to calculate
the average age. You can use the AutoSum button here too: Place your cursor just below the
ages and click on Σ. Press Enter to accept and then use the function field to change the
function to =AVERAGE (F2:F7). Press Enter once again and you have successfully
calculated the average age.

Copying formulas
On of the best features with Excel is its ability to change the values of a formula when the
formula is copied. Say that you have several columns of numbers and you want to sum each
row at the end of that. The formula for summing the first row would look something like this:
=SUM(B2:F2) and would be placed in cell G2. Copy the cell with the formula to cell G3 –
either by selecting cell G2, pressing Ctrl-C, moving the cursor to cell G3 and pressing Ctrl-V
– or by selecting cell G2, taking hold of the small handle in the bottom right corner and
dragging down. When you look at the formula in cell G3, you see that Excel has changed the
cells included in the formula to =SUM(B3:F3). The formula will continue to change when
you continue to copy.
Sometimes you would like to keep one or both values while moving or copying a formula –
the way to do that is to add a $-sign in the formula: =SUM(A$1$:A$34$)

Don’t forget to save your file – even during your work. And a tip is to save several versions of
the fie, sometimes you realize you’ve made a mistake when you have worked a while and
then it’s great if you have a previous version saved. You save by selecting the strange looking
button way up in the left corner. Use Save As to save multiple versions. Remember that Ctrl Z
undos you last key strokes.

