Military weapons sent to local police — the 1033 Program
By Nate Carlisle
ncarlisle@sltrib.com
Twitter: @natecarlisle
The Program
Congress created the 1033 Program in 1996 to send surplus military gear — from pliers to
armored vehicles — to local police. The program is managed by the Defense Logistics Agency's
Disposition Services. Both are subunits of the Department of Defense.
How it works
Local police first register to be part of the program. Then the police force submits applications
for surplus military equipment to a designated state coordinator. In Utah, at least, the coordinator
reviews the application to see if the equipment requested meets a law enforcement need. If so, the
coordinator forwards the application to DLA Disposition Services. What happens next is up to
that office.
If police get the gear...
Tools, clothing, emergency supplies and everything else become property of the police force.
Weapons and vehicles sent to local police are called “controlled” items. They remain property of
the DOD but are considered on permanent loan so long as the police force keeps and maintains
them. Controlled items are also subject to regular audits from DLA Disposition Services. The
most-recent audit in Utah found one agency lost an M-16. The entire state was banned from the
program for about a month until the police force that lost the M-16 developed a corrective action
plan. To date, the M-16 remains missing.
Get the records
The Defense Logistics Agency will respond to FOIA requests listing what supplies have been
sent to your state. But it doesn't do so easily. The DLA only wanted to give me two years worth
of Utah records. Judith Mansfield, the FOIA officer at DLA Disposition Services, said it would
be time consuming to provide more records than that. Also, citing security concerns, DLA
Disposition Services would only provided records for controlled items on a county basis. So, for
example, rifles may have been sent to Cedar City, Utah, but that town did not appear on the
spreadsheet. Instead, those rifles would be in a row for Iron County, Utah.
I accepted this limited records batch in order to get a sample of what Utah received. The records
proved to be valuable, and I plan to ask for more.
You can also submit a records request to your state coordinator. Here are some electronic
databases or spreadsheets and another record to request from both the feds and the state:
— A list of the police agencies in your state that participate in the 1033 Program1
— All the equipment given to police in your state2
1

Even if your news outlet is focused on a city, county or section of a state, it's important to remember that a
statewide agency might participate in the 1033 Program and could drive its MRAP or fire M-16s in your town.
2
Ask for everything in the program's history. If necessary, you can negotiate to a lesser span of years. Also,

— The most-recent audits for every 1033 participant in your state
The reporting
After you receive your data, call some of the police forces who received the weaponry to ask why
they need it and how it's being used. Has a gunsmith disabled the automatic firing option on the
M-16s? Are the officers or deputies going to fire grenades or gas rounds from the grenade
launcher? Have policies been written about when an armored vehicle can be deployed? How
much did it cost to retrofit that armored vehicle for police use and what will it cost to maintain
it?
Also, sometime in the first half of 2014 the American Civil Liberties Union is expected to release
a report on the 1033 Program and SWAT teams. Part of the report is to be based upon record
requests the ACLU sent to police forces across the country. Find the report or ask the ACLU
what it found in your state and community.
Be careful
Read that part again about how controlled items are listed on a county basis. Just because a
county appears on your spreadsheet doesn't mean it all went to your sheriff.
Watch out for police chiefs or sheriffs telling you their jobs are getting more dangerous and bad
guys are increasing their firepower. Crime and police deaths are both in longterm declining
trends.
Similarly, watch out for opponents of the 1033 Program claiming it increases the risk for
violence. No one is collecting any data showing weapons from the program are being used to hurt
or kill people.
Links:
DOD page for the 1033 Program: https://www.dispositionservices.dla.mil/rtd03/leso/
List of state coordinators: https://www.dispositionservices.dla.mil/rtd03/leso/statecoorinfo.shtml
DLA Disposition Services FOIA info: http://www.dla.mil/foia-privacy/Pages/FOIAPOCs.aspx
Salt Lake Tribune report on 1033 Program: http://bit.ly/1e4qnIU
Salt Lake Tribune graphic on the program: http://tinyurl.com/mjzgg4d

be prepared for this item to generate two spreadsheets: controlled items and everything else.

