The Wonderful World of Microdata
Ronald Campbell
714/425-5169
campbellr@verizon.net
Spend enough time in Census-land, and you'll notice something unsettling. People -academics, government bureaucrats, even a few journalists -- are finding information that
doesn't seem to exist in any table anywhere.
How do transportation planners know that 500 software engineers are carpooling into your
town each morning? How exactly did the federal government figure out that there are 2,000
Spanish-speaking construction workers in your county without health insurance? And how did
that reporter you met in the bar last night win the Philip Meyer Award?
Was it all a conspiracy? No. It was microdata, the secret sauce of the Census.
The Census Bureau asks millions of people dozens of carefully crafted questions every year.
It boils down the answers into thousands of tables - the same tables, laid out the same way
for every state, county and city in America. By and large these tables -- age and sex, family
income, commute time, etc. -- serve most users very well.
But some people need more. And that's where microdata comes in.
Each year, the Census prepares a slice of raw survey data (minus the respondents' names
and exact addresses), representing a 1 percent portion of all housing units. That may not
seem like much. But given the gargantuan size of the American Community Survey, the
microdata sample is vastly larger than any ordinary poll. For example, the 2010 Public Use
Microdata Sample for Maryland contains information about 23,805 housing units. Using
microdata, a researcher can assemble his or her own custom tables to answer questions that
the Census never thought to pose.
Suppose, for example, that you're working on a story about employment. You want to see if
hours worked last year in the Baltimore metro area varied depending on a person's race.
Simple question, right? In FactFinder it's easy to select the Baltimore metro area. With a little
more work you can find the correct table for hours worked, B23022 ("Sex by work status in
the past 12 months by usual hours worked per week in the past 12 months"). So far so good.
But the moment you add the criterion "Race" to FactFinder, you get an error message:

1

By now you are probably pounding your head on the desk or throwing things at your
computer. Census KNOWS these things, you're saying. The information MUST be there
somewhere. And you're right. The information does exist. It just isn't in a table. It's in
microdata.
The best source for microdata is IPUMS-USA (https://usa.ipums.org/usa/) at the University of
Minnesota. Registration is free. Its vast archives include microdata for every census going
back to 1850. Related sites cover the Current Population Survey (IPUMS-CPS) and maps
(NHGIS).
There are a couple of ways to deal with microdata from IPUMS. One way is to download the
data and analyze it yourself. For that you'll need a statistics package such as SPSS, which
costs about $1,500, or an open-source stats package such as PSPP (gnu.org/s/pspp/) or R
(www.r-project.org). A gentle warning: Stats packages are devilishly hard to learn; if you
thought Excel was hard, please understand that learning Excel was a gentle stroll in the park
while learning a stats package is a triathlon.
But oh yes, I did say there was a second way to deal with microdata from IPUMS. That's
analyzing it online.

There are a lot of benefits to analyzing data online in IPUMS. The biggest is that you don't
need to learn statistical software. Next is that sometimes you can find particularly obscure
data faster in IPUMS than you can in FactFinder. And if you're looking for data predating 2000
and don't want to mess with the Census FTP site, IPUMS is your best friend.
There are a couple of downsides, however:
2





Numerical variables such as income are wide open. If there is a way to compute a
median, I haven't found it. However, the online tool lets you create custom variables to
split numerical variables into ranges. By trial and error you can approximate the true
range.
Coded variables often are not fully documented in the online tool. If you are going to
use a coded field, first look up the variable on the home page (lefthand column under
Documentation - Variables) to find what's missing from the online tool.

Begin by clicking on "Analyze Data Online" on the IPUMS home page. That will take you to a
page where you'll be asked to choose the samples you want to use. As you can see, there's a
lot to choose from. For this lesson, we'll be taking the broadest choice: United States, 18502012.

After choosing your sample, IPUMS asks you to sign in. Then it's time to begin analyzing the
3

data. It's helpful to envision what we want in advance: We want to know hours worked by race
in the Baltimore metro area; and we'll pick three years as our benchmarks: 1990, 2000 and
2010. Notice that we are doing two things that FactFinder cannot -- we are crosstabbing
hours worked by race and including data from 1990.
At this point you need to understand a vital distinction about microdata. All microdata records
concern either households or persons. Since they are samples, these records are weighted to
represent all households or all persons in a given geography. But -- and here's the tricky part - certain variables, such as the year a survey was taken or the geography it concerns, apply
to both households and persons; those variables typically are found among the household
variables in the online tool.
Let's start by picking the year. Remember, our sample is every year from 1850 to 2012, but
we need only three years: 1990, 2000 and 2010. Here's how we'll get what we want.

In the variable column on the lefthand side, we'll click on "Household - Technical", then click
on "Year - Census year" to select it. That moves it to the Selected box at top left. Click on the
Col box to move it to the Column box. Now we add the following (without the quote marks):
"(r:1990;2000;2010)". This command tells IPUMS to take a range comprised of the years
1990, 2000 and 2010.
Next let's pick the geography - the Baltimore metropolitan area. We've already discovered
from inspecting variables on the home page that 072 is the federal code for the Baltimore
metro area. Good thing we checked because we can't find that code in the online tool. So
click on "Household - Geographic", click on "Metarea" and move it to Filter. As you do, notice
that it appears there like this: metarea(). Type the number "72" (without the quotation marks)
between the parentheses. The field is numeric, so the leading zero is unnecessary. Why use
Filter? Because this will filter out all results other than those from the Baltimore metro area;
it's analogous to the "where" clause in a database query.
Now it's time to add some meat to the bones. Click on "Person - Work", scroll down and you'll
find two variables that appear on topic: "Wkswork1 - Weeks worked last year" and "Wkswork2
- Weeks worked last year, intervalled". One of the nice things about the online tool is that you
4

can preview variables. Simply click to select, click the View button, and a window opens
displaying a frequency table. Wkswork1 has 54 values ranging from 0 to "No Data" while
Wkswork2 has just seven values, again ranging from 0 to "No Data". We'll make Wkswork2
our Row variable.
At this point we have a crosstab of weeks worked by year. But we also want to see the data
arranged by race. We can do that in IPUMS using race as a Control. That will produce similar
tables for each race, making comparisons easy. Click on "Person - Race, Ethnicity and
Nativity", then on "race - race" and click again on "Ctrl" to make race the Control.
In Table Options make sure percentages are set on for column. Click on confidence intervals.
Also click to display the Z-statistic. Here is what the program will look like before you run the
table:

Go ahead. Click that button. Run the table.
5

What you get is a bunch of data. Let's take a few minutes to unpack it, first in broad outline
and then in detail. We have separate tables for each race - white and black (together the
overwhelming majority in Baltimore), American Indian, Chinese, Japanese, Other Asian or
Pacific Islander, Other race, Two major races, Three or more major races and finally
"Statistics for all valid cases". We're going to look at stats for all valid cases -- the universe if
you like -- and compare that with whites and with blacks.
But before we do that, let's dive into the details. Here's a closeup look at the top of the table
for whites:

Each cell contains four numbers: the column percent, the confidence interval, the Z-statistic
and weighted N. The column percents within each table add up to 100 percent. The
confidence interval is a measure of the statistic's reliability; in the case of the 2010 statistic,
the chances are 95% that between 41.4% and 42.8% of Baltimore residents aged 16 to 64 did
not work the previous year. We'll come back later to the Z-statistic and the cell colors, which
are related. "Weighted N" is the number of people in the real world that the column percent
represents.
Now let's look at the bigger picture. The "Statistics for all valid cases" shows that the
percentage of full-time workers, those working 50 to 52 weeks in the previous year, grew
slightly form 39.4% in 1990 to 41.2% in 2010. But when you compare the white and black
tables you'll see big differences. The percentage of whites employed full-time grew from
42.6% in 1990 to 44.3% in 2010 while the black percentage lagged far behind, growing from
31.3% in 1990 to 35.8% in 2010. This is a story we could not have found in Census tables.
What about the color coding? And what is a Z-statistic? The answer is that they are designed
to tell us how unusual the data is. One of the key ideas in statistics is that values tend to
converge on the mean. Statisticians have come up with several tools to measure how close or
far values range from the mean; one of the most common is the standard deviation. The Zstatistic, or more commonly the Z-score, is the number of standard deviations a value is from
the mean. This is supremely useful if you're measuring, say, school test scores. But here
IPUMS is just measuring deviations from a made-up number: mean number of weeks worked
6

over a 20-year span. You don't always get everything you want with online tools.
OTHER SOURCES OF MICRODATA:
The Current Population Survey, jointly compiled by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, is especially valuable for labor and economic reporting. The monthly
unemployment rate is the best-known product of the CPS but far from the only one. Each
March since the mid 1960s, CPS has conducted a special survey variously known as the
"March Supplement" and the "Annual Social and Economic Supplement" (ASEC). Because of
its long track record -- nearly 50 years -- it's been a gold mine for economics, sociologists
and, in recent years, a few journalists.
ASEC has one big problem -- sample size. In 2013, the sample was 387,876: mighty hefty by
Gallup standards, but way too small if you're looking for statistically reliable results for, say,
Baltimore. As a general rule, ASEC is useful only if you're looking at the entire country or at
one of the largest states such as California, Texas or New York or at a multi-state region such
as the Southeast.
You can get raw microdata from ASEC and from the monthly CPS surveys here:
http://thedataweb.rm.census.gov/ftp/cps_ftp.html
But you should avoid this route unless
you're skilled at programming; skilled programmers already have tamed the data for you at
other sites.
There are three better options:
 IPUMS-CPS (https://cps.ipums.org/cps/): Simply excellent. Download and analyze on
statistical software or use the online tool. Your choice.
 CPS Table Creator (http://www.census.gov/cps/data/cpstablecreator.html): This menudriven tool lets you create tables from the past seven years worth of ASEC microdata.
It has two key limitations: The selection of variables is limited, though it should be
enough for the vast majority of users; more troublesome, you will have to cut and paste
results into a spreadsheet since there is no download option.
 DataFerrett (http://dataferrett.census.gov/): No one will ever say DataFerrett is intuitive.
But it gives you access to so much good stuff, including CPS microdata.

7

