Questions to consider before scraping: NICAR 2014
Isaac Wolf // ikewolf@gmail.com // @izziewolf // Please feel free to contact me with questions – I am
not a lawyer and this is not legal advice.
 How did you first discover the data? How were you subsequently able to access it? Can you
record the way you accessed it?
 Do you have to make any misrepresentations to access the information?
o Did you agree to a terms of service that stipulates use of information?
o Did you use a fake name or masked URL to register for access? Why? Would using your
real name mean denial of access?
 How publicly available is the information?
o Indexed on search engines? Previous versions cached? Recorded elsewhere?
o Is it located on or referenced from a clearly public-facing page?
o If not linked from a clearly public-facing page, how did you know the URL?
o How long online?
 What safeguards on the information?
o Password protection?
o Encryption?
 What is the website host’s stated privacy policy?
o Is there any reason to believe the actual policy should not be accepted on its face (eg it
makes unreasonable claims)?
o What is the relationship between the server host and the entity that created or
collected the information?
 Does the entity have a track record of problems reliably storing or analyzing information?
 Is the information already clearly publicly available, either partially or in a less desirable format
(eg chicken scratch PDF), or on other websites?
 What measures did you have to take to scrape it? (This one is really important)
o Was all information contained in a single URL? If not, how did you know how to reach
them? Was there a logical progression across URLs? Was the directory file publicly
accessible? Were you using any sort of random number generator? Did you use nonpublic information? More complicated methods? Random number generator?
 How sensitive is the information, and what must be done to safeguard it?
o Are you capable of securing it – including properly disposing of it? Budget? IT expertise?
o Under what circumstances would you release this information? To whom?
o What would the consequences be if you inadvertently released the information?
 What reporting have you already done, and how could these documents contribute to a story
beyond “there’s a data breach”? What resources are you willing to devote to pursuing that
story?
 What do others in your organization, including your lawyer, think?

