The year in car (& odors)
Jaimi Dowdell & Mark Horvit
With
Jennifer LaFleur, OdorMaster

Slides will prompt you
with a number. Gently
scratch the number on
your card…

…then sniff.

Warning:
If you are sensitive
to some smells, you
may want to avoid
the sniff.

For example, if you
missed breakfast
1

Scratch #1 on your card

Leaky Washington
Data: More than 100 FOIA
requests were made. Data
included Trade-by-trade
information for stocks (Telvent
DTN), trade-by-trade short
sales and economic-indicator
surveys. "Over the course of
our investigation, the
databases we created
comprised tens of millions of
records."

Findings: The analysis disclosed cases where clients made large profits from early
alerts about agency decisions that affected the value of certain stocks.

Data: Many different
sources including
census, employment,
education, income and
housing data. Look to
the contest
questionnaire for more
details.

Findings: “This was a series about the government’s role in
income inequality in the United States. Nationally, we found
that inequality had risen in 49 of the 50 states since 1989, and
that most states had a seen a rise in poverty as well. The
median householdhttp://www.reuters.com/subjects/incomeinequality income had dropped in real terms in 28 states,
suggesting a fall in the numbers of the middle class. We found
that the largest rise in income inequality was among the states
of New England.”

The 51 circles represent each state and the District of Columbia. They're sized according to
degree of inequality (smaller is better); median income (bigger is better); or poverty rate
(smaller is better). Hover over or tap a circle to see underlying data.

Data: Prescribing data obtained via an arduous
FOIA process from the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services. The data contained
prescribing by physicians and other providers
under Medicare's drug benefit program from
2007-2010.
Findings: Medicare failed to properly monitor
the prescription drug program leading to
abuses and safety concerns for patients.
“Some doctors and other health professionals
across the country prescribed large quantities
of drugs that were potentially harmful,
disorienting or addictive. One Florida doctor
gave hundreds of dementia patients
antipsychotic medications despite a black box
warning that it increases the risk of death. And
more than half the top prescribers of
Oxycontin, the most-abused painkiller, faced
criminal charges or discipline against their
professional licenses, or had been terminated
from state Medicaid programs -- but retained
their ability to prescribe in Medicare.”

Of note:
• The Prescribers, ProPublica – Saturday 11-11:50 a.m.
• Inside the Global Offshore Money Maze, ICIJ – Saturday 2-2:50 p.m.
• Deep dives 1 – Saturday 3-3:50 p.m.
• Deadly Delays, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
• Speeding Cops, Sun Sentinel
• The Untold Story of America’s Mass Killings, USA TODAY
• Deep dives 2 – Saturday 4-4:50 p.m.
• The Child Exchange, Reuters
• Washington, A World Apart, The Washington Post

Data: National Fire Incident Reporting System

Findings: Arson is far more common and dangerous
than previously reported. The yearlong investigation
identified more than 163,000 fires in America that
experts agree have a significant chance of being
undetected arsons. These fires caused at least 788
deaths, 13,009 injuries and at least $5.8 billion in
property damages. The project includes a searchable
database showing how local fire departments perform
in reporting arson.

When arsonists strike
This chart shows "the number of building fires reported as 'deliberate'
to the U.S. Fire Administration from 2006 through 2011. There are
elevated numbers of arsons on New Year's Day, Independence Day,
Halloween and during mid-April, although the patterns change with
geography."

In an earlier story, the reporter looked at when
arsonists strike: “They set fire to buildings in alarming
numbers on holidays such as Independence Day,
Halloween and New Year's Day. But a first-of-its-kind
study, conducted by Scripps Howard News Service,
indicates that arsonists also favor this week in April.”.

Findings: Despite multiple violations
restaurants are given “conditional”
passes and allowed to stay open.

“The CBC's Steven Bull reported that
a restaurant may be issued a
conditional pass, with the promise of
fixing the problem before a given
deadline, for faulty refrigerators,
dirty washrooms and even
contaminated food.”

Data: Analysis of restaurant inspections
from Toronto’s Dine Safe program.

Since 2001, only four restaurants
have lost their license from the
“license tribunal.”

Data: England’s
National Health Service
weekly Accident &
Emergency reports.
Findings: Each week
the BBC tracks hospital
performance from the
time it takes patients to
be seen to how long
ambulances must wait
to hand over a patient.
The Guardian recently
looked at hospital wait
times in England and
found “The number of
patients waiting more
than four hours in A&E
departments in
England before being
admitted, transferred
or discharged has
reached its highest
level since April last
year,

Data: The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
analyzed data consisting of nearly 3 million
newborn screening tests to look at screening
delays across the country. “But about two
dozen states and the District of Columbia
won’t release meaningful information.”
Findings: Newborn babies are supposed to
have blood samples collected and tested
within 24 hours. “But we found that
thousands of hospitals throughout the
country are late sending the blood samples
for these life-saving tests. Delays can be
catastrophic for a child with one of the
disorders, resulting in serious medical issues,
brain damage and even death.”

Data: Gathered spill reports and data from 14
states.
Findings: A months-long investigation by
EnergyWire found more than 6,000 spills and
other mishaps reported at onshore oil and gas
sites in 2012.
“That's an average of more than 16 spills a
day. And it's a significant increase since 2010.
In the 12 states where comparable data were
available, spills were up about 17 percent.
Drilling activity in those states, though, rose
40 percent during that time.”
The investigation found that states track spills
and accidents differently and enforcement for
spills is often lax.

Data: Worker’s
compensation
claims.

Web presentation:
Includes a
searchable database
of claims and cost
by body part.

Findings: The claims provide a look at violence in schools. “Of the
school district’s 866 workers’ compensation claims in the last fiscal
year, 293 were labeled assaults or altercations, and eight were
referred for criminal charges. ”
“School employees report more injuries than those in any city
agency except the Police Department.”

Data: Students with disabilities exiting special education from the Office of Special
Education Programs and US census data.
Findings: Mississippi is one of three states where more students with a learning disability
graduate with an alternate diploma than a regular one. That poses a serious problem for
many students leaving the state’s special education programs.
According to the Hechinger Report, many colleges and employers don’t recognize the
alternative diplomas.

“As a result, thousands of capable
students leave high school with
few career and education options
in a state with one of the nation’s
highest unemployment rates.”

Data: Online searchable databases of public
records including financial disclosures,
campaign expenditures, campaign
contributions and business registrations.
Findings: The reporters take a lighthearted
look at how any citizen could uncover the
people behind an unsealed FBI complaint in
the process giving a tutorial in campaign
finance research.

Data: KING 5 analyzed 18
months of parking ticket
data from Seattle
Municipal Courts and
election records.
Findings: Parking tickets
must be paid by the
vehicle’s registered
owner – unless, under a
Seattle law, the owner is
a rental car company.
This “select group of
multi-billion-dollar
companies has been
permitted to avoid the
penalties while piling up
more unpaid parking
tickets than anyone
else.”

“Elections records reviewed by the KING 5 investigators showed that the
leaders of the legislature's two transportation committees -- Murray and
Haugen -- received campaign cash from the rental car industry.”

Data: A geo-database of
all reported crashes in
the state, traffic volume
and a shapefile of
intersection's from the
Delaware Department of
Transportation. Read
about how Pat Sweet did
the analysis here.

Findings: More than half of all crashes in the state occur at intersections. “A News Journal analysis
found 185 intersections in the state averaged more than 15 car crashes per year between 2010 and
2012. Two intersections - Kirkwood Highway and Limestone Road in Milltown and U.S. 13 and S.R.
273 near New Castle - have averaged more than 80 crashes per year, including at least one injury
accident per month. DelDOT is aware of many of these issues but it can still take 5-10 years for
permanent fixes.”

Findings: The investigation found more
than 1,000 accidents reported at
amusement parks in five years and
poor oversight by the state agency
charged with regulating amusement
parks
leaveshttp://publicsource.org/investig
ations/pa-s-regulation-of-amusementparks-falls-short-inspectionsenforcement questions of safety.

Data: PublicSource combined data and built a
database to get a better look at amusement
parks in Pennsylvania. Records used include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Accident reports
Inspection reports from certified private inspectors
Inspection reports from the bureau’s state inspectors
Records related to registered rides, owners and operators
Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board meeting minutes
Itineraries
Internal emails
Court filings

Many parks failed to turn in all of their
certified inspection reports. “The
agency had no reports at all for 12 of
the state’s 117 permanent parks and
water parks PublicSource analyzed.”
-In 2011 a water park had remained
open despite having no inspections for
a year. An official said, this was
“among the most blatant of

Data: Reuters analyzed electronic bulletin board posts including more than 5,000 from “a
Yahoo group called Adopting-from-Disruption.” Along with other records, the team used
this information to create a dataset allowing them to look for trends.
Findings: “By creating a data set from the narrative accounts of the parents who offered
and sought children, we found that, in a single Internet group, a child was offered to
strangers on average once a week during a five-year period. At least 70 percent of those
children were said to be adopted from overseas (23 different countries), and the children
were living in at least 34 different states at the time they were offered.”

Findings: No one knows how
much hazardous materials travel
through Iowa on any given day
but incidents involving them are
tracked.
“Since the 1970s, more than
6,000 hazardous materials
incidents in Iowa have been
documented by the U.S.
Department of Transportation. ”
“The state is ranked 31st among
the 50 states and is home to far
fewer incidents than top-ranked
Ohio, which had 40,000.”

Data: Hazardous Materials Incident Report
Subsystem maintained by the Department of
Transportation

10

Data: Well data from the
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
Findings: In Wisconsin the number
of high-capacity wells are growing
causing fears for the water supply.
The number of wells has increased
over the years, especially in the
Central Sands area.

“In the early 1950s, there were
fewer than 100 high-capacity wells
in the Central Sands, according to
the state Department of Natural
Resources. Today there are more
than 3,000 — 40 percent of the
state’s total — in the six-county
area.”
Long Lake “ used to be up to 12
feet deep. Now it is closer to 3
feet.” In 2006 it completely dried
up “and all the fish, including 3foot-long northern pikes, died in
the mud. ”

Data: Ohio High School Athletic
Association appeals board decisions.

Findings: A rigid law prevents transfer
students from participating in athletics.
“239 families who have appealed to
OHSAA in the past five years to restore
eligibility for a student after a school
transfer. It’s largely a futile fight —
nearly 70 percent lost their cases and
their children were forced to sit out.”
“Nearly two-thirds of the transferring
athletes moved to a similar-size or
smaller school. About 40 percent of the
denials involved freshmen and
sophomores. Nearly half of the girls
stripped of eligibility were
underclassmen.”

Data: Department of Transportation
National Bridge Inventory
Findings:
-95 percent of bridges are in good
health.
-That still leaves hundreds that
could collapse in a bad confluence
of events.
-Several bridges on Interstates 5 and
90 are considered “fracture-critical,”
meaning that if a single major part is
broken, the entire span could fall.
-Others are “structurally deficient,”
meaning they have some kind of
defect that needs attention.
-Twelve bridges that carry an
average of 10,000 or more vehicles
a day fall into both categories

“It doesn’t imply anything bad about
the bridge. It just means that if a
certain component fails, it can lead to
the complete collapse of the bridge,”
said Jugesh Kapur, former head of
bridges and structures for the DOT.

Data: Campaign contributions
Findings: The Hillsborough County Public
Transportation Commission set a minimum of
$50 for limo rides. Consumers and some limo
companies sued the Commission because it
“won’t allow consumers to shop for a lower
prices.”
Reporter Mike Deeson analyzed campaign
contributions and found “the same companies
who want the $50 minimum had donated
thousands to commissioners.”
When asked about this, a commissioners
claimed it was for safety and top-of-the-line
limos. When pressed further, he said, “‘I
understand that, as a consumer I shop for a low
price when I go to Manhattan.’ “
Deeson’s story states, “However, in Hillsborough
County the consumer doesn't have that choice.”

Data: Reporters made
429 records request to
obtain kindergarten
daycare reports for the
entire country of
Norway.
They inspection reports
can in different formats
and reporters combined
them into a database
that they later made
searchable for readers.

Read more about how
they handled the data in
IRE’s Behind the Story.

Findings:
-Half of the kindergartens
violated the law.
-Security issues were found
in “one out of six.
-Critical hygiene violations
in one out of five.
-Too few adults in one out
of ten.
-One of ten reports are
prepared by the
kindergarten itself.
-55 municipalities did not
have any inspections at all.”
-About half of the
kindergartens had never
had inspections at all.

In honor of Baltimore’s
own John Waters, this
panel was offered in
“odorama”

