Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

Login

johnkeefe.net
data news + journalism + diy hackery
« Back to blog

Water Begone
Thousands of people live in the Hudson River.
That's what you'd think, at least, by looking at U.S. Census tract maps for New York City, because census
tracts extend to the state line.

But a population map drawn like this isn't attractive, and isn't accurate, either. It suggests inhabited areas at
the coast are far larger than actually they are.
So what's a journo-mapper to do?

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 1 of 7

Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

Fortunately, the Census Bureau also publishes shapefiles of all of the water in the U.S. So one solution is to
tell you trusty computer to subtract the water areas from the tracts -- and the difference will be the parts on
land.
Doing this turns out to be far easier than I expected. (Thanks to Michael Corey and Nathan Woodrow who
responded to my help tweet.) Here's what I did:
1. Opened my census tract shapefile with QGIS (a free, open-source mapping program I'm getting to know).

2. Found the water shapefile for Manhattan (New York County) and opened it as a new layer in QGIS.

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 2 of 7

Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

3. From the QGIS menu, selected Vector -> Geoprocessing Tools -> Symetrical Difference and followed the
prompts, choosing the tract shapefile as the "Input vector layer" and the water shapefile as the "Difference
layer."

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 3 of 7

Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

4. Compressed the resulting shapefile set into one .zip file and uploaded it to Google Fusion tables using
shpescape. Once in Fusion Tables, I can play with it, view the map and merge it with population data.

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 4 of 7

Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

Sweet!
A few extra notes and tips for those trying this at home:
- I've found water shapefiles only for individual counties, which makes for a small pain to do an entire state.
For New York City, which is five counties, I loaded the five water shapefiles into QGIS, made sure they were
all visible, and used Layer -> Save Selection as Vector File... to save them all as one shapefile. I then used the
resulting shapefile in the Symetrical Difference process.
- Be sure the water map represents the same census year as the tract map (and, of course, your data). Very
likely you'll be using shapefiles for the previous decennial census. For our New Littles map we had 2009
data, so we used the appropriate tract and water shapes -- which were from the 2000 census.
- I get an error about missing coordinate information when I do step 3, but it hasn't caused me any problems I
know of. Also, on my Mac version of QGIS, the Symetirical Difference window and the file-saving dialog
box conflict -- but I just moved them to their own side of the screen.
- Census tracts are made up of census "blocks," which are smaller and generally DO follow coastlines. So if
you're mapping blocks, you can eliminate the watery ones by excluding any block with an "area land" of
zero.
- The difference trick doesn't change the meta-data associated with each tract, which generally is a good
thing.
If you have any questions or suggestions, don't hesitate to post them in a comment below!
Upvote 0
Tweet

5

Like

0

Like this post? Subscribe to updates by email »
0 responses
Your Name
Email
Add Website URL »
Your Comment
Notify me by email when new comments are added
Comment

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 5 of 7

Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

Twitter: @jkeefe
Projects
Presentations

John Keefe
Adventures in journalism-doing, mapmaking, code mangling and hardware hacking. Much of what I do is for
WNYC, New York Public Radio, where I'm on the Data News Team. Comments here are mine alone.
Email john (at) johnkeefe.net. Encrypt it with my pgp public key.

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 6 of 7

Water Begone - johnkeefe.net

4/3/14, 1:06 PM

Posted almost 3 years ago
June 23, 2011 at 9:36 PM
3,112 views

http://johnkeefe.net/water-begone

Page 7 of 7

