Crunching Census Commuting Data
Mike Maciag
Governing Magazine
mmaciag@governing,com Twitter: @mmaciag
Prepared for NICAR 2014
There’s so much Census survey data available that knowing where to start can be
difficult if you’re new to using it. In this tipsheet, we’ll go over steps to compile data for a
few Census stories and discuss ways to present your findings to readers. We’ll utilize
commuting data from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS). Even if
you’re not interested in commuting data, though, this should help guide you along when
you’re planning your story.
Commuting Story Examples
Walking to Work: http://bit.ly/IJwsT8
This story examines where city residents most commonly walk to work. We compiled
data for all cities with populations over 100,000 and also identified areas where walk
commuting was growing fastest.
Table ID# used: B08301
Public Transportation’s Demographic Divide: http://bit.ly/1khzivv
This story compared median earnings, poverty status and race/ethnicity of public
transportation users with that of all commuters. Data shows the extent to which public
transportation commuters are poorer in each city by computing riders’ median earnings
as a percentage of median earnings for all commuters. As expected, many transit
systems greatly underserve select demographic groups.
Table ID# used: S0802
Chose a topic
We’ll be analyzing commuting data for this walkthrough. But if you’re not sure exactly
what you’re looking for, or don’t know what exists, here are a few good places to start:
• Census Subject Definitions file. Search this file to see a summary of all topics
covered by ACS: http://1.usa.gov/1hAzMfY
• Follow the links on the ACS subjects page: http://1.usa.gov/1hQvGPN
• Try browsing or searching for a topic you’re interested in American FactFinder’s
advanced search tool.
For the story on walking to work, we’ll use the table “Means of Transportation to Work,”
ID# B08301
Access American FactFinder’s advanced search tool (http://1.usa.gov/1bfxMTT) and
enter B08301 in the table name search field.

Select Your Geography
You’ll next want to select the appropriate geography to pull. This will depend on what
you’re trying to show and the geographies available for a given topic.
Here’s a complete hierarchy of Census geographies: http://1.usa.gov/1ofwMX3
“Places” refer to cities, towns, villages, boroughs and Census-Designated Places.
In FactFinder, click “Geographies” on the right and then select or search for the area
you’d like data for.
Select An ACS Dataset
You’ll also want to decide which ACS dataset to use. Survey estimates are compiled for
one, three and five-year periods. There’s a tradeoff, as one-year estimates are the most
current, but a smaller sample size means your margin of error will be higher. Use this
table to help you determine the best ACS dataset for your story.

Table: http://www.census.gov/acs/www/guidance_for_data_users/estimates/
In FactFinder, click “Topics” and “Dataset” to select your dataset.
Using the data
Click the table in the search results field. You can now download your data in .csv or
.xls format. To compute the share of walk commuters, simply divide the “Walked”
column by the total number of commuters.

Interpreting data
Does the estimate for walk commuters seem small for your city? For an explanation,
refer to page 89 of the ACS subject definitions file:
“People who used different means of transportation on different days of the week were
asked to specify the one they used most often, that is, the greatest number of days.
People who used more than one means of transportation to get to work each day were
asked to report the one used for the longest distance during the work trip.”
So this means that if someone walks to a subway station and from another station to
their workplace, they’re only counted as public transportation commuters (unless they’re
walking really long distances). In this way, the Census estimates understate how many
people are walking to work. Still, these estimates are comparable over time and remain
the best source for comparing commuting habits for multiple jurisdictions.
It’s a good practice to look over the subject definitions file and other documentation if
you’re using an ACS table that you’re not familiar with.
Also be aware of the universe of your data, or the segment of the population that it
describes. It’s often not the entire population. For the commuting data we’re working
with, the universe is all workers age 16 and older.
Other Ways to Use Commuting Data
• How do various types of workers commute?
• How many vehicles do commuters have access to?
• Travel time to work
• How common is carpooling?
• How many people ride bikes to work?
Source for Reporting
• State Data Centers: https://www.census.gov/sdc/network.html
• State demographers
• Census commuting data page: http://www.census.gov/hhes/commuting/
	  
	  

