Editing the Data
Project
Maud Beelman
The Dallas Morning

The Basics
You can backstop your data
reporters/projects even if you’ve never
worked with data yourself.
Don’t be intimidated. Think of databases
like big filing cabinets waiting to be
unlocked with the right questions.
What do you want to know?

General types of data
projects
Ones that emanate from the data
Ones that use data to supplement the reporting
Understanding which is which is important
You can go narrow and deep, or wide and deep
The latter takes a lot of time & resources. So
focus the analysis as early as possible.

Questions to ask
Ask early what kinds of data might be available.
Have others done similar reporting and, if so,
what data did they use and how?
Check IRE/NICAR tipsheets to see if anyone has
worked with similar data.
Read professional/academic literature to identify
experts who might have worked with similar data
and can advise.

Data is not magic!
Be as skeptical of it as you are with
human sources.
Ask what are the known limitations of / or
problems with the data.
All data are “dirty.” The question is how
dirty.
Ask who collects the data and for what
reason?

Seriously, not magic!
Is the database a clearinghouse of
unvetted information, or is it targeted,
carefully gathered information?
This may tell you something about the
reliability or bias of the information.
Ask what is significant about the data
findings.
Don’t confuse the effort it took to get the
answer with the importance of the answer.

More questions to ask
If there is a “read me” file or an errata sheet that
accompanies the data, editors should also read
it.
Ask to see a copy of the records layout as soon
as the reporters have it.
Helps you can understand what kinds of
questions can be asked of the data.
For example, the records layout for the Texas
Education Agency student data tells me this…

Look at the records layout
Consolidated Accountability Data File Format
2013 PEIMS SNAPSHOT HOMELESSSTATUS-CODE
0 = Student is not homeless at any time during
current school year
1 = Student lives in a shelter, transitional
housing, or is awaiting foster care at any time
during current school year
2 = Student lives temporarily doubled-up at any
time during current school year

Think in circles
Like concentric circles of information
What can the data tell you about a problem
locally, regionally, statewide, nationally?
How does your local problem compare to the
state?
How does the state compare to the nation?
How does it compare internationally?
What are the factors that influence your data?

Think like a scientist
Ask your reporters to write a white
paper
Summarizing their preliminary data
findings and explaining their
methodology.
This helps reveal story lines, holes,
new questions.
Several iterations later, it becomes the
foundation of a story draft and

Editors: Study the data
If the reporter is working with a spreadsheet get a copy
and dive in. Helps you backstop and ask questions.
For a story on bridge safety, the data reporter sent me a
spreadsheet of the 10 worst bridges in Texas with
hundreds of fields of data on each. Basic questions
emerged:
There were only 250 listings for Texas, but there are 254
counties.
Were we missing data or do four counties have no
problem bridges?
Does it make a difference in safety ratings whether or

The methodology
Make sure you understand the methodology.
Play a role in devising it. Does it make sense?
Ask reporters early and often what worries
them about the data?
The data itself?
The study methodology?
Too-eager editors or ones with predetermined story lines?
Unrealistic deadlines?

Backstopping/bulletproofin
g
Ask the reporters how they have verified their
data analysis.
Did they vet their methodology with a subject
matter or other expert?
Did they keep a data diary?
Did they re-import the data from scratch and rerun the entire analysis?
Did they ask others to check their work?

The power of checklists
Research has shown the effectiveness of using
checklists on cutting error rates.
Ask reporters for a copy of their data checklist. If
they don’t have one, have them create one.
Here’s a sample checklist used by one of our
data editors, Daniel Lathrop.
He devised this during a complicated medical
data analysis we were doing.

-- Review methodology with one or more other data people
-- Check results to other available comparable data
-- Ensure all record counts are consistent across stages
-- Check averages
-- Examine outputs to ensure logical consistency (do things
that should add up to 100% add up to 100%?)
-- Recheck all coding line by line if possible or in aggregate if
not
-- Re-read all programs/scripts
-- Re-run entire analysis from scratch
-- Check each number against analysis or source material
prior to publication
-- Recheck each number against analysis or source material
on each draft
-- Reimport data from scratch before re-running
-- Recheck each number against database (as opposed to
spreadsheet or report) at each draft and pre-pub

Other ways to bulletproof
If you have the luxury of more than one data
analyst in the newsroom, ask one to re-check
the other,
By working independently of the original
analysis,
By auditing scripts, reviewing data diaries,
By rechecking each major finding against the
original data set.

Ground Truth
Verify what the data is telling you with on-theground reporting.
If you can’t get there, or see everything, use
Google Earth to supplement your “ground truth”
reporting.
Share your results with targets early.
Give them a chance to attack your data and
methodology and allow enough time to consider
their criticisms and, if necessary, rerun your
analysis.

Learn from your mistakes
There will be mistakes, hopefully caught
before publication or release of your
analysis.
Learn from them. Do a “stand down.”
When errors occur, figure out how they
happened, why and when.
Then incorporate those lessons learned
into a data best practices for your
newsroom.

