Investigating Racial Inequality

2014 IRE Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
Nikole Hannah-Jones, ProPublica
nikole@propublica.org
twitter: nhannahjones

Higher education Health outcomes Unemployment
Incarceration rates K-12 education Juvenile

justice Housing Health disparities Foreclosures
Death penalty Toxic waste sites Urban renewal
Public housing Wealth Homeownership
Lending Felon disenfranchisement Income
Life expectancy

Infant mortality

Data is just the beginning
1.) Find it.
2.) Analyze it.
3.) Interrogate.

Nikole’s data favs
1. Census
2. Censusscope.org
3.) Brown University US2010 project (John Logan)
4.) U.S. Dept. of Education Office of Civil Rights
5.) HUD
6.) Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
7.) National Institutes of Health
8.) Local school board, housing authorities

Some disparities are easy to measure

CBS News

Dissimilarity Index
This index measures the evenness with which two mutually exclusive groups (such as
black and white residents) are distributed across the geographic units (such as Census
tracts) that make up a larger geographic entity (such as a city or metropolitan area). Its
minimum value is zero (perfect integration) and its maximum value is 100 (complete
segregation), with a value of 60 generally considered high segregation.
The DI is considered the most popular segregation measure because it takes into
account the size of each group measured, meaning one can compare cities with both
large (Durham, N.C.) and small (Portland, Ore.) black populations, for example.
This measure can determine, for instance, whether schools or a city or a neighborhood
have become more segregated or integrated over time or if an action will increase or
decrease segregation.

Detroit

Isolation and exposure indices
Isolation index calculates how isolated a racial group is from other racial
groups. For example, it can be used to tell the percentage of residents who are
white in the census tract of the typical white New Yorker. Or, the percentage of
residents who are black in the census tract of the typical black Chicagoan.
Exposure index calculates how much a racial group is exposed to another. It
tells us the percentage of black (or Asian, or Latino) residents who live in a
typical white neighborhood in a specific city or metro area, or any combination,
percent Asians in a Latino neighborhood, etc.

“Racism gets reduced to
intent, as if intent is all
that matters.”
David J. Leonard, professor of critical culture, gender and race studies, Washington State
University

Know the law
★ Civil Rights Act of 1964
★ Fair Housing Act
★ Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
★ Equal Credit Opportunity Act
★ Housing and Community Development Act
★ Equal Opportunity Employment Act

Disparate
impact theory
★
★

★
★

Civil rights doctrine that says practices may be illegally discriminatory
if they have an adverse impact on racial/ethnic minorities.
Often used to fight practices that appear race neutral but harm
members of protected classes AND the accused cannot justify the
practice or show there were no other less discriminatory actions or
policies they could have taken/adopted instead.
Doctrine deals with practices, policies, laws, not motivation, and often
provides the only means of legal recourse in the modern age.
Has been used heavily by the Obama Justice Department to pursue
discriminatory lenders.(Used most in employment and fair housing, but
also by the Department of Education)

Racial inequality is
not an accident or
simply a legacy of
the past

CooperCenter.org

The 1968 Fair Housing Act, passed months earlier in the tumultuous aftermath of
the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination, directed the government to
"affirmatively further" fair housing.
Over the next four decades, a ProPublica investigation shows, a succession of
presidents — Democrat and Republican alike — followed President Richard
Nixon's lead, declining to use the leverage of HUD's billions to fight segregation.
Nixon's vision for America largely came to pass and the costs have been steep.
More than 20 years of research has implicated residential segregation in virtually
every aspect of racial inequality, from higher unemployment rates for African
Americans, to poorer health care, to elevated infant mortality rates and, most of all,
to inferior schools.
HUD's largest program of grants to states, cities and towns has delivered $137
billion to more than 1,200 communities since 1974. To receive the money, localities
are supposed to identify obstacles to fair housing, keep records of their efforts to
overcome them, and certify that they do not discriminate.
ProPublica could find only two occasions since Romney's tenure in which the
department withheld money from communities for violating the Fair Housing Act.
In several instances, records show, HUD has sent grants to communities even after
they've been found by courts to have promoted segregated housing or been sued by
the U.S. Department of Justice. New Orleans, for example, has continued to receive
grants after the Justice Department sued it for violating that Fair Housing Act by
blocking a low-income housing project in a wealthy historic neighborhood.

Lessons learned? What Portland leaders did -- and didn't do -- as people of color were forced
to the fringes
Imani Muhammad remembers when she
no longer felt at home in the Northeast
Portland neighborhoods where she'd
spent most of her life.
By 2000, black-owned shops where she
got handmade soaps and Now and Later
candy had given way to white-owned
boutiques. Neighbors who used to ask
about her grandmother had been
replaced with strangers who passed
without speaking.
These days, the city markets Northeast
Alberta Street as a travel destination,
but Muhammad finds it difficult to share
in a feeling of success.

It is one of the most common arguments used to
justify federal inaction in pushing communities that
get government housing dollars to become more
racially diverse:Class, not race, determines where
people live, the argument goes. African Americans
and Latinos are poorer than white Americans, and
therefore, cannot afford to live in whiter, wealthier
areas.
ProPublica evaluated race and income data for
Westchester County – the affluent New York City
suburb under a federal desegregation order – to
determine whether income alone accounts for the
high degree of racial segregation experienced by
African Americans there.

