Investigating Racial Inequality in Your Region
Lawrence Lanahan, independent journalist
410-375-6350, llanahan@gmail.com, lawrencelanahan.com, @llanahan
Investigating racial inequality doesn’t mean just uncovering the kind of explicit de jure
discrimination and bigotry that the 20th century civil rights movement fought in the
streets and in the courts, as important as that is. It’s one thing to catch a landlord denying
an apartment to a black family and turning around to rent it to a white family. It’s another
to show how a seemingly neutral local zoning policy is disproportionately denying
opportunities to minority residents in a way that violates federal law.
Civil rights journalism in the 21st century ought to investigate the roots of de facto
segregation and other racial disparities. The challenge is identifying government policies
and institutional practices that are perpetuating these racial inequities, and determining if
they run afoul of laws and regulations that hold governments and institutions accountable
for the disparate impact of those policies.
Whether or not your investigation clearly uncovers discriminatory intent, powerful
people and institutions can still be held accountable for the impact of policies and
practices that lead to seemingly intractable disparities.
The first step in such an investigation is to gather the data that most clearly identify the
disparate patterns.
The second step is to identify policies and practices that might be driving the patterns.
The third step is to identify laws and regulations that hold governments and institutions
accountable for those policies and practices. These are known as “equality directives”:
they don’t just outlaw bias and discrimination—they require proactive, “affirmative”
steps to address the inequities.
EQUALITY DIRECTIVES
The idea here is to move beyond familiar, overt types of discrimination. Our targets are
the kinds of disparities so entrenched as to seem inevitable, with no seeming opportunity
to hold anyone accountable: segregated neighborhoods, for instance, or really high arrest
rates for black juveniles, or transportation systems that isolate poor neighborhoods from
job centers.
Equality directives are a good way to investigate accountability in these kinds of stories.
The best way I can suggest for you to get your head around equality directives is to look
into the work of law professor Olatunde Johnson. In “Beyond the Private Attorney
General: Equality Directives in American Law”
(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2258732), Johnson says when it
comes to civil rights law, our focus is on public enforcement—an EEOC claim for
employment discrimination, for instance—and private lawsuits. Johnson says of the two,

lawsuits have become dominant, with government agencies essentially saying, “Well, we
can’t handle all these civil rights violations, so we’ll pass the buck to the judiciary and let
private citizens, rather than government prosecutors, make the case.”
She argues we should pay more attention to what she calls “equality directives.” These
are comparatively rare provisions in federal law and regulation that say it’s not enough to
just not discriminate. Equality directives are more than prohibitory: they’re affirmative,
imposing a set of duties on government actors (and those who receive federal funding) to
promote equity. Rather than punish discrimination after the fact, these directives “target
bureaucratic enforcement,” motivating agencies to redesign programs and policies on the
front end so they stop perpetuating inequality in the first place.
Nikole Hannah-Jones’s ProPublica series on housing segregation, “Living Apart,” is a
great model for this kind of investigation: http://www.propublica.org/series/living-apart.
Nikole focused on Title VIII of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which imposes a duty to
“affirmatively further” fair housing. There’s another piece of civil rights law that
undergirds some equality directives: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which says
you can’t discriminate if you receive federal funding. That’s gotten some federal agencies
to issue regulations and guidance telling local governments and institutions how to design
programs in a way that promotes equity and inclusion of groups that have traditionally
faced discrimination.
These regulations and guidance are a good place to focus. Here are some quotes from
Johnson’s article, with a couple examples of Title VI reporting:
!

“A 2003 guidance from the Department of Agriculture implementing Title VI
requires federal agencies and their grantees to conduct a ‘civil rights impact
analysis’ that analyzes the proposed effect of their policies and actions on racial
and ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities.”
• Example:
http://www.rawd.org/resources/wwtpFinalEnvironmentalAssessment.pdf

!

“A recent Department of Transportation (DOT) guidance implementing Title VI
requires state and local actors receiving urban transit funds to assess whether their
programs and activities have a deleterious impact on racial and ethnic groups, to
include racial and ethnic minorities in their planning, and to consider less
discriminatory alternatives...Regulations implementing Title VI also require the
DOT to assess whether any negative environmental and health impacts fall
disproportionately on particular racial and ethnic groups and on low-income
populations, and to take steps to mitigate these concerns.
“The 2007 revision of the DOT guidelines aims to provide clearer guidance and
procedures on the meaning of disparate impact. It implements two executive
orders. The first was a 1994 Clinton Administration Executive Order directing all
federal agencies to develop an environmental justice strategy identifying
environmental effects, gather and disseminate specific data, and promote public

participation in decision making and research…A second executive order issued
by the Clinton Administration in 2000…requires federal agencies to take
affirmative steps to provide ‘meaningful access’ to persons with limited English
proficiency (LEP).”
• Example:
http://www.mtc.ca.gov/planning/2035_plan/Supplementary/equity/FinalE
quityAnalysisReportWeb.pdf
When it comes to federally-funded projects in your region, you can investigate whether
the local government and contractors are living up to the expectations in any related
federal equality directives:
! What requirements did the project have regarding community outreach?
! Was anyone required to file an equity assessment or an analysis of disparate
impacts?
! Were particular groups in the community required to be included in early
planning efforts?
! Was anyone required to outline plans to mitigate disparate impacts, and were
those plans followed?
! Was anyone required to file reports on Title VI compliance after the project was
finished?
! Are there sanctions for not complying with the equality directives?
! Did the federal agency provide sufficient technical assistance to help the local
entities comply with equality directives?
The duties imposed by Title VI equality directives generate a lot of reports, and
community input and public comments are rich resources, too.
Another powerful equality directive is the “disproportionate minority contact” standard,
which Olatunde Johnson writes about in her article “Disparity Rules” (Columbia Law
Review, Vol. 107, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 374–425). Congress passed this standard in
1992 to force states to address racial disparities in juvenile justice. It requires states
receiving federal juvenile justice funding to document racial disparities and come up with
plans to dismantle those disparities, regardless of whether there was intent to discriminate
in the first place. The standard as first passed only applied to disparities in confinement,
but was later expanded to apply to all contact points in the juvenile justice system: arrest,
diversion to adult court, pre-trial detention, conviction, secure confinement, and more.
States calculate their disparities with a “relative rate index.” An index of 1 means
minorities are no more likely than white youth to have contact with the system at a given
point. An index of higher than one indicates a higher likelihood of contact. This data is
not always easy to find; in Maryland, it’s in Appendix O of a “Data Resource Guide”
(http://www.djs.state.md.us/data-resource-guides.asp).
States also develop multiyear “DMC” plans. Both the RRI indices and DMC plans are
good sources of data. You can also talk to the federal DMC coordinator (right now, it’s
Andrea Coleman of the State Relations and Assistance Division with the Office of

Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention) to see how your state is performing, and
the Department of Justice also keeps track of states’ DMC reduction activities
(http://www.ojjdp.gov/pubs/239457.pdf).
The federal government can withhold juvenile justice funding from states that fail to meet
the DMC standard. (Of course they’ve only ever withheld funds from three places:
American Samoa, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and…Mississippi.)
Here’s Olatunde Johnson on DMC:
! “…the DMC provisions are quite far-reaching: They announced a standard that
requires public actors to reduce racial disparities without specifying whether those
disparities were motivated by intentional discrimination, caused by the public
actor or agency, or justified by the agency's legitimate institutional interests.
Rather, the statute takes aim at racial disparity by encouraging institutions to
gather information about racially disparate effects information which then helps
reformers and outside advocates better understand the role of public policies in
exacerbating inequality and take informed steps to intervene.”
MORE WAYS TO FIND RACIAL INEQUALITY TO INVESTIGATE IN YOUR
REGION
Figure out who’s talking about structural inequality and measuring disparities where you
live. For “The Lines Between Us,” a multimedia series about regional inequality I
launched at Baltimore public radio station WYPR, we contracted with the Baltimore
Neighborhood Indicators Alliance to build custom maps of neighborhood-level data. See
if the National Neighborhood Indicators Partnership has a partner in your town.
There are also regional initiatives focused on structural inequality, for instance “The State
of Equity in Metro Boston” (http://regionalindicators.org). In the Baltimore region, the
Aspen Institute Roundtable on Community Change has convened a group of civic leaders
over the past three years for a series of seminars on structural racism and racial equity. In
2010 and 2011, HUD gave out a bunch of “Sustainable Communities Regional Planning”
grants; in the Baltimore region, a grantee called the “Opportunity Collaborative” is
collecting equity-related data.
Good data and sources can be found among parties involved in complaints and lawsuits
over inequality issues. The ACLU of Maryland and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund
have been involved in a couple major suits in the Baltimore region. Also check the
comments on racial inequality-related federal regulations: HUD recently passed a final
rule on the controversial “disparate impact” standard, and it’s evaluating comments on a
proposed rule regarding the duty to affirmatively further fair housing. Anyone in your
region interested in these issues may have commented on these rules.
Obviously, you should also go where the disparities are most pronounced: visit
community organizations and neighborhood associations, talk to people on the street.

LOCAL SOURCES OF DATA ON RACIAL INEQUALITY
It’s not just federal equality directives that can generate data and sources for you to
investigate racial inequality at the local and state level.
!

!

!

!

The U.S. Census is an obvious place to go. Don’t forget to look at “County
Business Patterns” data, which tells you how many jobs in which industries are
located where. This is a good resource for stories on economic opportunity, and
Paul Overberg of the Reynolds Center for Business Journalism has done some
good webinars and presentations about it:
http://www.slideshare.net/BizJournalism/breaking-local-stories-with-economicdata-census-texas
Look at state and local legislation related to racial inequality, particularly
testimony and filings related to the legislation. In Baltimore, the city council
passed “inclusive zoning” legislation requiring large developments to include a
certain number of affordable units. The City’s finance department filed a memo
noting that after three years, the program created only 20 affordable housing
units—at a cost of over $85,000 per unit
(http://legistar.baltimorecitycouncil.com/attachments/6751.pdf). Another piece of
proposed legislation—this one to require the hiring of city residents for certain
public works projects—foundered when the city solicitor filed a memo saying the
bill would likely be unconstitutional
(http://legistar.baltimorecitycouncil.com/attachments/10354.pdf).
There are also practices in the private sector aimed at reducing racial inequality.
You can pressure those private actors to make their data public. WYPR looked
into promises by a developer to make a certain amount of local hires for a massive
downtown development. The “economic inclusion” agreement was between the
developer and an alliance of local ministers, but a city council member helped
broker the deal, and we obtained a copy of the memorandum of understanding
from him
(http://programs.wypr.org/sites/default/files/Lex%20Square%20EIP%20Final%20
with%20NAACP%20Execution-1.pdf). We also got the developer to assure our
listeners that monthly hiring reports would be made public.
“Opportunity mapping” is a popular new way to illustrate racial inequality and
efforts to dismantle it. In Maryland, the Department of Housing and Community
Development has a map
(http://staging.geodata.doit.maryland.gov/imap/index.html?appid=7e1ac20f27054
126828c1396d273af4e), and the HUD-funded Opportunity Collaborative
(www.opportunitycollaborative.org) is working on its own. Most importantly,
HUD is developing an interactive mapping tool that will be released with the final
version of its forthcoming rule regarding the duty to “affirmatively further fair
housing” (http://www.huduser.org/portal/affht_pt.html,
http://egis.hud.gov/affht_pt/). The Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and
Ethnicity (http://kirwaninstitute.osu.edu) is a leader in the opportunity mapping
movement, and University of California Berkeley law professor john a. powell
(http://www.law.berkeley.edu/php-

!

!

programs/faculty/facultyProfile.php?facID=15781) is a pioneer, having created an
opportunity map that was used to redesign public housing policy in the Baltimore
region: http://www.linesbetweenus.org/our-stories/episode-5-public-housingbaltimore.
You should of course request permission to use data from university and research
institute studies. If you have multiple sources of data, go ahead and “hack” some
maps to put a more nuanced picture together of inequality in your region. When a
Stanford researcher gave me maps from 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2009 that
color-coded Baltimore neighborhoods as poor, middle-class, or rich, I took them
to www.picasion.com and created an animated gif that showed middle class
neighborhoods disappearing over time and being replaced by rich and poor
neighborhoods: http://www.linesbetweenus.org/our-stories/episode-20-middleclass. I also used some Baltimore foreclosure data from ProPublica to plot
foreclosure hotspots on our own race and class maps:
http://www.linesbetweenus.org/seeing-inequality/foreclosure-race-and-income.
This showed that foreclosures weren’t just a class issue: they were concentrated in
several middle-class black neighborhoods.
Keep a sense of humor about you; it can make for powerful data visualizations.
For a story about the growing ratio of CEO-to-average-worker pay, I asked the 15
biggest public companies in Maryland for their ratios. Although they’d soon be
required to calculate that ratio under a forthcoming SEC rule, none of the
companies provided them to me. I made the graph anyway—its emptiness
reinforced the companies’ defensiveness when it comes to income inequality:
http://www.linesbetweenus.org/seeing-inequality/ceo-pay-shareholder-say.

Below are links to two stories in which I investigated racial inequality in the Baltimore
region using the three-step method outlined above: finding disparity data, identifying
policies perpetuating the disparities, and investigating accountability for those policies.
KEEPING KIDS OUT OF THE SYSTEM
http://www.linesbetweenus.org/our-stories/episode-41-keeping-kids-out-system
This story looked into Maryland’s efforts to reduce disproportionate minority contact
with the juvenile justice system.
DATA: Maryland keeps data at the county level for racial juvenile justice disparities
using the “relative rate index.”
POLICY: We looked at arrests for marijuana possession, arrests by school police, and the
practices of Maryland’s Department of Juvenile Services.
ACCOUNTABILITY: We asked a federal source how Maryland’s DMC efforts
compared to other states, profiled two DMC reduction programs, and talked to the person
hired by DJS to reform any internal policies that might be perpetuating disparities.

FIGHTING SEGREGATION IN HOUSING? THERE’S A MAP FOR THAT
http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/2/5/fightingsegregationinhousingtheresamapforthat.html
This story looked at the potential for “opportunity mapping” efforts to compel changes in
the racial makeup of American communities. In particular, it focused on an interactive
mapping tool HUD is developing to accompany the final version of a rule that clarifies
the duty of HUD grantees to “affirmatively further fair housing.”
DATA: We focused on a complaint by a local fair housing coalition alleging that tax
credit-backed low-income housing developments were concentrated in poor and minority
neighborhoods. This limited fair housing choice, they alleged, by limiting minority access
to “communities of opportunity” in the suburbs. We used the HUD mapping tool to show
the concentration of low-income housing in the region.
POLICY: The complaint alleges that the pattern is exacerbated by the state of Maryland’s
protocol for distributing low-income housing tax credits. That protocol allows local
governments to vote to reject such developments, which the complainants say happens
more often for developments planned for whiter, wealthier communities.
ACCOUNTABILITY: We highlighted a regional fair housing report sent to HUD that
identifies the state’s “local approval” policy as an “impediment to fair housing choice.”
The Baltimore County Executive signed off on that report, yet the Baltimore County
Council voted in November 2013 to reject just such a development.

