WSJ Encrypted Chat
The following is a quick­and­dirty guide to encrypted chat. I will refine this guide as time permits
but am writing this now for urgent circumstances.

For Windows: Download and Install Pidgin
(1) Download Pidgin from here: http://www.pidgin.im/
(2) Open the .exe file and hit "Run"
(3) Go through the setup wizard and just keep hitting next and then Finish. Yay!

For Windows: Install OTR Plugin
(1) Go here and download the installer for pidgin­otr: http://www.cypherpunks.ca/otr/
(2) Run the .exe file and keep hitting "next." (You may need to contact your help desk and get
them to do this or to give you higher admin privileges on your machine to do this. Tell them you
need to do it to communicate securely with a source, and it should be fine.)
(3) Open up Pidgin. It might take a little while, and you might have to try opening it again to get
the window to show up.
(4) On the Buddy List window, go to Tools > Plugins. Scroll down and you should see
Off­the­Record Messaging. Click the little check box next to it.
(5) Click the Configure Plugin button. Make sure Enable private messaging, Automatically initiate
private messaging, Don't log OTR conversations and Show OTR button in toolbar are checked.
(6) Click Close. Click Close again. Yay!

For Mac: Download and Install Adium
(1) Go here and follow the instructions. It should be pretty self­explanatory to download this
program: https://adium.im/
(2) To use OTR in Adium, you don't need to download anything else. OTR functionality comes
with Adium. Yay! Adium has some pretty straightforward instructions here, but you might need to
have your account(s) set up first in order to use them:
https://adium.im/help/pgs/AdvancedFeatures­OTREncryption.html

Both Platforms: Set Up GChat or AIM
You can use Pidgin/Adium and OTR with many types of chat systems. If you want to use it with
your GChat or AIM, your messages themselves will be encrypted, but someone could still see
who you are messaging with.
(1) For Pidgin: In your Buddy List window, go to Accounts > Manage Accounts. Click Add.
(Instructions are similar for Adium.)
(2) For Google accounts, your protocol should be Google Talk or XMPP. (I had to use XMPP, but
sometimes you'll have to use Google Talk. Try both.) Your username will be your Google user
name. Your domain will be gmail.com; password is your Google password. Under the Advanced
tab, choose "Use old­style SSL" for connection security. Connect port should be 443. Connect
server should be talk.google.com and File transfer proxies should be proxy.eu.jabber.org. Hit
save.
(3) For AIM accounts, protocol, username and password are as expected. On the advanced tab,
server should be slogin.oscar.aol.com, port should be 5190, connection security should be use
encryption if available. Check use clientLogin and allow multiple simultaneous logins.
(4) In either case, your accounts should show up as normal.

Download and Install Tor
If you need to obscure not only your messages but who you're talking with, you will need to use
something called Tor and a Jabber.ccc.de account.
First we will download Tor. (If you already have the Tor browser, you don't need to do this again.)
(1) Download the Tor browser bundle from here: https://www.torproject.org/
(2) Run the .exe file.
(3) You'll see a little folder on your desktop called Tor Browser. Open it and double click Start Tor
Browser. You'll have to do that whenever you want to use this secure chat.

Set Up a Jabber Account
(1) For Pidgin: In your Buddy List window, go to Accounts > Manage Accounts. Click Add.
(Instructions are similar for Mac/Adium.)

(2) Choose the XMPP protocol.
(3) Choose a username. Enter your domain as jabber.ccc.de. Choose a password. Check
"remember password" and "create this new account on the server."
Under Advanced, choose Require encryption or require ssl/tls. Connect port is 5222. File
transfer proxies is proxy.edu.jabber.og.
Under the Proxy tab, choose SOCKS 5. Host is 127.0.0.1. Port is 9150.
Click Add.
(4) You will get a registration dialog for jabber.ccc.de. (Sometimes the server is busy. Just wait
15 minutes or so and try again.) Eventually you'll be able to add the account. If it takes longer
than a couple hours, let me know.
(5) Now you can message using jabber.ccc.de, but remember you need to be running the Tor
Browser when you do it, or it won't work.
To test all this, you can message me! I am jennifer.valentino@jabber.ccc.de.

