Finding data from other countries
This tipsheet is intended to complement “Finding Data Online” by Jaimi Dowell. It is primarily
intended for people looking for data outside the country where they normally work – but
some of the search techniques work wherever you are. For now we will assume that you are
looking for data published by an authority you cannot approach with a FOIA (Freedom of
Information) request.
Finding good datasets, and good sources of datasets is like fishing. Knowing where the fish
are likely to be is a big help. The best place to start is where you know others have already
put the datasets and indexed them for you – even if you don’t find what you need, you will
get a good impression of what is available and where to look.
The US government has done a nice job - www.data.gov/open-gov/ From this page you can
not only find links to other government sites, but also download a spreadsheet listing them.
In London, The Guardian’s datastore - http://www.theguardian.com/data has a nice index at
the bottom of the page –

As mentioned above, even if you don’t find what you’re looking for here – it’s a great way of
finding out who has what.
Other places to start – the big international organisations
United Nations – data.un.org
World Health Organisation - www.who.int/hiv/data/en/
OECD oecd.org/statistics/datalab/
European Union eurostat And so on.
If you’re trying to investigate international links, say between companies, then
Opencorporates.com is a great place to look for companies, or even parts of names of
companies, or directors who work with more than one company in different countries. It
aggregates data from national company registration databases from all over the world, and
is very user friendly.
Think laterally too – the US site usaspending.gov has a filter in its advanced search options
that allows you to select “place of performance” of a US Federal project – you can then
export the database it generates and analyse it – you might, for example, find that the
company owned by President X’s brother is Washington’s biggest partner in the country.
Time to dig deeper?...
Advanced Search

As in searching generally, the biggest help comes from three of Google’s myriad “advanced
operators” –


site:



filetype:



inurl:

Site: is perfect for narrowing your search down to a site, working backwards from right to left
of the url. If you just want to find uk sites, you limit your search by putting site:uk (NB –
always a full colon, no space after it). If you want to find British companies, you add co –
site:co.uk or universities – site:ac.uk. There are several useful subdomains in Britain –
police.uk nhs.uk (the National Health Service), sch.uk – schools. As you get to know a
country’s internet landscape, you will begin to guess what the subdomains are, and which
ones are helpful. As a first step, to see what’s around I just google, say, site:ca filetype:xls
This search would show me now many pages google can see on the Canadian part of the
web, with spreadsheets attached. Filetype:csv is another useful search term because some
authorities save bandwidth by using “comma separated values” instead of the more bloated
spreadsheets – Excel, or Google Spreadsheets (and other programs) will read csv easily.
It follows from this that knowing the TLD (Top Level Domain) for each country will be a big
help in looking for data in strange places – site:fr will get you French sites, site:br will get you
Brazilian, ba – Bosnian, and so on. There are currently more than 250 TLD’s so you can’t
expect to know them all, especially in areas where you’re looking for the first time. (For
example, did you know there are more than 100 excel files on the “aq” – Antarctica –
domain?)
The full list is on Wikipedia - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Internet_toplevel_domainshttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Internet_top-level_domains
Once you’re beginning to get familiar with a domain, you could not only add filetype:xls (or
csv) to your search, but instead you could use inurl: This, as the name suggests, finds
keywords wherever they appear in the url – so you can narrow your search in many useful
ways. After a big nightclub fire in Brazil in January 2013 a search of “site:br filetype:xls
inurl:seguranca (Portuguese for “safety”) might have got you started on finding inspection
results. Equally usefully, it would show you the structure of the url’s which might contain what
you’re looking for.
My favourite example of a dataset googlewhack was one in Serbia – by putting
Site:gov.rs filetype:xls inurl:hrvatska - (asking for spreadsheets on a Serbian government
website with the Serbian for “Croatia” in the url). I found just one spreadsheet – a list of
cross-border projects, complete with the names and contact details of the person
responsible on each side of the border: a nice resource for someone looking into the current
level of cooperation between the two countries.
The words to look for in a url depend on your experience and imagination, and knowledge of
the language – try keywords in English, or the local language – words such as “data”,
“open”, “public”, “secret”, “inspection”, “download”, “results” – even the year you’re interested
in – “2012” – much depends on how the local IT people have structured their urls.

