Mapping 1: displaying geographical data with QGIS
Hands-on at NICAR 2014, Baltimore, Mar 1
Peter Aldhous
peter@peteraldhous.com
@paldhous
GQIS is the leading free, open source Geographic Information System (GIS) program. It
is capable of sophisticated geodata processing and analysis, but you don't need to be a
GIS expert to put it to effective use in displaying and processing geographic data for both
print and online.
Here we'll learn how to use QGIS to make a simple thematic map, with areas colored
according to data, plus a map of points, and how to export them as a vector graphic.
Launch QGIS Desktop, and you should see a screen like this:

We're going to recreate a version of one of the maps from The Nature Conservancy's
Atlas of Global Conservation – showing the number of globally threated amphibian
species in each of the world's freshwater ecoregions.

The data is here, in shapefile format, commonly used in GIS. A shapefile actually consists
of a series of files, one of which (in a format called DBF) is a table of data. Many
organizations, including the US Census Bureau, make their data available as shapefiles;
Natural Earth also provides a great library of global shapefiles.
To import a shapefile into QGIS select Layer>Add vector layer, or click this icon:
At the dialog box, click Browse and navigate to the FW_amphib shapefile, select the file
with the type SHP, then Open:

Once the shapefile loads, you should have a screen like this:

Notice how the name of the shapefile has appeared in the Layers panel, with a little
square icon showing that it displays polygons – areas with boundaries. Now is a good
time to save the project, so select Project>Save or use Ctrl+S.
This world map is plotted as rectangle with each degree of longitude and latitude given
the same size. Usually, the first job in a GIS project is to set a specific map projection.
Projections are important because any two-dimensional map is a distortion of reality: Just
as you can’t peel an orange and arrange the skin as a perfect rectangle, it’s impossible to
plot the Earth’s surface in two dimensions and accurately represent distances, areas,
shapes and directions.
The best projection for your map will depend on which of these attributes is most
important to conserve, and the area you're mapping. Your graphics department may be
able to advise on which one to choose. (For more on projections, see this reference.)
To set the projection, select Project>Project Properties>CRS and check the box marked
Enable 'on the fly' CRS transformation. (This will convert any data you import
subsequently to the correct projection for the project.)

For this project, we'll use a Robinson projection. To find it, start typing Robinson into the
box marked Filter. World_Robinson should appear in the box marked Coordinate
Reference System: select it, then click Apply and OK. (You can also search for
projections by their numerical codes, which you can find here.)
The map should now look like this:

Now let's look at the data available for us to map. Either right click on the name of the
shapefile in the Layers panel and select Open Attribute Table, or click this icon:

You should now see this data (from the shapefile's DBF):

The data include various ID codes, the name of the ecoregion, and its type. The final
column, marked THREAT_AMP, gives the number of threatened amphibians in each
ecoregion. If you click on the column header it will sort the rows by that data, which
ranges from 0 to 95. Close the attribute table.

Now we'll color the map according to the number of threatened amphibian species in
each ecoregion. Click Layer>Properties or double click on the shapefile in the Layers
panel, then select Style:

Click the little downward-pointing arrow next to Single Symbol and choose Graduated,
which allows us to map by numerical data. (If we were mapping categories, such as the
ecoregion type, we'd select Categorized.)
Then select THREAT_AMP under Column.
Using the Mode option instructs QGIS to divide the data in classes using some common
defaults – for example, selecting 5 Classes and Quantile would put the lowest 20% of
values in the first class, the next highest 20% in the second, and so on.
Here, however, we're going to follow the legend on the original map from The Nature
Conservancy:

Select 6 Classes, and edit them manually – double-click on each Value and Label to edit.

Now we can select a Color ramp. For data like this, a sequential color scheme with
increasing intensity of a single color works well, so the default Blues option is fine.
Misleading or confusing color schemes are a common problem in mapping, so I'd
strongly recommend looking at ColorBrewer's suggestions to find one that fits your data.
ColorBrewer schemes are available in QGIS – scroll to the bottom of the Color ramp
options, select New color ramp and then select ColorBrewer.

Next we will edit the boundaries. Select all of the classes and click Change under
Symbol. At the next dialog box, click Simple fill, and then you can edit the color and the
thickness of the boundary lines:

Click OK, then back in the main Properties dialog boc click Apply and OK.
The map should now look like this:

Now we'll add a second map layer, showing the locations of sites deemed important for
amphibian conservation, protected under the international Ramsar Convention on
Wetlands, which is in this CSV file.
To import this data, select Layer>Add Delimited Text Layer, or click this icon:
QGIS should recognize that Longitude and Latitude are the X and Y coordinates, and
that the delimiters are commas. If not, you can select the correct values at this dialog box:

At the next dialog box, accept the default of WGS84 for the Coordinate Reference
System. Notice that the code in the box at the bottom of the screen, which defines the
projection, includes the term “longlat.” This tells QGIS that there is no specific projection
for the CSV file, just latitude and longitude values – it will then convert to the Robinson
projection used for the project:

The points should appear on the map:

Notice that the entry in the Layers panel has an icon showing that this layer consists of
points, rather than polygons.

We can style the points much as we did the polygon layer, this time using the Single
Symbol option.

The map should now look like this:

Now we'll export the finished map as a vector PDF, which could be edited further by a
graphic designer. Select Project>New Print Composer, and add a title at the first dialog
box. The following window will open:

To add your map, click the Add New Map icon:
Then click, hold, and use your cursor to draw a rectangle in the main panel. Release the
mouse button and the map should appear:

You can add other elements, including a legend, using the options along the toolbar at the
top, and customize elements such as typeface and font size, as explained in the QGIS
manual.
To export the map as a PDF, click the Export as PDF icon:
You can also export as SVG, another vector graphic format, or as various types of raster
image (JPG, PNG etc).

