Mapping 2: Manipulating geographical data with QGIS
Hands-on at NICAR 2014, Baltimore, Mar 1
Peter Aldhous
peter@peteraldhous.com
@paldhous
In addition to displaying geographic data, QGIS is a powerful tool for processing data for
use by other mapping applications. If you want to make online maps, using tools
including TileMill and Leaflet, for instance, QGIS can help get your data into the right
shape.
In this class we'll explore some useful QGIS data processing functions, including joining
tables of data to existing shapefiles, simplifying geographic features so that online maps
will render quickly, and how to save data in formats commonly used for web mapping.
We'll also learn how to edit geographic data, and how to process data consisting of
hundreds or thousands of closely spaced or overlapping points to give a more meaningful
summary display.
Joining data to a shapefile
Launch QGIS Desktop, and import this shapefile:

(During this class, we're not going to set a specific projection, and will work throughout
with the WGS84 lat-long default. So whenever you're prompted, accept this option.)
The imported shapefile contains the boundary data for the world's freshwater ecoregions,
to which were going to join the data on threatened amphibians that we mapped in the
previous class. If you open the attribute table, you'll see that it lacks the THREAT_AMP
column that we used to create the thematic map.
The data is in this file, which I've saved in DBF format. You can create DBFs from any
spreadsheet – I'd recommend using Calc, the free spreadsheet program avilable in
LibreOffice. Simply open your spreadsheet in Calc, and select File>Save As
File Type dBASE (.dbf).
Here's the data, which has two columns, THREAT_AMP and ECO_ID (you can ignore
the letter and numbers after the first comma, which are a description of the data):

The shapefile contains the column ECO_ID, too, so we can use this field to join the
threatened amphibian data to each ecoregion. If you've used relational databases, this is
conceptually the same as an “inner join” query, which pulls together data from different
tables where they match for a selected field.

First we need to add the DBF to the project, using Layer>Add vector layer. Notice how
it appears in the Layers panel with an attribute table icon:

Right click on the shapefile in the Layers panel, select Properties>Joins, click
and fill in the dialog box as follows:

Click Apply and OK to complete the join.

Open the shapefile's attribute table, and see that it contains the joined data on threatened
amphibians in a new column at the right:

Here are further instructions on joining data to shapefiles, including from CSV files.

Now is a good time to save the joined shapefile. Right click on it in the Layers panel, and
Save as an ESRI Shapefile with a suitable name:

We can also use the same dialog box to export the data in formats commonly used for
web mapping, such as geoJSON or KML. But there's one problem: The boundary data is
highly detailed, which will make the exported data file huge and sluggish to load.

Simplifying the geometry of your data
To solve that problem, select Vector>Geometry Tools>Simplify geometries, fill in the
dialog box as follows, and click OK:

In practice, you will probably want to check the Save to new file option, and experiment
with different numbers for Simplify tolerance, to get a visually acceptable result that will
export as a file of reasonable size. (Your web developers may be able to advise on that.)
You should see a result like this, which will greatly reduce the size of an exported
geoJSON or KML file:

We're finished with this data, so select Project>New and Discard the current project to
start again with a fresh screen.

Editing geographical data
Now we're going to explore some of QGIS's data editing functions. First import this
shapefile of the countries of the world by selecting Vector>Add Vector Layer:

Next add this CSV file of points showing Ramsar Convention sites deemed important for
amphibian conservation, from the previous class, using Layer>Add Delimited Text
Layer:

We're going to edit the points to make a shapefile containing only sites in the United
States. The CSV file contains no information on country, but we can use the countries
shapefile to select the points within the US.
With the countries shapefile highlighted in the Layers panel, click the Select Single
Feature icon:
Then click anywhere within the borders of the US, and you should see a screen like this:

Now select Vector>Geoprocessing Tools>Intersect and fill in the dialog box as follows,
selecting a suitable name for the output shapefile:

Click OK, then accept the option to add it to map. Hide the full Ramsar sites layer by
unchecking it, and you should see a screen like this, showing our new shapefile:

The Vector menu in QGIS offers a rich set of tools for manipulating geographical data.
Our Intersect option created a new shapefile with fields from both shapefiles in its
attribute table. Clip is similar, but would not have added fields from the countries
shapefile to the new shapefile's attribute table. Buffer creates a new shapefile bounding a
zone a defined distance from a set features of interest – you might use this, for instance,
to see which parts of your city lie within a mile of a park, or a library. Find out more
about the options from the QGIS manual, and explore their functions for yourself.
We can also edit data in QGIS directly. To do that, click the Toggle Editing icon:
Then open the attribute table for the countries shapefile and click the Invert Selection
icon:
This will select all countries apart from the US, which we can then delete from the
shapefile by clicking the Delete Selected Features icon:
Click OK, close the attribute table, then click the Toggle Editing icon once more to exit
editing mode. Save your changes, and you should now have a map showing just the US.
This is just a brief intoduction to QGIS's data editing functions – see the manual for more
possibilities.
We're now finished with this data, so select Project>New and Discard the current project
to start again with a fresh screen.

Hexagonal binning: a better option than throwing many points at a map
In the final part of this class, we'll explore how to make a sensible map display from data
that consists of hundreds or even thousands of closely spaced or overlaid points. I used
this option to make these maps of the Syrian civil war.
Open this shapefile, showing the location of distinct violent events in Syria from the first
quarter of 2013:

If you open the shapefile's atribute table, you'll see that it contains more than 10,000
points, many of which overlay one another. We're going to create a hexagonal grid
covering the same area, and then count the points in each cell in the grid.
One of the strengths of QGIS is that it has an active community of open-source software
developers producing useful plugins for specific geodata processing tasks. To make our
grid, we need to install one of these plugins, called MMQGIS.
Select Plugins>Manage and Install Plugins, then select Get More and type mmqgis
into the Search box. Select the result that appears, then click Install Plugin. An
MMQGIS menu should now have appeared.

Next, use the Zoom In and Zoom Out tools
to give some blank space around the points:

This will ensure that the grid layer will completely cover all the points.
To create the grid layer select MMQGIS>Create>Create Grid Layer and fill in the
dialog box as follows, selecting an appropriate name for the output shapefile:

In practice, you'll need to experiment with the H Spacing value to produce hexagons of a
suitable size. The V spacing value will adjust automatically.

Once the shapefile has loaded, drag the points shapefile above the grid shapefile in the
Layers panel, and you should see a screen like this, confirming that all our points are in
the grid:

Now we'll make a new shapefile with a count of the points in each cell of the grid. Select
Vector>Analysis Tools>Points in polygon and fill in the dialog box as follows, selecting
an appropriate name for the new shapefile:

Click OK, and once the data has processed, accept the option to add the new shapefile to
the map. Open its attribute table, and you'll see that there is a column PNTCNT, giving

the number of violent events in each grid cell. You can now save this new shapefile in
whatever format you need for your mapping application of choice.
Next steps
For more on hexagonal binning, and pointers on styling the resulting shapefile in TileMill
to make an online map, see this tutorial. For instructions on how to make web maps with
Leaflet using data exported as geoJSON, see here and here.

