5 tips for data manipulation in Excel - Computerworld

4/3/14, 12:20 PM

Safari Power Saver
Click to Start Flash Plug-in

White Papers

News

Topics

Applications

In Depth

Reviews

Webcasts

Blogs

Newsletters

Research Centers

Opinion

Shark Tank

Events

IT Jobs

Magazine

More

App Development | Big Data | Business Intelligence/Analytics | Content/Document Management | CRM | Databases | Desktop Apps |
Emerging Technologies | Enterprise Architecture | ERP | Open Source | Regulatory Compliance | Social Business |
Unified Communications

Home > Applications

5 tips for data manipulation in Excel
There's plenty you can do, if you know the correct formulas.
By Sharon Machlis
March 4, 2014 06:30 AM ET

Share

20

4 Comments

Like

56

Computerworld - If you work with data much, you don't need a statistical
model to predict that the odds of consistently getting data in the format you
need for analysis are pretty low. Those who do a great deal of data cleaning
and reformatting often turn to scripting languages like Python or specialty
tools such as OpenRefine or R.

FREE INSIDER GUIDE

But it turns out that there's a lot of data munging) you can do in a plain old
Excel spreadsheet -- if you know how to craft the proper formulas.

IT Certification Study Tips

In a presentation at the recent 2014 Computer Assisted Reporting (CAR)
conference, MaryJo Webster, senior data reporter with Digital First Media -a newspaper group in New York -- shared some of her favorite Excel tricks.
The goal of these tips, Webster said: Learn at least one new thing that will
make you say, "Why didn't I know this before?"

Register for FREE now! »

Date functions
Tip 1: Split dates into separate fields
You can extract the year, month and day into separate fields from a date
field in Excel by using formulas =Year(CellWithDate),
=MONTH(CellWithDate) and =DAY(CellWithDate). Splitting dates this way -by year, month and day of month -- works in Microsoft Access as well,
Webster said.
In addition, you can also get the day of the week for any date in Excel with
=WEEKDAY(CellWithDate). The default returns numbers, not names of the
days of week, with 1 for Sunday, 2 for Monday and so on.
To display the name of the weekday instead of a number, apply a custom
format to the cells with the weekday numbers, using Format cells >
Custom; then type ddd in the Type text box to get three-day abbreviations
or dddd for the full day name.
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9246720/5_tips_for_data_manipulation_in_Excel

Register for this Computerworld Insider Study Tip
guide and gain access to hundreds of premium
content articles, cheat sheets, product reviews and
more.

Applications Resources
Best Practices in BYOD - Addressing BYOD
Challenges in the Enterprise
Take control of the iOS, Android™ and BlackBerry®
devices in your organization, from one powerful, unified
console.
Built for Business: 10 Reasons BlackBerry
Smartphones Are Still the Best Way to Do Business
The BlackBerry® 10 mobile computing platform
removes many of the barriers that slow down other
devices. Here are just a few of the...
Choosing an MDM Platform: Where to Start the
Conversation
If you're in the early stages of choosing an MDM
solution, or you're considering switching vendors, here
are seven critical questions to ask...
How to Migrate from BlackBerry Enterprise Server
v4.0 or v5.0
Page 1 of 4

5 tips for data manipulation in Excel - Computerworld

4/3/14, 12:20 PM

Tip 2: Find someone's current age
If you have someone's date of birth, you can find his or her current age on
whatever day you open the spreadsheet with the =DATEDIF() and =TODAY()
functions. TODAY(), as you might guess, gives the current date. DATEDIF()
gives the diﬀerence between two dates in units of years ("y"), months ("m")
or days ("d"), using the syntax:
=DATEDIF(Date1, Date2, Unit of measure)
So, to get current age in years, use the formula:
=DATEDIF(CellWithBirthday,TODAY(), "y")
Note that the years unit returns ages in whole numbers and does not round
up.

Find out how to make the transition from your current
BlackBerry® Enterprise Server environment, in this
quick, visual guide.
LIVE WEBCAST
Government Agency Webifies Outdated COBOL
Applications
Let this CTO tell you how his agency converted 1980sera green screens into an e-filing portal for the 100,000
cases handled each year...
LIVE WEBCAST
PPG Company Uses Verastream to Web-Enable
Host Functionality
PPG subsidiary LYNX achieved 3270 and 5250
integration using Verastream. They quickly extended
legacy functions to the web for internal and external
users,...
LIVE WEBCAST

See an example below.

Freightliner Uses Verastream to Simplify Mainframe
Processes
This UK-based freight transporter automated EDI
messaging and rolled out real-time online tracking,
generating 2 million customer messages per year.
Webinar: Building a Big Data solution that's
production-ready
Big data solutions are no longer just a nice-to-have.
Transforming Finance, Procurement and Supply
Chain Eﬀectiveness with Cross-Functional Analytics
Date: May 6th, 2014
Time: 1 PM EDT
Attend this Webcast to find out how Oracle's packaged
analytic applications enable line-of-business managers
to examine all...
All Applications White Papers | Webcasts

If you have someone's date of birth, you can find his or her current age.

1

2

3

Next page

FREE Download: IT Certification Study Tips on the Cheap!
Comments (4 Comments)
Share

Print

20

Like

Today's Top Stories
7 all-in-one suites: Anti-malware for all
your devices
10 takeaways from Microsoft's Build
conference 2014
Apple slates WWDC for June 2-6, sets up
ticket lottery

56

From CIO.com | CSOonline
Top 12 Laptop Bags for Mobile Pros
Think Deleted Text Messages Are Gone
Forever? Think Again
7 New Faces of the C-suite
5 Ways CIOs Can Rationalize Application
Portfolios

http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9246720/5_tips_for_data_manipulation_in_Excel

Page 2 of 4

5 tips for data manipulation in Excel - Computerworld

4/3/14, 12:20 PM

Jonny Evans: WWDC 2014: Apple's return
to glory?

Slideshow: 7 security mistakes people
make with their mobile device

Microsoft teases touch-first Oﬃce for
Windows

iOS vs. Android: Which is more secure?

IT Jobs

Post a Job for $295

Services - New Technology - Commissions...
Columbia, MO - Global Strategic Alliances - Powered By
Mahala

11 sure signs you've been hacked

JR Raphael: Attention, Android
manufacturers: Bigger isn't always better
EU votes net neutrality into law, abolishes
mobile roaming charges

ADVERTISING SALES EXECUTIVE - NEW MOBILE...
Columbia, MO - Global Strategic Alliances - Powered By
Mahala
See All Jobs

Additional Resources

Job title, company

City, State, ZIP

Search

WHITE PAPER

How Cloud Communications Reduce Costs and Increase Productivity
Small and midsize businesses are moving to the cloud to host their
communications capabilities. Learn how enterprise-quality phone benefits, online
management, conferencing, auto attendant, and ease of use are built into a
system that is half the cost of a PBX.
Read now.

Our Commenting Policies

4 Comments

Computerworld

Sort by Newest

Login
Share

Favorite

Join the discussion…
Microaddin • 2 days ago

Immediate prompt for existing words when doing data entry.
Accelerate data entry for repetitive words.
Consistent spelling to avoid errors in summary, lookup and statistics
later.
SmartInput for Excel from www.microaddin.com
• Reply • Share ›

c_world_poster • a month ago

"Just say no".
Next weeks lesson: how to use a hammer as a screwdriver.
1

• Reply • Share ›

thesafesurfer

c_world_poster • 22 days ago

You occupy a part of the universe devoid of intelligent life.
• Reply • Share ›

ccocallas • a month ago

Great tips! I just wish the videos were less grainy...
• Reply • Share ›

Subscribe

Add Disqus to your site

http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9246720/5_tips_for_data_manipulation_in_Excel

Page 3 of 4

5 tips for data manipulation in Excel - Computerworld

4/3/14, 12:20 PM

Applications White Papers | All Applications White Papers
Best Practices in BYOD - Addressing BYOD Challenges in the Enterprise

Built for Business: 10 Reasons BlackBerry Smartphones Are Still the Best Way
to Do Business

Choosing an MDM Platform: Where to Start the Conversation

How to Migrate from BlackBerry Enterprise Server v4.0 or v5.0

Protection for Every Enterprise: How BlackBerry Security Works

Your New EMM Platform: How to Streamline the Migration

The CIO's Guide to Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM)
Secure, Centralized, Simple: Multi-platform EMM

Separating Work and Personal at the Platform Level: How BlackBerry Balance
Works

Future Focus: What's Coming in Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM)

Future Focus: What's Coming in Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM)

8 Tips for Social Business

5 Step Guide to Social Media Security

Evaluating Enterprise Social Relationship Platforms

Social Media in Technology: A Unified Strategy for Success

Vblock™ is Cornerstone of New In-House IT Operation for Canadian Pacific
Railways

Drive Business Growth with the Right Social Media Tools
Vblock™ Systems and SAP: Transform Your Business

Is Your Big Data Solution Production-Ready?

Learn why Analyst firm Ovum names SugarCRM a leading CRM

Sponsored Links
Register now for EMC World 2014. Las Vegas - EMC Corporation

Drive Down Help Desk Costs using Collaborative Workflow - Learn How...

Download Microsoft's latest Data Protection Management tool

ITwhitepapers.com - Access thousands of white papers on 300+ technical
topics.

Not All QSAs Are Created Equal: What You Should Know Before You Buy
The arrival of Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) marks a new era in storage scalability

Leverage Your Cisco infrastructure for Superior Application Performance
Learn about the AMD Virtual Experience

The AMD Virtual Experience Virtual Trade Show

"The Definitive Guide to Security Management" Chapter 1: Introduction to
Security Management

"The Definitive Guide to Security Management" Chapter 1: Introduction to
Security Management

Introducing: Project Icebreaker

Skip to top

About Us

Advertise

Contacts

Newsletters

Careers at IDG

The IDG Network: CFOworld
Ventures

InfoWorld

CIO

ITwhitepapers

CITEworld
ITworld

Editorial Calendar

Computerworld
JavaWorld

Subscribe to Computerworld Magazine

Privacy Policy
CSO

LinuxWorld

DEMO

Reprints
IDC

Macworld

IDG

Site Map

IDG Connect

Network World

PC World

Help Desk

Ad Choices

IDG Knowledge Hub
TechHive

IDG TechNetwork

IDG

Technology Briefcase

Copyright © 1994 - 2014 Computerworld Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of Computerworld Inc. is
prohibited. Computerworld and Computerworld.com and the respective logos are trademarks of International Data Group Inc.

http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9246720/5_tips_for_data_manipulation_in_Excel

Page 4 of 4

