Charles Ornstein, ProPublica
Jennifer LaFleur, CIR

 Pharmaceutical companies purchase data

from middlemen, who purchase the data
from pharmacies.
 The middlemen would not sell it to
ProPublica at any price.
 We requested the data from Medicare
because its Part D program pays for one
of every four prescriptions dispensed
annually in the U.S.

http://www.propublica.org/checkup

 Found list of available information on

ResDAC website (resdac.org)
 Worked with CMS officials early and
often to craft request
 Met with more than a dozen CMS officials
to discuss request

 Differentiated our request from WSJ/CPI

2010 requests
 Willing to accept aggregate data
 Willing to give up very small cases

 Prescribing data by provider ID from

2007 to 2010 (and later 2011)
 For each prescriber and drug:
• the total number of claims
• the retail cost of the drug (by brand and NDC)

• the days of supply
• the number of units (i.e. pills or ounces)
 Prescribing data for people 65+

 CMS also did additional data runs that we

could not do because of redactions
• Top 500 drugs prescribed nationally and in each

state

 We got the data in SAS files, which we

read into SPSS and stored on SQL server.
 CMS included unique IDs for prescribers
and provided a separate table linking IDs
to identifiers such as NPI or DEA.
 Reporters could access via Access, SPSS
or other programs via ODBC.

 CMS NPI registration data (on CMS site) to

identify doctors
 DEA registered prescribers (from
National Technical Information Service) to
identify doctors that did not have NPI #s
 Data from First Databank to help us
categorize data into types of drugs
• (Ex: Lipitor = antihyperlipidemic)

 CMS NPI registration data (on CMS site)
 DEA registered prescribers (from

National Technical Information Service)

 CMS NPI registration data (on CMS site)
 DEA registered prescribers (from

National Technical Information Service)
 Data from First Databank to help us
categorize data into types of drugs
• (Ex: Lipitor = antihyperlipidemic)

 Data from American Geriatric Society on

drugs dangerous to seniors (Beers)

 Data from American Geriatric Society on

drugs dangerous to seniors (Beers)
 Scraped drug information sites for top 500

 Data from American Geriatric Society on

drugs dangerous to seniors (Beers)
 Scraped drug information sites for top 500
 Data from ProPublica’s Dollars for Doctors
project to look at physicians who got
money from drug companies

 Talked to many experts about how to

best examine the data and develop
methodologies.
 Within categories, did crosstabs to look
for doctors who did not follow pattern
• Those who prescribed at rates more or fewer

than 2 standard deviation from others in
category

 Talked to those who prescribed high

amounts or in unusual ways
 Bounced findings off experts

Medicare’s failure to keep watch over Part
D had enabled:
 Inappropriate and risky prescribing
 Billions of dollars in waste
 Fraud to flourish
We also found clear signs that doctors who
had relationships with pharmaceutical
companies prescribed more name-brand
drugs

In his worn Miami office, psychiatrist
Enrique Casuso said he has no choice but to
give antipsychotics to many of his elderly
patients.
Drugs keep them safe and ease their
anxiety, Casuso said: "You have to submerge
them in medication to avoid a catastrophic
event."
In 2010, Casuso prescribed more of
these medicines to seniors in Medicare than
any other physician in the country--50
percent more than the second-ranking
doctor.

Dr. Hew Wah Quon is one of Medicare’s top
prescribers. From a worn office in Los Angeles’ bustling
Chinatown, he churned out $27 million worth of
prescriptions from 2009 to 2011, data show.
He mostly prescribed name brands, such as
AstraZeneca’s Crestor, for high cholesterol. Crestor costs
more than $6 a pill; the leading generic costs as little as
20 cents.
If Quon had prescribed the way other internists do
in California, choosing drugs so that his average cost
was similar to theirs, he alone could have saved
Medicare $5 million in 2011, ProPublica’s analysis shows.

 In some cases, prescriptions from other

physicians within a clinic or practice
were attributed to one physician.
 In some cases, pharmacies entered the
wrong NPI number.
 In some cases, prescriptions were
attributed to “dummy” prescribers.

 State Medicaid prescription data
 Veteran’s Administration

CMS will release new data on:
 Prescribing in Part D for 2012
 Physician payments in Medicare Part B
 Pharmaceutical and medical device
company payments to doctors

 Using ProPublica’s Prescriber Checkup

charles.ornstein@propublica.org
jlafleur@cironline.org
Get a copy of this presentation at
www.jenster.com/2014 or at
cornstein.tumblr.com

