The Hidden Key to Hot Button Issues:
Census Data
Ronald Campbell
campbellr@verizon.net
714/425-5169
Journalists traffic in controversy. We can’t help ourselves. And that gives us two
choices: Quote people with opinions or dig for facts. One of the best places to dig
for facts is the Census. It’s got numbers – hard, ascertainable facts – for almost
every hot button issue.
Here are 10 examples. In each case I will cite a particular dataset and table.
Because of the way census data is structured you often can choose any
geography you wish.
Hot Button #1: California is a failed state
Politicians and pundits have been predicting the imminent demise of the Golden
State for the last decade. During the 2012 election, Mitt Romney compared
California to Greece as a failed state. But is it true? Are people really fleeing in
droves?
Dataset: 2013 Population Estimates
Table: PEPTCOMP
The population estimates report three kinds of population growth or decline:
natural (births minus deaths), net domestic migration (movement of U.S.
residents) and net international migration (movement of foreign-born residents).
California lost in only one of those categories, shedding 49,000 U.S. born
residents while gaining three times more international migrants and an even
larger natural increase.
Hot Button #2: Immigration
Immigration is such a hot button issue that Congress refuses to touch it. You
should. And you can do it no matter how small your news organization is.
Dataset: American Community Survey 2012 1-year estimates
Table S0501: Selected characteristics of the native and foreign-born populations
This table is a good snapshot for comparing natives and immigrants in your
community. Other tables worth checking:

1







B05005: Year of entry by nativity and citizenship status – when they
entered and whether they’ve become citizens.
B05007: Place of birth by year of entry by citizenship status – same as
above, this time with region of birth (Europe, Asia, Caribbean, Mexico,
Central America, South America, other areas)
B05009: Age and nativity of own children – were their kids born in the US
or abroad?
B13008: Women 15 to 50 who had a birth in the past 12 months by marital
status and nativity – were immigrant women more likely to give birth than
native women?
C16005: Nativity by language spoken at home by ability to speak English
– captures the population who can’t speak English well.

By the way, I cited the American Community Survey 1-year estimates here by
force of habit because I tend to write about a large metro area. If you are
reporting on an area with a population under 100,000, go with the 3-year
estimates. If you need information on an area under, say, 25,000 or so – or for a
Zip code or census tract – then you must use the 5-year estimates.
Hot Button #3: Commuting
It doesn’t matter if you live in a big city or a small burb. You probably hate your
commute. And the census has got information on it.
Dataset: American Community Survey, 2012 3-year estimates
Table S0802: Means of transportation to work by selected characteristics
Commuters – driving alone, carpoolers and public transit users – by age, sex,
race, nativity, income, and income; also time leaving to go to work (nearly a
quarter of Moreno Valley residents are out the door before 6 a.m.), travel time.
Since commuting data tends to be very particular – focusing on half-hour times of
day when people leave – you’ll want the 3-year estimates no matter how big your
metro is; the margin of error for the estimates will be better than for the 1-year
estimates.
Hot Button #4: Housing costs
Journalists tend to forget that housing prices involve much more than the median
sticker price for a home. It’s also what people pay for insurance, utilities and
taxes. And it’s the bite all that takes out of their paychecks. Over the past decade
while housing prices have risen dramatically in much of the U.S., incomes have
not kept up. You can track the increased housing burden in census data.
Dataset: American Community Survey, 2012-3-year estimates
Tables B25091: Mortgage status by selected monthly owner costs as a
percentage of household income

2

Table 25070: Gross rent as a percentage of household income
Dataset: Census 2000
H094: Mortgage status by selected monthly owner costs as a percentage of
household income
H069: Gross rent as a percentage of household income
Hot Button #5: Unequal wages
Do women still make less than men? Where are they nearly equal? Census, as
usual, has the answers.
Dataset: ACS 2012 3-year estimates
Table B19326: Median income in the past 12 months by sex by work experience
Perhaps the most effective geography for measuring this is by metropolitan area
rather than by county. That’s because county sizes differ so enormously and
because, in most of the U.S., workers move easily across county lines. Metro
areas differ in size too, but in general their boundaries have been drawn to
capture distinct economic areas. So when you write that women working full-time
in the XYZ metro area make 85 cents for every dollar that men in that metro
make, the comparison is more likely to be fair than it would be in a smaller
geographic area.
Hot Button #6: Health insurance
The Census began asking about health insurance in the American Community
Survey in 2008. There had been other surveys covering the topic earlier, but
ACS instantly became the go-to source for detailed statistics on health insurance
coverage down to the city level.
Dataset: American Community Survey 2012 1-year estimates
Table S2701: Health insurance coverage status
Hot Button #7: Education
For my money the two most revealing statistics about any city or county are
these: the percentage of adults who have not gone to high school and the
percentage of adults with a four-year degree. Under the dry title “educational
attainment,” those stats reveal a community’s economic and social prospects.
For this one, you really want to get down to the tract level. It’s not enough to see
citywide stats; it’s in the neighborhoods where you will see a city’s fate.
Dataset: American Community Survey 2012 5-year estimates
B15003: Educational attainment for the population 25 years and over

3

Alternative: DP02: Selected social characteristics (contains many social
statistics, including a reduced version of B15003 with recalculated margins of
error)
Hot Button #8: Gay marriage
No, the Census Bureau does not tally gay marriages in the handful of states that
legally recognize, at least not yet. But it does count unmarried partnerships, and
it breaks those down by the sex of the partners: male-female, male-male, femalefemale. Note that male-female unmarried’s can also be counted as female-male
unmarried’s – depending on which partner is “head of household.” Because the
number of gay and lesbian households is so small, you should always use at
least the 3-year estimates and perhaps the 5-year estimates to reduce the
margin of error.
Dataset: ACS 2012 3-year estimate
Table B11009: Unmarried partner households by sex of partner
Hot Button #9: Traditional marriage
Anyone who thinks gay marriage is a threat to traditional marriage has never
spent time in divorce court. You can learn a lot about the state of traditional oneman-one-woman marriage in census data.
Dataset: American Community Survey 2012 1-year estimate
 Table B12007: Median age at first marriage.
 Table B12501: Marriages in the last year by sex by marital status.
 Table B12503: Divorces in the last year by sex by marital status. Guess
what – it’s not 50-50 marriages and divorces – not even close.
 Table B12504: Median duration of current marriage in years by sex by
marital status.
 Table B12505: Number of times married by sex by marital status - only
available on the state level so far, but you can see in which states the
highest percentage of people are three-time losers. Hint: It’s not California
or Nevada. Second hint: You will be surprised.)
Hot Button #10: Pockets of poverty
Think you know where the rich and poor neighborhoods are in your community?
The Census does know. And the degree of difference between the richest and
the poorest may surprise you. There are several ways to look at this: using 3year data at the city level or 5-year data at the Zip code or census tract level.
Dataset: 2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates
Table B19301: Per capita income in the past 12 months

4

