The Art of Access:
Public records for career and
everyday life
April 12, 2014
Investigative Reporters and Editors
Society of Professional Journalists
and the University of Arizona School of Journalism
Tucson, Arizona

David Cuillier, Ph.D., was chairman of the Society of Professional Journalists
Freedom of Information Committee 2007-2011, has been an SPJ newsroom trainer
since 2005, and is currently president of SPJ. He is an associate professor of
journalism and director of the University of Arizona School of Journalism, where he
teaches public affairs reporting, computer-assisted reporting and access to public
records. Before entering academia he was a public affairs reporter and city editor
for a dozen years at daily newspapers in Idaho and Washington state. He is coauthor with Charles Davis of The Art of Access: Strategies for Acquiring Public
Records and researches the psychology of access. He provides news and tips about
FOI at www.theartofaccess.com and http://blogs.spjnetwork.org/foi/, and he can
be reached at 520-626-9694 or cuillier@email.arizona.edu
 Society of Professional Journalists

Agenda
Unlocking the Power of Public Records
Part I. The stories
1. FOI laws in action

2

2. Classic 5 FOI stories

4

3. Records for your beat

5

4. Creating a document state of mind

11

Part II. Strategies for accessing records
1. Flow chart

13

2. Doing FOI when you are SOL

14

3. Planning your FOI request

15

Learn the law
Know the record
Request the record
4. Sample request letters

19

5. Overcoming denials

22

6. Lowering copy fees

26

7. Soft tactics and principled negotiation

27

8. Hard tactics

28

9. Posting data online

32

10. Data ethics checklist

33

11. Top-10 meeting red flags

34

12. Access resources

35

 Society of Professional Journalists 1

FOI laws in action
Stories using state records laws


Government waste: The Los Angeles Times won the Pulitzer in 2011
for exposing corrupt officials in the small town of Bell, Calif., where the
city manager was making $1.5 million a year in total compensation.



Property insurance: The Sarasota Herald-Tribune, a 66,000circulation daily newspaper in Florida, won the 2011 Pulitzer in
investigative reporting for examining state property insurance system
records, finding insurers demanding more money from homeowners
despite no hurricane in five years.



Recession-proof government: In March 2010, the Syracuse PostStandard examined New York state payroll records to find that the
state hired more than 51,000 employees at a cost of $1 billion despite
the governor calling for a hiring freeze.



Criminal cabbies: Using driving and criminal records obtained under
Georgia Open Records Laws, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution found
that 72 percent of taxicab drivers had a serious violation on his or her
personal or professional driving record, ranging from excessive speed
to DUI. Over seven years, 622 taxicab drivers have had their licenses
suspended, including 94 who currently have a suspended driver's
license. What's more, the investigation found 63 taxicab drivers with
criminal records in Georgia, including 10 who had spent time in prison.
The charges included armed robbery, child molestation and
kidnapping.



Drivers of death: In April 2002 KIRO-TV in Seattle reported that a
public transportation program for the disabled has covered up fatal
accidents. The reporters managed to obtain documents revealing the
flaws in the system -- incident reports, autopsy reports, wrongful
death lawsuits, trip reimbursement vouchers, etc. Another finding is
that many of the van drivers had extensive felony records.



Campus sexual assaults. In February 2010 the Center for Public
Integrity and a consortium of non-profit investigative reporting
organizations gleaned federal and local data to find that universities
routinely underreport sexual assault statistics and fail to adequately
pursue cases.

 Society of Professional Journalists 2

Stories using the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)


Unsafe bridges: Using a database Inventory of Bridges from the
Federal Highway Administration in 2000, the Boston Globe found that
the rate of problem bridges - with structural defects or with design
flaws that make them too narrow, poorly aligned with roadways or
unable to carry larger vehicles - is the third worst in the country.
Nearly 40 percent of the 4,995 bridges in Massachusetts rate low
enough to qualify for federal repair funds - a situation that state
officials said posed a threat to public safety.



Vulnerable airports: After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, CNN.com used
a Federal Aviation Administration Enforcement database to find that
the three airports where the terrorist attacks originated had the first,
third and fourth lowest weapons detection rates among the 25 largest
U.S. airports.



Rape in the military: In 1995 the Dayton (Ohio) Daily News used the
Act to learn that women in the military endured cavalier responses to
charges of rape brought against enlisted men and officers, many of
whom had faced multiple charges. In 1993 that newspaper perused
Occupational Safety and Health Administration databases obtained
through the Act to identify the most dangerous work places in the
country.



Radiation victims: After the Albuquerque Tribune filed requests for
information on victims of governmental radiation experiments in the
early 1990s, Department of Energy Secretary Hazel O Leary began a
departmental program to identify and make public widespread abuses
of past radiation experimentation.



Night accidents: In the late 1980s an Orange County (Calif.) Register
reporter showed that hundreds of servicemen were killed or seriously
injured in accidents relating to their government-issue night vision
goggles, with the Pentagon attributing the accidents to "pilot error."



Workplace health risks: In 1985 the Public Citizen Health Research
Group used the Act to find that government had identified 250,000
workers in 249 work places who faced increased risks of cancer, heart
disease and other illnesses because of their work environment — but
that it had not notified the workers of the risks.



Government waste: Other reporters have used the Act to identify
wasteful government spending. In the early 1990s a request by an
Associated Press reporter led to a story about a little known $200
million federal program to advertise U.S. food and drink overseas.
Monies were going to companies such as McDonald s, Burger King,
Pillsbury, Dole, M&M-Mars and Jim Beam — all of whom had
substantial advertising budgets of their own to draw on.
 Society of Professional Journalists 3

FOI classic top 5 stories
By Joel Campbell

1. Bus drivers. Get a list of bus drivers from your local school district
and compare the list to driving records our court records at your
county courthouse. While driver licenses are now off limits because of
federal law, many states still allow access to driving records including
DUI arrests. DUI convictions may also be available through local court
records. Or, get a list of all the sex offenders in your state and match
the list with school bus drivers. This kind of story can be done with just
about any list of public employees that are entrusted with children or
other vulnerable populations (e.g., daycare workers, nursing-home
workers). Often, public agencies don't do background checks on new
hires, even if they are supposed to by law.
2. Settlements. Check on claims and out-of-court settlements at City
Hall. Most claims and litigation with local governments never make it
to court. You should look at the kinds of settlements that your local
city is making with citizens. It’s usually surprising the kind of money
cities and towns spend each year on claims for accidents and injuries.
There are usually some pretty good stories buried in the information,
i.e. a woman fell through an open manhole or a kid was seriously
injured at a playground.
3. Budgets. Get a copy of the budget for the last five years. Whether it
is a school district, county or city budget, uncovering the largest
increases and decreases in budgets can lead to some great stories.
What’s tied to the 50 percent increase in the police budget or what
effect has a decrease in human service programs had in your area?
4. Crime. Get a copy of local crime statistics reports. Each year, police
agencies have to compile crime statistics. Take a tough look at
increases and decreases in crime. This record should lead to some
stories and trends, budgets and resources.
5.

Salaries. Ask for the salaries of all of the employees and officials in
the local county or city government. You might be surprised what you
find including high-paid political contributors and poorly qualified
people in top jobs. Stories about salaries and outside contracts of top
college coaches also make good stories.

 Society of Professional Journalists 4

Records for your beat
Prepared by David Cuillier
Below are just a few of the many different public records that are typically
available in most towns. Some are available online but many you have to
actively request.
Health and Social Services
o Air quality. Air quality violators are fined by county and state air quality
departments.
o Nursing home inspections. To identify unsafe nursing homes. Can get
comparisons nationally by Medicare at
http://www.medicare.gov/NHCompare/Include/DataSection/Questions/Se
archCriteria.asp?version=default&browser=IE%7C7%7CWinXP&language
=English&defaultstatus=0&pagelist=Home&CookiesEnabledStatus=True.
o Child-care complaints. To assess how well child-care (daycare) is
handled in your community and how well the government monitors child
care.
o Coroners reports. Generally open to inspection to see the cause of an
unusual death.
o Environmental. Toxic release inventory information provides what bad
stuff different companies and industry release in your community. A good
site to find that EPA information is at the Right to Know Web site:
http://data.rtknet.org/tri/. Government also monitors other
environmental hazards, such as leaking underground gas tanks.
o Restaurant inspections. To make sure the public is protected from
unsanitary conditions at restaurants and other venues.
Education
o Educational records. Anything related to the education of a student is
secret because of FERPA, except for directory information, including
name, year, home address, phone number, date of birth etc. (unless the
parent or adult student wishes the information to not be disclosed). See
http://www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html. Also, serious
criminal incidents are public.
o School test scores. To identify poorly performing schools. Check with
individual schools, school districts or the state board of education.
City Hall and state/fed
o Abandoned buildings. Identify trends in deteriorating neighborhoods.
 Society of Professional Journalists 5

o Airport noise. Airports track noise complaints from neighbors when jets
fly low or are particularly noisy. Ask to see airport noise maps and flight
pattern maps.
o Audits. To monitor problems in government agencies, particularly
financial woes. Look carefully to find any irregularities – often clouded by
vague terms and wishy-washy language. Ask to get more details.
o Bridge inspections. To assess the safety of bridges in the community.
Inspection records are maintained by states and the Federal Highway
Administration (http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/britab.htm - click on
“Download NBI ASCII files”).
o Budgets. Detailed budgets are available before and after approval. Can
be helpful to see what departments are getting more money over time
and what areas are getting less funding. Get them from the agency’s
budget officer.
o Calendars. To find out how top officials are spending their time. Look at
their calendars, or day schedules, to see who they are meeting with and
the extent of their workload. Should also be able to get travel expenses.
Request from the office you are interested in, such as the mayor’s office if
you want to see the mayor’s calendar.
o Contracts. Allows you to find out who is benefiting from government
projects. Should include the amount agreed upon, the amount paid (often
more), who the money went to, etc. Contact an agency’s business office.
o Development. To identify development trends and potential building that
could impact the community or a neighborhood. Find out what permits for
development have been submitted and approved for an area. Go to the
city planning and development department to see development plans.
o E-mail. To monitor government function and make sure business that
should be conducted in public isn’t being handled secretly via e-mail.
o Elections. To see who is funding candidates and campaigns. Federal
records are kept by the Federal Elections Commission.
o Employees. To identify cronyism and find former employees. Request
employee names, titles and salaries. Employee home addresses and
home phone numbers, however, are generally not public.
o Expense reports. To monitor government spending and see if
government employees are cheating the system. Check with the business
office of an agency. Can ask for credit-card logs as well.
o Liquor licenses. To identify bars and restaurants that are nuisances
(have a lot of bar fights and problems for neighbors) and not following
liquor laws.
o Licensing. The state monitors a variety of professionals, including
barbers, beauticians, accountants, appraisers, chiropractors, nurses,
Realtors, etc. See if a person is licensed or has had a license revoked.
o Meeting minutes. To monitor city councils, school boards and other
government bodies. Meeting notices, agendas and minutes are almost
always public. Check with the clerk’s office at the respective agency.
 Society of Professional Journalists 6

o Odor complaints. Most municipal sewage treatment plants track
complaints of their sewage stink, which enables people to identify trends
and know where not to buy a house.
o Personnel records. Confirm whether someone is a public employee and
identify bad workers through disciplinary records. Not always public in all
states, so can be difficult to get, such as disciplinary actions against
teachers. Easier to get for high-ranking officials because a greater public
interest. Performance evaluations are public in many states.
o Pet licenses. To examine trends in pet ownership and dog bites.
Includes information about licensed animals (name, breed, last rabies
shot, etc.), as well as name of owner, address and phone number.
o Property taxes. To assess whether everyone is paying their fair share of
property taxes and also to find who is buying what in the community.
Property tax records are public at county courthouses. You can find out
how much homes in your neighborhood are worth, what they sold for,
along with details, such as the homes’ square footage and number of
bedrooms.
o Public records requests. To find what public records are being
requested by businesses, citizens, government employees and journalists.
Request from the public records officer copies of the public records
request and any log used to track requests.
o Retention schedules. To find out what records an agency keeps and
when it purges them. Most public agencies have established retention
schedules to determine how long they will keep different records and
when they can get rid of them. Check with the individual agency to find
its retention schedule, usually held by a clerk or records officer.
o Salaries. To find cronyism and disparity in pay. Names, titles and
salaries of public employees are almost always available. Also, get
overtime pay and actual pay (not just budgeted salary) to find janitors
who make more than the mayor. Also, a good way to find former
employees.
o Street maintenance. Examine trends in bad streets and who gets them
fixed and who doesn’t. Check with your local street department.
o Taxi inspections. To assess the safety of taxis check with the local
licensing agency.
o Voter registration. To see whether people, particularly candidates, have
voted or lived in a community. Also to prevent voter fraud (can check to
see if dead people are voting). Voter registration records include name,
address, year of birth, party affiliation, and whether a person voted in
previous election (but not how they voted).
o Zoning. To analyze growth planning and find who is benefiting by
development. Find out how land is zoned and what development is
possible. Also look at comprehensive plans, which map out the general
future of a community.
 Society of Professional Journalists 7

Cops and Courts
o Arrest reports. Verify the arrest of a specific person in connection with a
specific event. Available at local law enforcement offices, usually from a
public information officer or officer in charge. If the case is still under
investigation (someone’s still on the loose or they haven’t forwarded the
information to the prosecutor yet for potential charges), then policy may
keep some of the information secret if it would harm the investigation.
o Arrest warrants. To ensure fairness in the arrest of suspects and get a
lead on potential big busts. An arrest warrant is signed by a judge
authorizing the arrest of someone for probable cause. It usually allows
police to barge into a house and make an arrest when there is reason to
believe the person has committed a crime (drug house, homicide, etc.).
Often warrants have a lot of information because police are trying to
justify to a judge the need to arrest the person. These are similar to
search warrants, which also require justification and approval by a judge.
Warrants are usually made public once the person is served (arrested or
searched), or when it appears it won’t be able to be served (the person
skipped the country).
o Autopsy reports. Confirm cause of death or circumstances of a person’s
death and evaluate the quality of medical examiners. Might be closed in
connection with pending criminal investigations or to protect personal
privacy.
o Bankruptcy files. To identify trends in bankruptcies, spot fraud, and find
people with unfortunate financial pasts. Chapter 7 is a straight
bankruptcy and Chapter 11 is a reorganization that usually allows them to
stay in business. Businesses in bankruptcy lose a fair amount of privacy
as the files list assets, how they got into trouble and what they intend to
do to get back on their feet.
o Civil lawsuits. To make sure civil cases are handled equitably and
disputes resolved fairly. When a person sues another person, the case
ends up in civil court. Examples of civil cases include malpractice, child
support, divorce, libel, paternity, property rights, restraining orders and
breach of contract. Superior Court handles big cases and municipal courts
(small-claims) handle the little things (like you see on Judge Judy).
o Claims. If someone feels a government agency owes them compensation
for damages (slipping on a sidewalk, hit by police car, etc.), they often
file a claim before filing lawsuit. Check with the risk management officer
or attorney for the agency.
o Code enforcement. To examine trends and fairness in applying local
nuisance laws. Code enforcement records detail noise violations, illegal
businesses in residential zones, illegal dumping, huge signs, and other
problems.

 Society of Professional Journalists 8

o Crime log. A barebones list of incidents, usually including address,
time/date, one-word description, and disposition. Also called a “police
blotter.”
o Criminal records. To find trends in crime, monitor the criminal justice
system, and find backgrounds of individuals. Compilations of criminal
histories are closed in many other states, but you can get court records
from individual courthouses and piece together a history.
o Court records. To find if someone has a criminal background or has
been sued in civil court. Also to monitor trends in a variety of criminal
justice issues, including crime, sentencing, racial profiling (speeding
tickets), and judge performance. In general, court records are public
unless they have been sealed by a judge for a specific reason.
o Drug houses. Find location of homes that were once used as meth labs
or other clandestine drug labs. To identify trends in drug houses. Can also
see if any homes in your neighborhood had drug problems (or a house
you are thinking of buying). Provided by the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration.
o Fire incident reports. To monitor fire departments and spot trends,
such as arson, dangerous homes, public buildings that are hazards, etc.
Check with the fire agency to examine incident reports.
o Graffiti. Track decaying neighborhoods and hooliganism.
o Jail records. The jail log is a list of people booked in the jail, including
name, time/date, and charge. More detailed information can be found in
the booking sheets. Also can get jail mugs and examine budgets, jail
population statistics, and overtime to monitor operations.
o Lawyer discipline. To find lawyers who have been disciplined and
monitor the oversight of attorneys.
o 911 Logs. To spot trends in crime, medical calls and response times by
police officers and fire trucks. They typically list time/date, location, call
type and responding units.
o Parking tickets. To identify parking scofflaws and trends and fairness in
ticketing (any special persons get their tickets waived?).
o Probate. To make sure possessions are disbursed fairly and find family
members of the deceased. When someone dies and leaves property or
doesn’t have a will, it goes through probate – the government has to
figure out how to fairly divvy up the goods. Check the courthouse.
o Sex offenders. To find if sex offenders live close to vulnerable
populations. Note that a variety of studies have found registries to be
relatively inaccurate, so the person may or may not actually live where
the registry says the person lives.
o Stolen vehicles. To identify trends in vehicle theft. Request stolen
vehicle data to analyze popular makes, models and locations of car
thieves.
o Traffic accident reports. To find out dangerous intersections and
stretches of roads. You can analyze the federal Fatality Analysis Reporting
 Society of Professional Journalists 9

System data for every fatal accident in the nation going back to 1975
(http://www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/Main/index.aspx).
o Use of force. Look at how police use – or overuse – force during arrests.
Each time an officer uses a choke hold, gun, taser, police dog, baton or
other use of force a form is filled out.
Business
o Corporate records. To spot connections between public companies and
identify key officers. The federal Securities and Exchange Commission
provides a wealth of information on public companies online, including
initial public offering files (Form S-1), quarterly reports (Form 10-Q),
annual reports (Form 10-K), and top officer information (Form DEF 14A).
Can search the clunky Web site www.sec.gov or also search EDGAR
(www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/srch-edgar) and enforcement records for folks who
got in trouble (www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/txt-srch-sec).
o Gas-pump inspections. To make sure gas stations aren’t ripping off
consumers.
o Incorporation records. To find out who owns a business. Look up city
business licenses at the finance department at City Hall. Find state
incorporation records at the Secretary of State’s Office.
o Price-scanning inspections. To assess which stores might be ripping
off consumers. Find it at your state office of weights and measures.
o Worker safety. To identify dangerous workplaces and trends in
workplace accidents. Look at the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration records at http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html.
Arts, Culture and Lifestyle
o Census. Demographic data available down to the block group level and
over time can be used to analyze shifts in community demographics,
including in migration, income, race, education, gender, and age.
Challenging to burrow through the Census Web site (www.census.gov),
but it’s all there.
o Nonprofit 990 forms. To make sure nonprofits are actually not out to
make a profit and just using 501c(3) status to avoid paying taxes. Also
can find a variety of information about nonprofits’ income, expenses and
officers through the 990 forms they file annually. To see 990 forms, go to
www.guidestar.com. You have to register but most of the site is free.

 Society of Professional Journalists 10

Creating a document state of mind
1. Follow the money. Ask for the detailed line-item budget, maybe as
an Excel file, that details all spending, not just total expenses and total
revenues. Look for other documents that might outline the details.
Where is that money going?
2. Map the activities. Now, map the agency to find out what it does.
Look on their websites and you’ll often find organizational charts that
can help jump-start this process. What sorts of documents might be
generated by the activities of this office? The mayor is awarding a
$100,000 grant to a local arts group. What questions does that raise in
your documents-driven mind? Look at blank forms that people fill out
to get a sense of what is kept.
3. Circle of light. If you are backgrounding a person, get a sheet of
paper or a white board and write the person’s name in the middle.
Around the name write down different roles the person has in life
(e.g., married person, business owner, driver, pet owner, property
owner, pilot). Then write down for each role the records available.
4. Look at records lists. Many public offices maintain an index of
records or retention schedule – a master list of documents routinely
filed. Also, ask for a log of previous public records requests. You’ll get
a sense for what kinds of records the agency keeps.
5. Train the agency. Get the agency used to you asking for records. Ask
for tame records, such as reports, expenses and contracts. Ask for emails of the mayor for the past week. Then work up from there. When
you find you really need those e-mail records they’ll be accustomed to
giving out that kind of information.
6. Blend in. Each week take a few hours to go to your agency and talk to
workers. Ask what they do, what they are working on, and what
records they keep.
7. FOI First on Fridays. Every Friday (or whatever day of the week
works best for you), submit a public records request. Track your
requests in a notebook and follow up. Get in the habit of doing it.
8. Explain to the public. Get in the habit of explaining what records
your information is based on and how people can get them on their
own. Create a “Doc Box” for each story explaining the basics of the
record, what’s in it, and where to get it.
 Society of Professional Journalists 11

Backgrounding government
Here are a few examples of how to background your local government
agencies to find out what documents they have that can help you:
Go to the city and ask for the master index or retention schedule. Here’s
a sample list of records in San Francisco’s index:
Administration
Accident-Injury Reports
Administrative Files
Audit Reports
Budget Files
Check Payments
Conflict of Interest Form 700
Contracts & Grants
Discrimination and Harassment Complaints
Draft Contracts
Family Medical Leave Act Records
General Correspondences
Medical Information
Office Expenditure Documents
Payables (Invoices/ Vendors)
Payroll Reports/ Timecards & Related Documents
Personnel Files
Policies/Procedures
Purchase Orders (copy)
RFA, RFP, RFQ(s) & Records
Receipt/Deposits
Travel Request (copy)
Work Orders
Worker's Compensation Record
Just think for a minute about how many stories lie in this data!
Now that is thinking documents-first!

 Society of Professional Journalists 12

Part II: Strategies for accessing records
Do your homework



Find exact record name, agency, person who has it
Review laws and relevant exemptions, if any

Access
denied, all
or in part

Ask
verbally –
nicely!

Told to submit
written
request.
Submit letter

Access
denied, all
or in part

Get legal
rationale in
writing from
agency.
Verify validity
of exemption
with expert

Invalid
reason

Access
approved!

No response,
blown off, or
stonewalled

Access
approved!

Access
approved,
but with
outrageous
copy fees

Exemption
valid: Ask for
discretionary
disclosure or
seek record in
other ways

Challenge the decision:
 Apply negotiations and human strategies
 Formally appeal; consult experts and records ombudsman
 Go up the chain to elected leaders
 Enlist other organizations to apply pressure (e.g., SPJ)
 Write about it; quote experts and focus on how it affects people
 Sue

 Society of Professional Journalists 13

Huzzah!
You get the
records!

Doing FOI when you’re SOL
1. Surprise yourself. Look at public records as birthday presents.
Because turnaround on requests can take days, weeks or months,
(and sometimes years), submit requests for documents that could
yield a good follow-up story or project. Then when you get a box in the
mail three months later it will be like opening a present. Squeeze
those record-based projects around the daily work.
2. Minimum story. When you submit a public records request, always
have a “minimum” story in mind – something you might be able to
produce fast, or a launching pad for a project. No use fishing for
stories with random records requests. That can waste time.
3. Keep request forms handy. Carry request forms and a copy of your
state open records law in your bag. Fill out requests on the spot if you
are at a city council meeting or at the police station.
4. Tracking system. Develop a good system for tracking requests. It
can be as simple as a binder with a sheet of paper for each request.
Some reporters use Excel. Every time something new happens with
the request (response from agency, your response back, etc.), note
the date, who you talked to, and what was said. Always agree to
changes in your request in writing, such as through e-mail exchanges.
5. Team up. Find someone else you can work with and team up.
Sometimes splitting the work can make things happen. Use Google
Documents or other similar programs to share your work and update
notes.
6. Build credibility. If you complete some record-based projects then
your boss is more likely to cut you more time to take on bigger
projects.
7. Get inspired. During lunch, visit FOI websites (see Access Resources
at end of handouts) to see the great work other journalists are doing
with documents. See the challenges they face. Even though it seems
like your readers and sources might not seem to care about access,
know that you aren’t alone. There are others out there like you.

 Society of Professional Journalists 14

Planning your FOI request
By Charles Davis and David Cuillier

Learn the law
Public records laws require government agencies to provide anyone
the right to look at a record (or pay for a copy) that is held by a government
agency subject to the law.
You can become fairly knowledgeable by reading a summary of the
state public records law provided by the Reporters Committee for Freedom
of the Press at: www.rcfp.org/ogg. See the resources listed at the end of
these handouts for guides in your state.
Here are some basics of access law:


No law requires an official to talk to you, but records laws require
agencies to let you see documents or data.



“Record” generally includes any format of recorded material, including
paper, audio tapes, video, data, e-mail, and even the electronically
embedded properties information in a Word file. Be creative.



Federal executive agencies (e.g., FBI, but not the Supreme Court or
Congress) are subject to the federal Freedom of Information Act. State
executive agencies, cities, school districts and other local public
agencies are subject state public records law. Be sure to know the
name of your state law, and don’t ask for a record from your local
school district based on federal FOIA.



Other laws may apply, such as the Family and Educational Rights and
Privacy Act for protecting educational records or the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act for medical records.



Some records may be kept secret if there is a law that says the record
may be kept secret, usually to protect national security, privacy
invasion, etc.



Some laws and agencies require a written request.



Agencies are required by law to respond within a certain amount of
time. They may provide the records, deny them in whole or in part
(legal reason in writing), or say they need more time.



Most laws are discretionary, which means an agency can give out the
information even if an exemption allows them to keep it secret.

 Society of Professional Journalists 15



Denials may be appealed to the agency. A requester can also sue, in
some states recouping his or her legal fees by substantially prevailing
in court.



When in doubt, ask for the record. It is up to the agency to prove it is
secret, not for you to prove it is public.

Know the record
Identify exactly what you want to the best of your ability. Here are
some tips for finding the existence of records:


Check the agency’s website and see if the record is provided online. Or
perhaps information is provided online about the specific record.



Visit or call the agency and talk to a clerk or person who would know
what records are kept that would have the information you need.



Look for original blank forms that the agency keeps to know what
kinds of information is kept and how it is kept.



Look at an agency’s retention schedules or records indexes to find
what kinds of records are kept.



Ask to see the log of public records requests to see what other people
have requested.

Request the record


Avoid fishing. Try to limit your request to what you really want. If
you simply ask for "all files relating to" a particular subject, you may
give the agency an excuse to delay its response, and you risk
needlessly running up search and copying costs. Do your homework.
Go talk to the agency first.



Get specific. Cite relevant newspaper clips, articles,
congressional reports, etc. If the records have already been
released, let the agency know the date, release number, and
name of the original requester. If you are asking for a database,
talk with the techies ahead of time to know exactly what data
you are requesting and in what format. Tour the agency office
and ask about what they are working on and specific documents
they maintain.



Ask verbally. Ask for the record verbally in person first, if possible.



Be polite but persistent. The people on the other side of the counter
don’t come to work with horns and cloven hooves. They are people
too, and they are more likely to get you what you want faster if you
are nice about it, especially at the beginning.
 Society of Professional Journalists 16



Prioritize. Let the agency know if you'd like to receive
information in a particular order. Materials could be reviewed
and released to you in chronological or geographical order - or
you may simply not want to wait for all the records to be
reviewed before any are released.



Submit a written request. If you anticipate balking, bluffing,
or being passed around or put off, simply submit a public records
request letter, which starts the clock ticking and requires them
to act and stop passing you around or delaying. On the following
pages see a sample state public records request letter generated
from online request letter generators.



Choose your tone. Note the last paragraph of the request letter
that threatens litigation. Threaten to sue only if you are prepared
to do so and if they’ve indicated they will not cooperate. Also,
consider whether the wording may create defensiveness or
hostile undermining of your request (e.g., delays). Sometimes
it’s better to attract flies with honey than vinegar. But at other
times, coming in strongly and quoting the law can demonstrate
you are serious and know what you are talking about (research
indicates the threatening letter gets more agencies to respond).



Decide on your own transparency. Legally, you don’t have to
say who you are or why you want the documents. As a practical
matter, you’ll probably have to tell them your name and provide
a phone number so they can contact you. Also, some states have
different standards for commercial users, so you might have to
sign a statement saying you aren’t a commercial user (they don’t
consider journalists as commercial users). If you don’t care if the
agency knows why you want the information, feel free to tell
them. It’s likely to speed the process and they might offer other
information that you didn’t request. But if that would jeopardize
your investigation, then don’t tell them. If they ask, “Why do you
want that information? Are you going to write something
negative?” Just tell them, “I don’t know what I’m going to write
until I gather all the facts,” which is true.



Go to the top. Sometimes going straight to the agency’s
lawyers or top officials speeds things up. Clerks sometimes deny
requests or stall as they try to make sure they don’t release
something that will get them in trouble. Once the agency
attorneys look at it and see it should be released, it often is.



Keep records of records. Keep track of every step of your
different requests. Keep dates, contact names, phone numbers
and try to correspond by email so you can have written records
 Society of Professional Journalists 17

of what was said to whom. Some requests can last years, so
keeping track of details can help.


Follow through. After you submit a request, always follow it
through to the end, especially if they provide the records, even if
months after you need it. Also, if denied initially don’t skulk
away cowed. If you have a legal right to the information keep at
it. How you treat requests and denials will affect how agencies
treat requests in the future. Educate officials and get them in the
habit of providing information to you and the public. It’s part of
their job.

 Society of Professional Journalists 18

Sample request letter: Friendly version

April 12, 2014
Needles School District
5530 E. Northern Lights Blvd.
Needles, AZ, 85745

RE: Public records request

To whom it may concern,
I know you are busy, but I want to thank you in advance for helping me gather some
public records regarding superintendents and high school coaching salaries. I am writing to
request a copy of the contract for the district superintendent, including pay and any other
compensation he or she might receive. Also, if your district has a paid high school head football
coach, or several head coaches, I would like a copy of that person (or persons’) contract,
including pay and any other compensation they receive for their duties.
I would be happy to pay copying and postage fees and help in any way I can, but if the
cost is more than $5, please contact me and let me know. If the files are available electronically
and would be more convenient to copy and email, then that would great too.
I would very much appreciate a response by the end of the month, and if there is
information that I am not entitled to, please let me know. I understand that sometimes some
information doesn’t warrant disclosure for statutory reasons, and might need to be blotted out
while releasing the public part.
If there is anything I can do to help with the request, please do not hesitate to let me know
(email is the fastest way to reach me).
Thanks again for your help!

Sincerely,

Jane Jones
1212 Main St.
Needles, AZ 85745
520-555-1111
jones@email.com
 Society of Professional Journalists 19

Sample request letter: Neutral version
This letter is based on the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press online generator, available at
www.rcfp.org/foialetter/index.php

April 12, 2014
Needles School District
5530 E. Northern Lights Blvd.
Needles, AZ, 85745

RE: Public records request

Superintendent Comeau,
Pursuant to the state open records act, I request access to and copies of the contract for the
district superintendent, including pay and any other compensation he or she might receive. Also,
if your district has a paid high school head football coach, or several head coaches, I would like a
copy of that person (or persons’) contract, including pay and any other compensation they
receive for their duties.
I agree to pay reasonable duplication fees for the processing of this request.
If my request is denied in whole or part, I ask that you justify all deletions by reference to
specific exemptions of the act.
Thank you for your assistance.

Sincerely,

Jane Jones
1212 Main St.
Needles, AZ 85745
520-555-1111
jones@email.com
 Society of Professional Journalists 20

Sample request letter: Legalistic threatening version
This letter is based on the Student Press Law Center letter available at www.splc.org/foiletter.asp. You
might remove the threatening paragraph toward the end.

April 12, 2014
Needles School District
5530 E. Northern Lights Blvd.
Needles, AZ, 85745

RE: Public records request

Superintendent Comeau,
Pursuant to the state open records law, Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. Secs. 39-121 to 39-126, I
write to request access to and a copy of the contract for the district superintendent, including pay
and any other compensation he or she might receive. Also, if your district has a paid high school
head football coach, or several head coaches, I would like a copy of that person (or persons’)
contract, including pay and any other compensation they receive for their duties.
If your agency does not maintain these public records, please let me know who does and
include the proper custodian’s name and address.
I agree to pay any reasonable copying and postage fees of not more than $5. If the cost
would be greater than this amount, please notify me. Please provide a receipt indicating the
charges for each document.
I would request your response within ten (10) business days.
If you choose to deny this request, please provide a written explanation for the denial
including a reference to the specific statutory exemption(s) upon which you rely. Also, please
provide all segregable portions of otherwise exempt material.
Please be advised that I am prepared to pursue whatever legal remedy necessary to obtain
access to the requested records. I would note that willful violation of the open records law can
result in the award of legal costs, including damages and reasonable attorney fees. See Ariz. Rev.
Stat. Sec. 39-121.02.
Thank you for your assistance.

Sincerely,

Jane Jones
1212 Main St.
Needles, AZ 85745
520-555-1111
jones@email.com
 Society of Professional Journalists 21

How to handle denials
By Charles Davis and David Cuillier

IF THE AGENCY SAYS…
"YOUR DESCRIPTION OF THE RECORD IS INADEQUATE"
This means you probably did not give enough specific identifying
information. Give the agency the benefit of the doubt and
rewrite your request. You can try to call or make an appointment
with the official processing your request to get more help.
"THE RECORD DOES NOT EXIST"
If you are reasonably certain the records you've requested do
exist, and if your request letter was clear and informative, you
should try to do more research. Are there news reports,
congressional hearings or court records that describe the
information you want more clearly?
Rewrite your request, giving the agency more guidelines and
clues for where they might find it. Try to be as patient and
understanding as you can; some agencies are short staffed or
have disorganized data systems.
"SOME OF THE INFORMATION IS EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE,
SO WE WON’T GIVE YOU ANY OF IT"
The agency can't withhold an entire document or file because
some portion(s) of it is exempt from disclosure. The agency
must release any non-exempt material that can be reasonably
extracted from the exempt portion(s).
"WE CAN’T GIVE IT TO YOU BECAUSE AN EXEMPTION SAYS WE
HAVE TO KEEP IT SECRET"
FOIA exemptions are generally discretionary, not mandatory –
an agency is not required to withhold all information. Agency
officials can choose to waive the exemptions and release the
material, unless another statute specifically restricts that
disclosure. One exception is FERPA, but note that FERPA doesn’t
cover everything and they can release the records if identifying
information of a student is blotted out.

 Society of Professional Journalists 22

"OUR PROPRIETARY SOFTWARE DOESN’T ALLOW US TO COPY
DATA"
I don’t know of any software that can’t copy or export data.
Maybe it exists, but it must be rare. Usually the person saying
that is unfamiliar with the software and needs to confer with the
agency computer technicians. If, after talking to their techies,
they still stick to that story, find out the software maker and call
them up. No doubt the company will want everyone to know how
useful and versatile the software is and explain how to copy the
data.
"COPYING THE DATA WITH FIELDS REDACTED WOULD CREATE
A NEW RECORD, AND WE ARE NOT REQUIRED BY LAW TO DO
THAT"
It is true that most laws do not require government agencies to
create new records, only let you see or copy existing records.
But you aren’t asking for a new record – just a copy of their
existing records with some information redacted. It’s no different
from getting a copy of a paper file with some information (fields)
redacted with a black pen. Just because they blot out a name on
a piece of paper doesn’t mean it’s a new record. Same theory
applies to data. Copying data with some fields redacted, or even
combining fields from different databases, is not creating a new
record. It’s copying existing data.
"OK, OK. HERE IS YOUR PILE OF RECORDS. THAT WILL BE $1
MILLION, PLEASE."
Make them justify the expenses with a line-by-line explanation.
You might be able to narrow your request to get fewer
documents that would still serve your purposes. Arm yourself
with what other agencies charge for copies, including for
computer programming time. If many other agencies charge
nothing or very little, then make that known, including by writing
a story about it.
Look at the agency’s FOI logs to find out if others have been
receiving the same records. Ask for an extra copy. Ask for a
backup copy of their data if they make backups. Get an outside
expert to scrutinize their time estimates. The estimates are
usually inflated and unreasonable. See the handout on Lowering
Copy Fees for more tips on reducing copy costs.
"WE ONLY PROVIDE THIS INFORMATION TO RESEARCHERS.
YOU CAN HAVE IT IF YOU SIGN THIS CONTRACT WITH US."
 Society of Professional Journalists 23

Some agencies give information to researchers provided they
sign a contract with use restrictions, such as prohibiting
identification of individuals in the records. Few reporters are
willing to sign such agreements. The problem is you might want
to use the information for something else later and won’t be able
to. Also, fundamentally it designates journalists as above
average citizens with special access, and it creates a new
category of “public information.” Either it’s public or not. Some
journalists advise only considering such agreements when the
information is clearly not public but the agency is willing to
release it for your story.
"WE DON’T KNOW WHY YOU WANT IT OR HOW YOU MIGHT USE
IT. YOU MIGHT USE IT IN A WAY WE DON’T LIKE.”
Tough noogies. In most states a records request cannot be
denied based on who the requester is or how the information will
be used (except in the case of commercial mailing lists in some
states). If they ask why you want the information you can tell
them: “I wouldn’t want to determine the story before I have all
my facts. I’m just doing my job at gathering information.” If you
request records routinely from an agency (weekly), then it will
be no big deal and they are less likely to question you.
"WE JUST DON’T WANT TO GIVE IT TO YOU"
The agency must explain its reasons, usually in writing, for
determining that an exemption applies to any particular
information.


You have the right to contest any exemption claim.



The exemptions must be narrowly applied, since the FOIA
was created to maximize public access to agency records



You can file an administrative appeal to a higher agency
official. And if this fails, you can file a lawsuit. The federal
court must conduct a full judicial review of the agency's
claims and it is up to the agency to justify its denial of
your request.



Even if the agency releases substantial portions of the
material you've requested, you can appeal the decision to
"sanitize" the rest. You can also request a detailed
justification for each deletion.



You can ask the state public records ombudsman to step in
and try to mediate. The ombudsman has the authority to
 Society of Professional Journalists 24

look at records behind closed doors to see if the agency is
following the law (although the ombudsman has no
enforcement authority).


While you are haggling with the agency, try to get the
information from another agency. Some records are kept
by multiple agencies (for example, boating accident data
kept by state agencies and the Coast Guard).



Use principled negotiation and hard tactics, as detailed on
the following pages.

 Society of Professional Journalists 25

Lowering Copy Fees
By David Cuillier
Here are some tips for lowering or eliminating unreasonable fees:


Don’t ask for copies. Look at the documents for free. In most states an
agency can’t charge for search fees, only for copies.



Narrow the request to just the few pages that you really need.



Ask for a fee waiver as a researcher using the information for the
public good (federal FOIA provides waivers for journalists).



Take photos or use a portable scanner (about $100).



Ask for electronic files on CD or e-mailed for free.



Ask the agency for an itemized list of expenses to justify the costs.
Here is what I consider reasonable: Add paper (.7 cents per page
based on a box of paper from Office Depot), machine depreciation (.2
cents per page based on a Xerox WorkCentre 5225 that costs $4,299
and produces 75,000 copies a month), and toner (.6 cents per page),
and you get 1.5 cents per page. Call it an even 2 cents per page.



Question high staff search fees – $100 per hour is equivalent to paying
someone $208,000 a year to make copies.



Request to see a copy of the contract the agency has with a copy
company. My employer pays a company less than a penny (.9 cents)
per page to provide the machine, service it and refill the toner.



Survey local agencies to compare costs and expose the unreasonable.



Survey citizens to find out what they consider reasonable. Most people
will say 10 or 15 cents per page copy.



If the unreasonable charge is for computer programming, call the
company that makes the software and ask them if copying data should
be time consuming. They often say it takes a few minutes.



Publicize the unreasonable copy fees. Find out if an agency provides
free copies to lawyers or commercial requesters but overcharges
citizens. Contact elected officials. Write about it.



Team with other requesters to share the bill. Request the request logs
to see who else gets records frequently from the agency.



Ask an ombudsman or attorney general to talk to the agency.



Sue or lobby for laws specifying reasonable fees.
 Society of Professional Journalists 26

Soft tactics and principled negotiation
By David Cuillier
Below are tips for getting sources to comply with requests, based on the
theories and application of “principled negotiation.” These techniques are
advocated by such experts as William Ury, co-founder of the Harvard’s
Program on Negotiation and author of “Getting to Yes.” I suggest reporters
always approach their sources in this frame of mind. With enough practice
you’ll get a lot of agencies to comply without threats of litigation.
Argue interests, not positions
Argue for your interest (I wish to analyze ambulance response times to
find trouble spots), not positions (I want your database). If the agency
understands why you want the information they are more likely to be
cooperative. Of course, you are not obligated by law to explain that and you
might not want to tip them off. But in reality they can figure it out most of
the time so being up front is a good option. Then, they can argue their
interest (we don’t want to invade anyone’s privacy). You can work out a
solution when you understand interests. Positions cause both sides to dig in.
Allow face saving
If you box an official into a corner early on they might feel like they
have to stick to their guns no matter the cost, especially if they denied the
information in front of their superiors and subordinates. Talking with the
person informally first, before they commit to an action, gives the person
more leeway to agree to your request. Or, suggest the legal department
examine the issue and let them make the decision – that will relieve the
official of the shame of changing his or her mind (e.g., “sorry folks, I had to
say yes because the attorneys said I had to release it.”)
Use people skills
Allow officials to vent. Listen first, then repeat what you heard
(whether you agree with it or not). Use “I” statements, not “You”
statements. Talk to people informally side-by-side, not facing across a
counter, creating psychological “opposition.”
Apply negotiation jujitsu
Bend like the willow, don’t break like the oak. Invite criticism and
advice for how to analyze the information. If they say the record is a waste
of time then ask what record would be a better use of time. Use questions
instead of statements. Use silence after an unreasonable attack. Invent
different options and alternatives, and end conversations with a compliment.
 Society of Professional Journalists 27

Hard tactics
By David Cuillier
Sometimes you apply the techniques of principled negotiation but an agency
just doesn’t want to play ball, or purposely chooses not to play fair. Then it’s
open season and time to apply hard tactics. Below are tips for getting
sources to comply with requests, based on the six elements of persuasion by
Robert Cialdini of Arizona State University. Also, other strategies are
provided for pressuring an agency to release records. Do not use these
techniques for evil. Only good.
1. Reciprocation


Rejection-then-retreat: Ask for a lot, then cut it in half. “Can I
see all your expenses in database format for the past 20 years? OK,
how about starting with just the expense reports for the past five
years?” The clerk will appreciate you for simplifying the request and
may reciprocate by working faster and being more helpful. Request
information that you can give up later, such as social security
numbers. If it lands in court a judge might want you to concede
something anyway. When it appears you are giving them something
then they are more likely to reciprocate.



Get-to-know-you stories: Don’t ignore newsworthy positive
stories. Occasionally government actually does something right. It’s
often useful to do a harmless newsworthy project first to get to
know people and build trust (e.g., analyze pet license data for a
feature on most popular dog breeds/names), then work from there.
When you do something positive to someone, psychologically they
feel obligated to reciprocate and help you out even more. But don’t
make up stories or get buddy-buddy. Readers come first.



Be a helper: Check in frequently after the request is filed and offer
to help to make their jobs easier. Offer to help copy data or provide
CDs for copying. They might not take you up on it but they might
appreciate the gesture.

2. Commitment and Consistency


Everyone happy: Ask, “How are you doing today?” When the
person says fine, then he or she is more likely to help you. People
don’t want to appear stingy when they are fine and you are not.



Commitment: Once commitment is made, people try to stick to it.
Get commitment verbally: “Do we have an agreement?”

 Society of Professional Journalists 28



Ratcheting (low-balling): Get a commitment for something
small, then it opens the door for getting a “yes” on something
bigger. This is the opposite of the reciprocation techniques. “How
about if I could see a copy of what a police report looks like. OK, do
you have what a case file would look like? What does it look like in
your computer system? Any chance I could just get an electronic
copy of your reports in Excel for the past year?”

3. Social Proof


Peer pressure: We follow what we see everyone else doing (e.g.,
canned laughter). This is most effective when people are uncertain
and when the reporter is similar to the person. “Boy, all the other
towns in the county provide this information. I wonder why it isn’t
open here?”



Patriotism: Focus on the importance of what they have to offer to
the community. That it’s their duty as Americans to keep
government open and transparent, and the community will
appreciate it.

4. Liking


Looks: As much as we hate to admit, people often make decisions
based on how a requester looks. Dressing well helps; looking shady
usually raises suspicions and increases denials.



Similarity: Dress like your sources. Act like your sources. Talk
about similar interests.



Compliments that are sincere help.



Association: Disassociate yourself with negative media and people
who use information irresponsibly (spammers, identity thieves). Go
to lunch with people for a positive association with you and food.

5. Authority


Bigger gets better responses. Journalists from bigger media
have more “authority” and tend to get calls returned faster. If you
work for a smaller organization, consider teaming up with reporters
from other organizations. Cooperative requests can increase
pressure for release and serve everyone’s interests.



Titles have authority. Have the request letter co-signed by the
managing editor or, depending on the importance of the
information, the publisher. Or have the organization’s attorney send
it.



Government allies. Get people in government on your side to
back you up. Get to know the state attorney general, your state
 Society of Professional Journalists 29

records ombudsman, or others who might be respected in
government.


Shallow but effective. Symbols of authority are effective: titles,
clothing, automobiles. Even height conveys authority.



Cite the law. The law is authoritative, particularly if it has
penalties for noncompliance. Include the citations in your requests
and e-mails when you want to exert authority.

6. Scarcity


For a limited time only. What you are offering is limited. “I don’t
have time to wait until next week for you to check with the
attorneys on this. My deadline is in six hours. Either I get the
information or I’m going to have to write a story for tomorrow
morning’s paper explaining that your agency is withholding it. I
would hate for you all to look like you are hiding something and are
bad officials when I know you aren’t. The public will appreciate it.”

7. Pound lawbreakers into submission
Sometimes you run across a few bad apples in public service (just
like there are some bad apples in journalism) who deliberately act
in bad faith and deny valid public records requests to hide
corruption or embarrassing facts. Remind them who’s boss (the
public):


Go to the top. Go to the elected officials and ask them why the
agency is hiding information. Sometimes elected officials, especially
during an election year, would rather avoid a public battle with
journalists.



Write about it. Some journalists say it’s inside baseball but that’s
hooey. When an agency says “no” to you, they aren’t saying “no” to
you. They are saying “no” to the thousands or millions of people in
your community. Tell those people. Quote access experts and show
why the agency is breaking the law. You would write a story if the
agency broke other laws, right?



Wave the flag. Use patriotism as leverage. Communists and Nazis
favor secrecy, not god-fearing Americans. Are your officials pinkos
and hate America, or are they good citizens?



Expose the deviant. Get the same information from other
agencies then ask the secretive officials why they are deviant.
Nobody wants to be an outlier.



Rally allies. Find people and groups who want the information and
go tell them about the secrecy. It’s even better if they are
influential business owners, contributors or active citizens. When
 Society of Professional Journalists 30

officials see it isn’t a media issue, and they fear the wrath of
constituents, they yield.


Heads on pikes. Put together a list of all the other agencies in
your state or elsewhere that lost public records battles and had to
pay tens of thousands of dollars in lawyer fees (including the
requesters’ fees). Show them the news articles that made the
agencies look bad. When officials see the very real drawbacks of
secrecy (heads on pikes), they might wave the white flag.



Bury them. If they deny your valid request and are being
stubborn, flood them with more requests. If they are trying to hide
one record, you can tell them that you wonder what else they are
trying to hide. Make it much more work to deny you records than to
comply. Wear them down.



Release the hounds (lawyers). Have your attorney write a terse
letter citing the relevant law. The letter, while perhaps unbudgeted,
can demonstrate you are serious and will pay off down the road
with more records.



Sue. Sometimes all it takes is filing a lawsuit and an agency will
cough up the information. In many situations you can recoup your
attorney fees, even if you don’t go to court. Check out the new
NFOIC litigation fund (http://www.nfoic.org/) that will cover
litigation to fight for records.

 Society of Professional Journalists 31

Posting data online
By David Cuillier
Here are some programs you can check out for posting data online for the
public, from the simple, cheap and easy, to the complicated and expensive:
1. Google Fusion Tables
http://www.google.com/fusiontables/
This is a free service for posting data online and making it look fancy
through maps and other visualization techniques. You can upload data,
share it, and allow people to update it if you want.
2. Socrata
http://www.socrata.com/
This is cheap and easy, and is used by the White House. For no cost
you can post online fast and share it with the world. The databases are
kept on the Socrata server, though, and it is limited in space.
3. Tablesorter
http://tablesorter.com/
This program gives you a little more control over your content and
looks professional. It’s also free (they ask for a donation if you like it).
The downside is you have to know html to be able to integrate it into
your website, but any Web person should be able to work with it.
4. Caspio
http://www.caspio.com/
This is a really nice program, and it even uses point-and-click interface
for ease of use. It’s very slick and has some great features. It can be a
little more expensive, though. It ranges from $39.95 per month for the
“value” package to $349.95 per month for the corporate package.
5. Django
http://www.djangoproject.com/
This is a high-end program that requires a person to know Python
programming language. It appears to be growing in popularity.
6. Other programs
Other programs that you can check out include DataGrid, DataTables,
Tableau public, Simile exhibit, and Tablesetter (open-source software
created by ProPublica).
 Society of Professional Journalists 32

Data ethics checklist
By David Cuillier
Here is a checklist to review when dealing with data (also, see the SPJ Code
of Ethics, http://www.spj.org/ethicscode.asp):
1. Is the database accurate?
Often an agency will provide data that have been compiled in a hurry,
changed from year to year, or just garbled. Take an excerpt of the data
and verify it is accurate. Clean it up. Some people say it’s OK to take
post government databases online raw, and if there are inaccuracies it is
the government’s fault. That is true, legally, but journalists have an
ethical duty to verify and publish the truth.
2. Did I analyze the numbers right?
When you get your findings, run them past the agency to see whether
they find errors. You want to give them the chance to reply, and they
can’t prevent you from publishing it. Don't provide the entire story to an
agency before publication, but it doesn’t hurt to present key findings.
3. Should I withhold some of the data from the public?
Just because we have a legal right to acquire public data doesn’t mean
we have to publish everything. We might get databases that include
home addresses. In some situations that might be important to publish
online (sex offender data). In other situations the harm in publication
might outweigh the benefits (database of child beauty pageant winners).
4. What would my mom/aunt/grandma/neighbor/child think?
Apply the sniff test to determine whether publication of the data might
evoke a public backlash that could lead to closure of the records. This has
happened many times around the country, particularly when data include
home addresses (concealed weapons permits) or other sensitive
information (911 recordings). People worry about privacy invasion and
will call for blanket closure of records. That doesn’t mean we don’t
publish data if they have any whiff of personal privacy. But if we do, we
must have a clear and defensible reason that we explain up front.
5. Am I pursuing data aggressively in the public’s interest?
A lot of journalists don’t write about denials because they say it’s inside
baseball, or a conflict of interest. However, it is the ethical responsibility
of journalists to fight for records on behalf of the public. Agencies aren’t
saying “no” to you – they are saying no to the thousands or millions of
fellow citizens. When government breaks the law (including the state
public records law), tell people.
 Society of Professional Journalists 33

Top-10 open meetings red flags
By Joel Campbell

1. Retreats. Just because a public body wants to meet at the beach for a
retreat doesn’t mean the open meetings law doesn’t apply.
2. Attorney-client privilege. Some public bodies try to skirt the open
meetings act by claiming attorney-client privilege, calling the attorney
into executive session when they want secrecy. Question such ploys.
3. Stealth agendas. If the agenda says minutes, old business, new
business, begin challenging the public body for more information. If
the agenda says the public body is closing the meeting to discuss
“personnel” ask for specific details about the meeting closure.
4. Boilerplate closures. In some states, city councils include an
“executive session” on their agenda as a matter or practice whether
they really need it or not. This encourages closed meetings and
violates the spirit of open meeting laws.
5. Electronic meetings. Some states allow meetings to be conducted
over the telephone or via video or audio conference. However, such
meetings usually require that journalists and the public can listen or
watch. Also watch for agencies conducting public business via e-mail.
6. No votes for executive sessions. Laws sometimes require that a
majority vote be taken to go into closed session. Keep public officials
honest and demand votes be taken.
7. Work meetings or committee of the whole. In some places,
public bodies hold regular “work sessions,” “committee of the whole
meetings” or “work meetings” before their regular meetings. These
often are designed to discuss matters informally and line up votes.
8. Vague times and locations. Some boards have attempted to
approve closed meetings for a non-specific time and location in the
future. In some cases these have been used to bring in candidates for
job interviews. Object to such tactics.
9. Get the meeting documents. Ask for the same information packets
the members of the board or council receive. These are public
documents and can help you be more thorough in your reporting.
10.
Diffuse the open meetings bomb. If a discussion scheduled
for a closed meeting looks like it might violate the law, make a phone
call before the meeting and try to persuade public officials to discuss
the agenda item in question in the open. Some states have FOI hotline
attorneys who may be consulted.
 Society of Professional Journalists 34

Access resources
Arizona First Amendment Coalition
http://arizonafoi.com/
This group, comprised primarily of journalists in Arizona, advocates for open
government.
Arizona Media Hotline
http://www.ananews.com/wordpress/index.php/member-services/legaladvice-services/
A hotline for reporters needing help figuring out public records laws: 602351-8000. Funded by the First Amendment Coalition and answered by
attorneys from Perkins Coie Brown & Bain.
Arizona Public Records Ombudsman
http://www.azleg.state.az.us/ombudsman/default.htm
This office started mediating access disputes in January 2007 out of the
state Attorney General’s office. A good way to get an impartial government
person on your side to work out disputes.
Arizona Reporter’s Handbook on Media Law
A good summary of access in the state, along with other media law issues.
To order a copy for $5, contact Sharon Neilson at 602-351-8014 or
SNeilson@perkinscoie.com. For more information, contact Dan Barr at 602351-8085.
Reporters Committee Arizona open government guide
www.rcfp.org/ogg (then click on Arizona)
A great guide to the public records law and open meetings law in Arizona,
written by Arizona media law attorney Dan Barr. It describes the different
pieces of the law in plain English. A must-have resource for everyone.
Arizona Newspapers Association
http://www.ananews.com/
A good source of news on FOI issues in the state and help for dealing with
access issues.
Arizona SPJ Sunshine Chair
David Cuillier, University of Arizona School of Journalism,
cuillier@email.arizona.edu, (w) 520-626-9694 (email best way to reach me)
http://journalism.arizona.edu/people/faculty/cuillier.php

 Society of Professional Journalists 35

Quotable access experts
 Dan Barr, media law attorney, (w) 602-351-8085, (c) 602-882-1896,
dbarr@perkinscoie.com
 David Bodney, media law attorney, (w) 602-257-5212, (c) 602-3151547, dbodney@steptoe.com
 David Cuillier, University of Arizona School of Journalism (w) 520-6269694, (h) 520-575-4016, cuillier@email.arizona.edu
 Nick Dranias, director of the Center for Constitutional Government for
The Goldwater Institute, 602-462-5000,
ndranias@goldwaterinstitute.org
 Robert Leger, First Amendment Coalition of Arizona, 602-444-6805,
rleger@spj
Society of Professional Journalists
http://www.spj.org/foi.asp?
This group provides information about freedom of information, including a
blog and resources. The “Open Doors” publication has document-based story
ideas, check the guide to FERPA, and see the Sunshine Network with experts
for each state.
Student Press Law Center
http://www.splc.org/
This nonprofit center provides free legal assistance to student journalists.
Check out the Web site for the publications and searchable database on a
variety of student media law issues. It also includes a super FOIA letter
generator that caters to each state.
The Art of Access blog
http://www.theartofaccess.com
The blog, by David Cuillier and Charles Davis, provides more tips and story
ideas on accessing public records, as well as resources for requesters and
teaching FOI.
The National Security Archives
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
Tips for accessing public records through FOIA, as well as tons of federal
records.
Investigative Reporters and Editors
www.ire.org
This group has an online resource center (for members) that includes a
searchable database of more than 20,000 investigative stories and a
searchable database of 2,000 tip sheets. Also check out the Extra! Extra!
daily stories: http://www.ire.org/extraextra/
 Society of Professional Journalists 36

Society of Environmental Journalists
www.sej.org
Environmental story archive that provides great ideas for data and FOIA
requests.
Freedom of Information Center
http://www.nfoic.org/foi-center
Information about access in all the states, including a listing of public
records audits and studies. Out of the University of Missouri – Columbia.
WikiFOIA
http://sunshinereview.org/index.php/Portal:WikiFOIA
Provides information and news about access issues nationally.
Alltop Freedom of Information
http://freedom-of-information.alltop.com/
A compilation of FOIA blogs with top stories and postings.
State Sunshine blog
http://openrecords.wordpress.com/
State Sunshine blog with news about FOIA issues nationally. A good list of
links.
Office of Government Information Services
http://www.archives.gov/ogis/
The federal agency, started in fall 2009, is the federal ombudsman for FOIA.
Have a problem with an agency? Contact them and see if they can help.
OpenTheGovernment.org
http://www.openthegovernment.org/
An advocacy group with news and reports about access to federal records.
Sunshine in Government Initiative
http://www.sunshineingovernment.org/
Check the FOIA files for hundreds of stories produced with public records.
Google News Alerts
http://news.google.com
Go to Google News, click on “News Alerts” then set up alerts with keywords
such as “public records request” and “freedom of information” and Google
will send you links to stories that contain those keywords.

 Society of Professional Journalists 37

