Tips for speaking
Thanks for agreeing to speak at the IRE & NICAR national conference. Whether you’re new to IRE or a
veteran speaker, we hope these tips will help (or serve as a good reminder) as you prepare for your
session. The list below is combined from material given to us by previous speakers and our own
observations. Please don’t hesitate to call us (573-882-3364) if you have any questions.
1. Go over your material until you are comfortable with it. Know how long
it will take and adjust your presentation to fit the time you're allotted.
2. Speak with your co-panelists in advance to plan who will cover what and in what order. (If the
session has a moderator, he or she may set up this call; if not, feel free to get the ball rolling).
3. Prepare a one- or two-page tipsheet. Our members appreciate having something to
take home. We also want to post it on our website. Email a copy to tipsheet@ire.org.
4. Make sure your presentation and any tip sheet Includes links to resources you used or any tools
you used or built.
5. Keep your presentation straightforward and offer five to 10 useful, step-by-step tips for how
someone could conduct their own investigation.
6. Slides should be easy to read, highlighting only the key points. (Too much text is really hard to
follow).
7. Stay away from long war stories. An anecdote can be very helpful (and entertaining); just make
sure it is a good, concise example of what you are trying to teach.
8. Work with your co-panelists to leave time for questions (in an hour-long session, 10 or 15
minutes is great). That means it’s really important for each speaker to regulate their own time
and not to chew into that of other speakers (or the q & a).
9. Please use and speak into the microphone. Recordings are tied to the microphones, and we
want to make sure members who couldn't make it to your session can hear what you have to
say.
10. When you’ve finished your panel, if you have any extra time, please head for the hallway right
away and hang around to chat. Each chat can be a workshop in itself. And please do go to the
hallway so the next panel
can get set up.
11. Remember that your words are being recorded for the ages and that IRE conference
audio is widely distributed. Avoid such things as casual profanity or slander or
anything else you wouldn’t want your family to hear.

Contact Lauren Grandestaff, Resource Center Director, for questions about tipsheets. lauren@ire.org

