Five Law Enforcement Tips, IRE session, June 28, 2014
Jaxon Van Derbeken, San Francisco Chronicle public safety reporter
jvanderbeken@sfchronicle.com
NO FISH IS TOO SMALL – Getting to know rookie officers, junior secretaries, young
court clerks, newly hired court bailiffs (they prefer to be called deputies) and other
comparatively low-level folks--especially checking in on a daily basis, even to just say
hello—pays off big over time. When you cultivate them early, they have yet to develop
the anti-press attitude many use to help get promoted. It gets much harder to find sources
the higher they are on the food chain. But if you get them fresh -- and keep in touch -they will remember you when they do move up. Try to get as many cell phone numbers
as possible from all sorts of people, just to say you may need to check a fact, etc.
KNOW THE LAW – Whether your beat is cops, courts or any state or federal regulatory
agency, you must master the applicable laws, statutes and regulations. This may sound
obvious, but it really does pay off. You don’t have to go to law school, but you do need
to know enough to foster quick rapport with sources. Nothing slows that down more than
asking questions like “What does no contest mean?’’ You are best figuring out that kind
of stuff on your own, because few will be impressed with your learn-on-the-job approach.
Listening to the scanner, using smart phone apps like 50-Radio, will help you get familiar
with the penal codes and lingo, but turning that radio chatter in stories can backfire.
GO TO COURT – Just show up, even if you have no particular story in mind.
If your beat is a federal or state agency, try to attend an administrative hearing or an
enforcement case in federal court. Going helps you meet new sources, know the law and
demonstrate that you take matters seriously. That’s especially true when you don’t
actually write about what happened, believe it or not. This helps you get to know sources
as they wait to testify, usually on a bench outside. Sometimes they will be nervous, but
most of the time they will be relaxed and have time to kill. Make sure you take notes
during the mundane first part of their testimony -- where they talk about their areas of
expertise and where they have worked – and keep a file on their background. Just
attending court a few days will help inform you and your stories. Sometimes you can
even get an unexpected story out of it because….
INFORMATION FLOWS IN CROOKED LINES – This sounds weird, but it is true:
When you are doing a story about a major crime, you will obviously talk to investigators
and maybe the chief. But what does the mayor’s office know? Or how about the DA?
Prosecutors are often sent to officer-involved shootings, even homicides whether or not
someone is booked. If you know the law, go to court and have cultivated young sources
– like the ‘baby prosecutor’ whose cell phone you got when you watched their first trial
and is now the on-call prosecutor at the scene – you learn how info flows unpredictably.
LOOK FOR PATTERNS – Since you have a growing network of sources, know the
law, have gone to court and mastered how information flows, you are able to look for
patterns that are invisible to others. Spotting them is the key to a successful investigation.

