Reporting on death penalty access
Richard Pienciak / AP
RPienciak@ap.org
Brandi Grissom / Texas Tribune
bgrissom@texastribune.org
Ziva Branstetter / Tulsa World
ziva.branstetter@tulsaworld.com
Things to keep in mind:
— How does the process work?
Know your state’s protocol. Request from the prison system, or
agency in charge of implementation, the documentation that spells
out how it works. (It’s more than how they kill somebody. Step-bystep who’s involved, an outline for how it works – specific and vague
simultaneously) Get the prior versions of your state protocol to see
how it has changed over time.
— Sometimes the decisions aren’t made in court
Watch carefully for subtle changes in the way the system works. Keep
in touch not only with people in the system now, but people who have
worked there in the past. Ask them what’s different now.
— Lawyers for the inmates are pros at seeking information
Is there an organization that represents death row inmates
specifically in your state? Do you know the lawyers who regularly
represent those inmates? They have been requesting documents for
years. What do they have?
— What is the context?
All of these decisions are political. So, help your readers understand
the political considerations at stake. Ask for communication between
politicians and state officials about the death penalty and obtaining
the drugs.

— What’s motivating people?

Learn where the legal argument ends and the emotional argument
begins. Death penalty lawyers are usually more talkative but don’t let
it result in short shrift for the state.
— Nothing’s too basic to cover
There’s so much secrecy that people have no idea even what the room
looks like where these things take place. Report it all. Not only does
it illuminate the process, but it makes it easier for you to know in the
future when the system is changed.
— What’s the history of the process?
How has the process developed in your state? What were the basic
cases involved? SCOTUS said in 1976 that states could execute people
but only if the laws ensured the process was fair and not cruel and
unusual. But it took states a while to pass laws.

— What are the previous rulings regarding the execution process?
Familiarize yourself so that you can craft your own request in the best
way possible and avoid delays.

Ten death penalty stories you can do:
1. Executions throughout history: Go back and look at old archived stories to find
the botched or just plain strange executions in your state’s early history. What
methods has your state used and what has gone wrong in the past?
2. Declining death penalty: Nationwide, the number of defendants receiving death
sentences has plummeted and the number of executions has dropped. Look at the
trends in both death sentences and executions in your state in the past decade. What
counties sentence people to death most frequently? (Be sure to look at per capita
measures.) The Death Penalty Information Center keeps this data. Which counties
haven’t handed down a death sentence in years?
3. Cost of the death penalty: How much does one death penalty case cost your state
vs. putting a murderer away for life? If your state pays defense attorneys in death
row cases on a contract basis, rather than salaried public defenders, you should be
able to quantify a large part of what the death penalty costs your state. Also request
figures on prison costs for death row inmates vs. those held on life sentences to
compare. Usually prosecution costs are hard to determine because prosecutors are
generally salaried but ask for that information also.

4. Where are the drugs coming from? If you’re lucky enough to live in a death
penalty state that doesn’t have a secrecy law shielding pharmacists and pharmacies,
ask for records about who supplies the lethal drugs to your prison system used in
executions. These drugs have been very hard for states to obtain, hence the everchanging list of them. Many states have turned to compounding pharmacies because
manufacturers have banned use of their drugs in executions. Check to see whether
the drug supplier has been cited by the FDA or state regulators and whether it is
licensed to do business in your state.
5. Legal landscape: Go back and review any legal challenges to your state’s death
penalty. Are any pending? Has your state had to settle lawsuits by inmates in the
past by changing its protocol? Pay particular attention to depositions by prison
officials about how the process really works and reports by defense experts pointing
out flaws.
6. Compare protocols: Examine your state’s protocol when compared to protocols
in other states. Many are available at the DPIC web site -- deathpenaltyinfo.org -and others are posted on states’ web sites. Several states keep their entire protocol
confidential but have produced some or all of it in legal challenges. Does your
state protocol require the execution team to train regularly? Are backup drugs
required in case something goes wrong? What are the qualifications and experience
required (if any) of members of the execution team? If your state releases the
names of doctors or other medical professionals on the execution team, check their
backgrounds, licensure files, lawsuits etc. (If you do this story, I have protocols from
about 20 active DP states and can share.)
7. Has your state botched an execution in the past? Sometimes it’s not obvious to
witnesses when something goes wrong, especially if your state uses a paralytic drug
such as vecuronium bromide as part of a three-drug protocol. Request autopsy or
medical examiner reports, if available, and any logs your corrections department is
required to keep of individual executions. Look for problems with IVs that indicate
improper IV placement. Look at the levels of drugs in inmates’ blood (if available)
but this is only useful if blood was drawn quickly after death. Look for any injuries
suffered shortly before death.
8. Defacto or actual moratoriums: How long has it been since your state (or states
around yours) actually executed someone? While there are 32 states where the
the death penalty is legal, many have not carried out an execution in years. Some
governors have issued actual moratoriums while other states have just chosen not
to carry out the sentence due to legal challenges.
9. Increasing secrecy: An increasing number of states are passing laws or
administrative rules to shield pharmacies, pharmacists, doctors and others who take
part in executions. What laws are on your state’s books? You might be surprised
once you look.

10. Don’t ever ignore the victims: If you are focusing a lot of attention on one case,
consider doing a separate story just devoted to the victim(s) in the case. Don’t give
up because the direct relatives don’t want to talk. Track down former teachers,
school classmates and others who might be more willing. Get photos of the victim.
Often prosecutors will be happy to help supply information and it may be compiled
in a comprehensive packet prepared for the clemency hearing. Did the victim’s
parents write victim impact statements for the trial? These are often very powerful
and allow the family to speak for the victim if they don’t actually feel like talking to
reporters. Consider sending a letter to the victim’s family about what information
you are seeking and why you want to talk to them.

Death Penalty Resources:
Death Penalty Information Center -- deathpenaltyinfo.org -- has a wealth of
information , statistics, a searchable database of executions by state with filters,
protocols etc. It’s a good idea to disclose that they advocate for abolition of the death
penalty.
Lawsuits: Read the legal challenges to the death penalty in your state. They often
contain depositions, expert reports and other helpful documents.
ACLU: An advocacy organization but often has people who are very knowledgeable
about the landscape in your state.
Prosecutors and defense attorneys: Get to know the attorneys who specialize in
post-conviction capital appeals. Many of these attorneys handle only death penalty
cases and can tell you about problems in your state as well as which cases are
nearing the end of their appeals.
Prison system: Don’t forget about the wealth of records your state corrections
department has on hand. Make sure to get a copy of your protocol, current and past.
Know who is in charge of decisions, what kind of training and experience is required
and be prepared in case your state does botch an execution badly. Ask for emails, log
books, policies etc. related to the death penalty.

