Sources
Finding them, getting them to talk and dealing with the
consequences
FINDING SOURCES:
 Set a goal of building quality sources each week. Public Information Officers are
not Quality Sources.
 Use your position, title and reputation to connect with movers and shakers in the
community.
 Meet with people who leave key positions in key organizations such former
Governors, Mayors, Congressmen, community leaders.
 Identify and build bridges with the union sources and watchdog groups in your
area--- they often know what’s wrong.
 Use your quality sources to find other quality sources. Sources build sources.
 The best source meetings happen in person--- not on the phone. Having the ability
to read body language during the communication process is critical.
 If at all possible, don't settle for a source or an example in your story that is "good
enough." Keep looking. Look everywhere.
 Make that last phone call even if it's on the last day
ONCE YOU FIND A SOURCE
 All sources should be vetted. You must understand their motivation for talking and
not your motivation for needing them to talk. Why would they want to put
themselves in this position? Is there something in their background that can impact
their credibility and the credibility of your story?
 Sharing information with a source. This depends on the level of trust you have
built. If the source is verified as credible by another respected source that may
make you more willing to share more information. It’s a case by case and person
by person decision. It’s very much like a live “no-limit” poker game. You
must read your hand, your opponent and the situation before you make your play.
THE UNNAMED OR ANONYMITY QUESTION
 Don’t make promises you can’t keep. Find out how your news organization
grants confidentiality and who can do that. The organization has a stake in
confidentiality. The organization’s credibility takes a hit if readers don’t trust
stories with unnamed sources. The organization pays the legal bills if prosecutors
want to learn the names of confidential sources. The organization may take a hit in
a civil suit if it can’t produce witnesses to support libelous allegations it has
published.
 Victims deserve special consideration. A newspaper with a strong policy against
granting confidentiality to sources may make exceptions in cases of victims of
sexual assault and other crimes. Many victims of sex crimes will not talk at all
unless they are granted confidentiality. Still, you need to discuss how to identify the
victim in the story.
 Try to get them on the record. Your initial grant of confidentiality is not the
last word. You should tell the source that you will try later to get him/her on the
record. And then you should do it.
1

GETTING RELUCTANT SOURCES TO TALK
 Give sources a reason to share their story. Explain to sources why their story is
important and let them know that sharing that story is important for reasons beyond
themselves.
 Talk to them in their language. Not an interpreter, which can create distance and
misunderstanding. If you know you are going to be working in an area where you
will be dealing with a population that speaks a different language, have a reporter
on your team that speaks that language.
 Approach them through someone they know. The same person who may hang up
the phone, slam the door in your face, or run away, may be very happy to speak
with you if someone they know and trust makes the introduction. This could be a
lawyer, social worker, friend, or family member. Or, if they are reluctant, asking
enough people around them may compel them to change their mind.
 If it’s a woman victim of sexual assault, consider having a woman ask the
questions. Or at least consider having a woman on your team available to join the
interview.
 Be a human first and a reporter second. Remember that your story is not the most
important thing in their life. Show empathy and understanding with regard to
whatever they are going through. Feel free to share a bit about yourself too, but
don't overstep your bounds. Always remain professional.
 Figure out ways to communicate that are easiest for them. A lot of undocumented
immigrants may not have an email address, or check it infrequently – but they
may text regularly. Also, Monday at 10am may not be a good time since they may
be coming or going from work, or resting. Taking them out to eat may not be a
good idea in a small town, but showing up at their house may be worse. Ask them
when and where is most convenient and don’t be surprised if they are late or
don’t show up. Just try again.
 Write a letter. Some sources who won’t respond to emails, phone calls or knocks
at the door will respond to letters. Explain why you want to talk and what the story
is going to be about. It may take more time, but it also may open up the source.
 Slow down & be patient. As journalists, we’re used to working quickly. But
sometimes it works to our advantage to slow down. It can take a while to gain a
source’s trust. At your first meeting (and maybe your second and third), don’t
take out a notebook, microphone or camera. Just get to know the person.
 Help sources get used to the idea of going on camera. Some sources feel
uncomfortable talking — and showing their emotions — on camera. Talk with the
videographer and photojournalist ahead of time to try to make the subject as
comfortable as possible. Don’t make a big deal about the filming – just let the
conversation flow so that they forget they are on camera.
 Acknowledge their vulnerabilities. Acknowledge how hard some things are to talk
about and give them a sense of how their story fits into the overall goal of the
project.
 Abstain from judgment. Be sensitive to the fact that someone may have chosen not
to pursue legal action or even take their case to the police. That doesn’t make
their story untrue. It may in fact add to your reporting to find out why they
haven’t shared their story before.
 "Squeeze the details" out of your source so you can tell a strong narrative, but also
so you are confident you have the full story. Ask for documents, medical records,

2

whatever it takes to corroborate their story.
 If government sources or other authorities ignore you, just be persistent. They want
you to go away. Do not. Be polite, but be persistent. Keep a record of each time
you communicate with them and use that in future communications. "I've emailed
your office 15 times in the past week and called 7 times ..." Go above their head,
contacting a boss/department head who will ultimately be responsible when the
news comes out. Make it clear you are trying to truly understand the problem, not
"get them." But also make it clear you will write about their obfuscating.
 Be ruthless with your own content. Remember that journalists, not sources, are
responsible for the accuracy of stories. As hard as you may have worked to get a
source to speak and as much as you love the tape – you must scrutinize and verify
what that source says to decide if it’s credible and accurate.
And Finally:
 You make your own luck through persistence and hard work and not giving up.





Andres Cediel [andresacediel@gmail.com
Ellen Gabler [egabler@jrn.com]
Tony Kovaleski [tony.kovaleski@nbcuni.com]
Ellen Weiss [ellenrweiss@gmail.com]

Additional Resources on the question of sources:
 Steve Buttry: http://bit.ly/1irMdyR
 Poynter: http://bit.ly/1wpSZrt

3

