FRAUD: THE MEMORABILIA RACKET
Hagit Limor/WXIX-TV hlimor@fox19.com Phil Drechsler/KNBC Philip.drechsler@nbcuni.com
Eric Flack/WAVE-TV eflack@wave3.com

SPECIAL GUEST: Autograph Expert Steve Cyrkin Steve.Cyrkin@autographcollector.com
RESEARCH TIPS / BEFORE YOU PUBLISH:


Use several experts. You don’t have to include them all in the story but you don’t want to
hang your hat on one expert’s opinion. A combination of voices adds to your credibility
and will help insulate you from legal fallout.



Talk to your lawyers early. There is often an overwhelming amount of circumstantial
evidence, but rarely a smoking gun.



Look up comparable items on EBay and other auction sites. The market sets the price. If
an item is cheap, it probably is fake.



Google the sellers, suppliers and authenticators, since you're likely to find discussions
about problem ones. But don't rely on sites like RipoffReport.com, because the fraudsters
use those sites to try to defame legitimate parties.



No signature is too small-time or too low-priced if a forger thinks he can make a few
bucks.



No seller is beyond scrutiny. That includes auction houses, charities and galleries.



Always check the date of issue of the particular piece of memorabilia that is signed.
Occasionally it will post-date the death of one of the supposed signers.



Just because a person actually had access to big time celebrities does not mean the
signatures are authentic. For example, the Beatles road manager or fan club members
often signed their names.



There are investors and there are collectors. Investors are looking for a return on their
investment. Collectors are fans, and some are simply interested in having a piece of
memorabilia. Keep that in mind when you interview people.



Find a focus by looking for an event.



These are not quick turn stories.



Budget time to give seller a chance to respond.

INFORMATION YOU SHOULD INCLUDE IN EVERY STORY ON THIS TOPIC:


Unless you witness the person sign the item you may never be absolutely sure it is 100%
real.



A Certificate of Authenticity does not mean an item is authentic. It is only as good as the
person who signed it.

CYRKIN’S BOTTOM LINE:
 The vast majority of autographed items offered in fundraising auctions and memorabilia
galleries are fake.
 The fundraising organizations, such as charities and universities, usually don’t know
they’re selling forgeries. They’re duped by their suppliers.
 Most gallery owners, on the other hand, know if they’re selling forgeries.
Indications of forgery include:
 A never-ending stream of same or similar rare items. Seller offers multiple signed LP's,
photos, guitars and other memorabilia of popular current and classic bands and artists,
such as Led Zeppelin, The Who, Metallica, The Beatles, Jimi Hendrix, etc. Sometimes
they offer sets with signatures from complete bands. One such item would be extremely
rare. A whole set? Highly unlikely.
 Signatures perfectly positioned in marker.
 Generally below-market sale price. If serious collectors considered it genuine, the price
would be much higher.
 No verifiable provenance
 Seller makes general statements such as that the item was obtained at "an estate sale" or
from "insiders" who don't want the celebrity to know they sold the item.
 No reliable Certificate of Authenticity (COA)
 COA from a "forensic document examiner" often described as "court-qualified FDE” to
bolster credibility for the unsuspecting customers. COAs by forensic document
examiners are a sign of forgery, not authenticity.
 Seller has relatively strict refund policy (no refunds or refunds only if the signature is
rejected by an FDE). Many fraudulent sellers offer what looks like a strong guaranty, but
in reality is actually worthless or they don’t honor it.
Most reputable sellers generally will take back an item if it cannot pass muster from reputable
authenticators. The top people in the business have provided full refunds to original purchasers
after 10 or 20 years have elapsed. They do it both as a matter of ethics and to make sure the
bogus piece is removed from circulation.
KEY FACTORS IN DETERMINING BOGUS CELEBRITY SIGNATURES:

Be wary if one or more of the following come into play.
 The signature has no flow. Starts and stops indicate slow hand attempt at forgery.
 Signature looks "too perfect." It's on the sweet spot of a baseball or perfectly placed on an
LP or CD cover. If multiple signatures, they don't touch one another. It's possible for such
signatures to be genuine, of course. But typically people aren't that neat.
 Signature substantially differs from known authentic exemplars from the same time period
without explanation or opinion of respected authority.
TIPS FROM THE FBI WEBSITE http://www.fbi.gov/sandiego/about-us/history/operation-bullpen


While the only way to absolutely guarantee that the autographed memorabilia is authentic
is to personally witness the autograph, there are several ways to avoid becoming a
memorabilia fraud victim. These recommendations include:



If the price is too good to be true, it is probably a fake. If a company offers an
autographed item well below competitors’ prices and market value, then consumers
should be wary. An example would include Michael Jordan basketballs, which some
companies sell for as low as $150. Given Jordan's current exclusive contract with Upper
Deck and difficulties associated with obtaining his autograph, the Tuff Stuff Magazine
market value of an autographed Jordan Basketball is $500, while Upper Deck Michael
Jordan autographed basketballs retail for up to $1,500. (Caution: a high price does not by
any means suggest authenticity either.)



Certificates of authenticity are not guarantees of authenticity. Individuals and companies
involved with selling forged memorabilia often include a Certificate of Authenticity,
allegedly from a third party expert. Often, the authenticator is either a knowing or
unknowing, but incompetent, participant in the fraud. Carefully read the Certificate of
Authenticity, looking for the authentication "language", an address, telephone number,
and name of the authenticators. Do not accept copies of Certificates of Authenticity.



A photograph of an athlete or celebrity signing an autograph is no guarantee the item is
authentic. This investigation revealed that it is a common practice of forged memorabilia
traffickers to include a photograph of the athlete/celebrity signing the item along with a
Certificate of Authenticity. Traffickers also include photographs of themselves with the
athlete/celebrity to lend credibility to their forged memorabilia.



An individual or company having a paid signing session with an athlete or celebrity is no
guarantee of authenticity. Operation Bullpen has revealed that is a common practice for
forged memorabilia traffickers to "mix-in" forged memorabilia with items signed during
an autograph session. For example, a company may pay to have an athlete sign 500 items.
After the signing, the company will "mix-in" forgeries with the authentic autographs. The
company also may continue to sell forged items after the authentic items have been sold
claiming that they were from the autograph session.



The method of selling the memorabilia should not affect skepticism about the item’s
authenticity. The investigation revealed that forged memorabilia traffickers sell their
forgeries through a variety of methods that may lend credibility to the forgeries. One such
sales method is through charity auctions in which the trafficker splits the profits with the
charity. At charity auctions, buyers often overpay for items and do not question the
authenticity of the memorabilia. Traffickers also sell forged items through trade
publications, television shopping networks, trade shows, retail businesses, and the
Internet.



Before purchasing autographed memorabilia, especially "vintage" or deceased
athlete/celebrity memorabilia, ask questions about the history and circumstances relating
to the autograph. Be wary of far-fetched or elaborate stories that are difficult, if not
impossible, to verify. Common false stories suggest connections to an athlete or
"runners" employed to get autographs. Whenever possible, attempt to verify the history
and circumstances of the autographed items before making the purchase.



If an individual is seeking an autograph of a current player, send a request for an
autograph directly to the athlete's team. Include a letter requesting that the enclosed item
be autographed along with a self-addressed, stamped envelope or container. Only send
photographs, cards, or baseballs. Large items such as bats and jerseys should not be sent
directly to the athlete. In the letter requesting an autograph, request information relating
to where you can purchase authentic autographed items if the athlete does not sign
autographs through mailed requests. The athlete or the team may direct the buyer to a
company that has an autograph contract with the athlete.



To counter the forged memorabilia problem, many athletes and celebrities are either
creating their own autograph company or are signing exclusive contracts with specific
sports memorabilia companies. Dealing directly with the athlete's company or with an
exclusive contract company will greatly reduce the likelihood of purchasing forged
memorabilia.

