Blair Hickman, ProPublica
@amandablair | blair.hickman@propublica.org
IRE 2014
Using Community to Power Investigative Reporting
Community engagement is a powerful piece of your reporting toolbox, leading to original
source databases, story leads, untapped user expertise and even reporting help. You can
engage your community on a daily level with your personal social media accounts, and also
work with your newsroom on enterprise projects.
GROUNDWORK
*Ask yourself: What am I reporting on, and who am I trying to reach? Communities
assemble around niche issues, so get as narrow as possible. Perhaps you’re a healthcare
reporter, with special interest in reporting on opioids, risk management and hospitalacquired infections. Once you’ve defined your specialties, you can identify target users
that could either benefit from, or contribute to, your reporting. Pregnancy rights, for
example, encompasses user groups of OB-GYNs, midwives, pregnant women and new
moms.
*Research existing communities. You want to know where the people you want to reach
live online. Different user groups often hang out in different online communities. Find, join
and participate in these groups to begin to build trust. Good places to start:
 Reddit. Excellent for passionate users and intimate discussion.
o Learn more about Reddit here.
o MetaReddit is a good tool for finding subreddits (do broad keyword
searches).
o Multireddits are a good way to lump several related subreddits into an easyto-follow list.
o Send Reddit keyword alerts to your RSS reader with this IFTTT recipe.
 LinkedIn: Great for finding and engaging with experts. When searching, filter for
groups.
 Facebook groups
 Yahoo groups. A range of groups organized by topic
 Ask existing sources what communities they use
*Be accessible. Set up accounts on the platforms your target readers use. Make sure to
display a prominent alternative way to contact you (ie, email address,) and links to callouts
you’ve made (discussed below).
BUILDING AND ENGAGING COMMUNITIES
*Engage your community with quick hits & consistent content Investigative reporters are
often focused on big-scoop projects. But quick hits that serve the community you’re
trying to reach will help you build your long-term online network. Read comment threads,
and monitor popular content to get an idea of what is important to your community. Before
posting, always ask: does this add value?
You can use Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr or your newsroom to publish this content. Get
creative. Some easy post, quick post types:
Explainers + Resource guides
Curated links, with a discussion question

Highlight users + their stories
Translate studies into layman’s terms, and put them in context
Expert Q&As (listen to community chatter to identify areas of confusion)
Once you join a community, you also really need to participate. This can be as simple as
up-voting people’s posts, favoriting tweets and liking Facebook statuses. When you talk to
people online, display your expertise and be conversational. These actions engender trust.

*Create an original source database with callouts: A callout is a survey with questions
specific to your reporting project. Answers are fed into a searchable, sortable database that
lets you follow up on story leads and sources.
Before you start:
*Know your scope: How many people does your story affect? Callouts are best for
widespread problems that affect many people.
*Know your timeline: How long will you report on this issue? Concentrated efforts
to build a database work best when you plan to be on a project for 4-6 months or
longer.
How to build a callout (detailed instructions)
*Provide context: explain the issue, emphasize its scope and explain why you’ve
chosen now to report on it. Examples: restraints in public schools, patient harm,
recovering heroin users
*Design questions for consistent data. For example, if you need to know how much
student loan debt an individual has, use a dropdown list with ranges, instead of a
text box. This will make it easier for you to analyze responses.
*Callouts should always include requests for first name, last name and an email
address and/or phone number for follow up. These email addresses in turn become a
marketing tool. Every time you publish a quick hit or have a project update, email
this list.
*Include at least one open text field, with a general question like “Anything else
you’d like to tell us about how this affected you?”
*Google Forms and Screendoor are both survey tools that make it easy to build
questionnaires. The latter will let people upload documents.
*Ask the crowd to help you gather data or annotate documents. The specifics of your
campaign will depend on your crowdsourcing project, but here are some guiding
philosophies and tips:
Create meaningful, but doable tasks. With Free The Files, ProPublica had TK files
from TK markets. But we decided to narrow it to 33 swing states, and request four
pieces of data from each document.
Use Transcribable to enable the crowd to annotate documents. This is an open
source tool that any organization with a Document Cloud account can use.
Create incentives. Ensure people know how their work will help solve a bigger
problem. But you can also use tips like leaderboards, or real-time results to
encourage participation.

Track and report success metrics. Your metrics will depend on your project, but this
could be number of documents reviewed, tips received or members in a group.
Report them on a daily or weekly basis to keep momentum going. Use a Google
spreadsheet to hand-compile participation rates.
Create groups for reporters or users to help each other with the project. Try
Facebook groups for ease of use, or Google Groups, for an option that relies on
email and archives conversation
Make it social: Give consistent updates. Create a hashtag for the project campaign.
When designing the project, create ways for people to easily share with their friends.
(For example, here is how to create a Twitter button.)

