Campus Coverage: College Sports
Speakers: Paula Lavigne, ESPN; Jodi Upton, USA Today; Brad Wolverton, The
Chronicle of Higher Education; Jill Riepenhoff, The Columbus Dispatch
There’s lots of fodder inside college athletic departments for meaty watchdog journalism.
Learn how to dissect NCAA financial documents, how to find good investigative stories
in the NCAA rule book and generally where to look to be a good muckraker inside a
department that is only comfortable with journalists who cover the ball. This session will
arm you with the tools you’ll need for when a scandal breaks out on your campus.
I. FOLLOW THE MONEY
How to investigate college athletics finances and coaches’ salaries.
1. The federal EADA report:

2. The much better EADA report schools fill out for the NCAA; get this with a

FOIA request.
Here are some examples of financial statements from Ole Miss:
http://www.olemisssports.com/school-bio/ole-eada-report.html

What you’ll find:
Categories, both total athletics and broken down by sport:


Cost of attendance/grant in aid



Ticket sales



Student fees – who is paying for athletics?



Guarantees



Marketing/licensing, etc.



Scholarships offered by sport

Salaries (see also the contracts and outside income reports) – this is
what’s on the coach’s W4 and includes bonuses. It is not the same thing as
annual pay and you can’t compare year over year




Total revenue and expenses

One important math formula: The NCAA uses these reports to measure what schools are
independent, meaning they do not rely on a subsidy (allocated revenue) to balance
expenses. This is critical in tracking the ‘arms race.’

Only five schools that have been in Division I for the past five years have decreased their
subsidy, in spite of double-digit revenue increases.

Two places you can look up the department-wide data:
http://www.usatoday.com/sports/college/schools/finances/
https://b2.caspio.com/dp.asp?AppKey=900c1000ea466e223e104a22814aC
Other links for spending on sports:
http://ope.ed.gov/athletics
http://www.usatoday.com/sports/college/schools/finances/
http://spendingdatabase.knightcommission.org/

Bottom line: These reports don’t substitute for a regular budget(s), but they are the best
way to compare schools in a conference, or growth in spending and revenue over time for
one school.

A few other sources for covering athletics, especially salaries:
3. 990s – from Guidestar.org. This is the ‘tax return’ for non profits. Many athletics
departments are set up as separately this way. This doesn’t shield them from
FOIA laws (generally). 990s can tell you how a private school coach is being
paid, but no detail and it lags a year or so.
4. Contracts – ask for all of a coach’s contracts, including marketing and others. As
of recently, you may also want to ask for documents on whether a school has
trademarked a coaches’ name/likeness/etc. See “Urban Meyer Knows.”
5. Outside income reports – schools are required to report to the NCAA any outside
income a coach may receive, from books, speeches, ads, etc. In some cases, it’s
hundreds of thousands.
Investigating overlooked funds:
The NCAA’s Student Assistance Fund, whose goal is to provide direct financial support
to players, draws from the association's multibillion-dollar media-rights deals. In recent
years it has distributed about $75 million annually to Division I athletes. The money has
helped colleges reimburse players for such things as clothing, health insurance, summer
school, and many other costs that their scholarships don't cover. But not all of the dollars
directly help students.
Story idea: Athletics compliance officers often keep a record of how this money flows
from the conferences to their member schools. Request a copy of the form, which
sometimes shows distributions across every university in the league. Be sure to follow up
with the compliance staff at the conference and university levels to make sure you
understand what the numbers mean.
Example: This Chronicle of Higher Education piece showed how some Big Ten
institutions were misusing Student Assistance Fund dollars.
http://chronicle.com/article/NCAA-Money-for-Student/136927/
II. CRIME AND PUNISHMENT
1. Crime
Athletes getting in trouble with the law certainly isn’t a new story, but it does seem as if
coaches and administrators are paying more attention – especially as the issue plays out
in the pros where we’ve seen ‘character issue’ play into where and whether a student
athlete ends up in the draft.

Questions you should be asking now:
-

How many athletes are getting in trouble with the law?

-

How do their numbers/cases compare to the overall student body?

-

Are athletic departments taking steps to prevent criminal behavior?

-

How have athletic departments responded to athletes in trouble with the law?

-

Are there certain ‘hot spots’ for trouble?

-

Alcohol / drug offenses?

-

Don’t forget to check on the coaches as well!

Sources of data:
-

Campus police.

-

City police.

-

County sheriff.

-

Jail.

-

911 calls

-

Municipal and county court

Know the public records law and how it applies to campus and local law enforcement
before you request records.
There are stories almost daily about student athletes getting arrested. No one has a
completely comprehensive database of these arrests, but you can see what comes up on
Arrest Nation : The Sports Arrest Database http://arrestnation.com/ .
Tips:
-

Make sure you have the student athlete’s correct name. You’d be surprised
how many kids use abbreviations (AJ, TJ, etc.) or nicknames. You need the
real name in order to search for any criminal records.

-

Don’t just rely on court records. A lot of crimes involving athletes don’t end
up in charges being filed. Request records of “incident” and “arrest” reports
from the police/sheriff’s offices, and booking records from the jail, to find
cases that may have never been reported.

-

Even at many private universities, campus police departments are still subject
to public records laws.

-

Public records requests of correspondence among coaches, university
administrator, and law enforcement can yield great details on how crimes
were addressed, but be prepared to fight student privacy/FERPA redactions.

-

Never rely entirely on online reports of crimes or on previous media reports
for the status of an ongoing case; Always go directly to the court or law
enforcement agency to get current information.

Examples:
-- A 2008 ESPN data-driven story (ESPN.com version only) examining the propensity of
Penn State football players to run into trouble with the law.
http://espn.go.com/video/clip?id=3506616
2. Sexual assault
Sexual assault cases involving student athletes is a hot topic right now. The White House
recently formed a task force to study sexual assaults on campus. In May, the U.S.
Department of Education released figures showing that 55 schools across the U.S. are
facing federal investigation for the way they handle sexual abuse allegations by their
students. It’s unknown how many instances of sexual assault on campus involve student
athletes, but because those cases make news, they are often the ones by which the system
– both the university and law enforcement – are judged for how they handle such reports.
Questions you should be asking now:
-

Is my university one of the 55? If so, can I find out whether that investigation
is related to a student athlete? http://espn.go.com/collegesports/story/_/id/10867156/55-schools-facing-title-ix-sex-assault-probes

-

Again, numbers: How many student athletes have been accused of sexual
assault? What has happened to those accusations? (See crime tips for more on
how to do this.) Are any of them the subject of multiple incidents/allegations?

-

How have law enforcement/prosecutors responded?

-

What action did the athletic department take? Is there a pattern?

-

Is my university named in a Title IX lawsuit?

-

Has my university been following the reporting rules of the Clery Act?
http://clerycenter.org/summary-jeanne-clery-act

-

Has my university been properly conducting investigations as spelled out
under the U.S. Department of Education’s Title IX provisions?
http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/qa-201404-title-ix.pdf

-

What is the athletic department doing to prevent incidents of sexual assault?

-

What do local rape crisis centers have to say? Where does my university stand
in the opinion of national victim advocate groups?

-

Several of the tips are the same from the crime example.

-

Remember many reports of sexual assault my never end up in court because
of the resistance of prosecutors to press charges. Make sure you check
incident reports.

-

You may have a battle over records: Know that there is a specific exemption
to FERPA for disciplinary outcomes of a violent or sex crime.

-

Come up with a solid strategy for getting alleged victims to talk. They might –
and rightfully so – fear retaliation, especially in cases involving high-profile
athletes. Be prepared to consider concessions for anonymity and decide your
position on that ahead of time.

-

Sometimes an incident won’t generate a criminal file, but will prompt the
alleged victim to ask for a protective order. Check the courts for
protective/restraining orders in cases where you can’t find a police or other
criminal court file.

Tips:

Examples:
New York Times April 2014 story about flaws in the rape inquiry of Heisman Trophy
winner Jameis Winston:
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/04/16/sports/errors-in-inquiry-on-rapeallegations-against-fsu-jameis-winston.html?_r=0
ESPN Spring 2014 stories about Missouri officials not responding to rape allegations by
a college swimmer who later committed suicide.
http://espn.go.com/espn/otl/story/_/id/10323102/university-missouri-officials-did-notpursue-rape-case-lines-investigation-finds

“Victory and Ruins.” A 2009 Seattle Times investigation of criminal conduct in the
University of Washington football program found that the behavior was often excused or
overlooked.
http://seattletimes.com/html/victoryandruins/
3. Stadium security/safety
Whether they’re falling over railings, falling sick over tainted chicken, or falling victim
to a drunken fan from the other team, people who go to college sporting events have a lot
to keep an eye on off the field. You can take any one of these story ideas and localize it.
Maybe with a little digging – and some data – you can find a deeper story.
-

Fan ejections and/or arrests: College stadium officials vary in how they deal
with rowdy fans and what agency (i.e. campus police, hired security, local
cops) are responsible for keeping track. See what the protocol is at your
stadium and then ask for the data. Do you see any trends among sections?
Opponents? Time of day? Types of problems? Response times?

-

Concessions: Is that hamburger going to turn your seventh-inning stretch into
a seventh-inning sprint to the bathroom? Ask for food safety inspection
reports of the concession stands and restaurants in the stadiums where your
college teams play. How many are incurring ‘critical violations’ and what are
they for? How many repeat offenders?

-

Worker safety: Is your stadium on par for keeping its workers safe? Check
state regulator and federal OSHA data (available through the NICAR database
library) for incidents and, if available, workers compensation claims in your
state.

-

Equal access: Are venues and events accessible to people with disabilities.
Check who regulates ADA compliance in your city/county/state and check for
any complaints, investigations or enforcement actions relating to access for
people with disabilities.

-

Security: Although it might be hard to get information due to public records
exemptions, consider a story on how well equipped the stadium is in case of
an emergency. What is being done to prevent acts of terrorism? To respond to
natural disasters? For some ideas, check out the National Center for Spectator
Sports Safety and Security at https://www.ncs4.com/.

-

Accidents: How many people are getting injured or falling ill at the stadiums
and what’s the cause? Check 911 calls to the stadium address and police
incident reports.

-

Lawsuits: Are lawsuits being filed against universities, stadium operators for
negligence?

Examples:
See this USA Today story for ideas on holes in stadium security:
http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/2013/05/02/stadium-security-boston-marathonkentucky-derby/2130875/.
“What’s lurking in your stadium food?” An ESPN summer 2010 examination of food
safety at concession stands at all pro-league stadiums in North America reveals some
unsavory practices.
http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/eticket/story?page=100725/stadiumconcessions (Can
easily be replicated for college venues)
Good local story out of Foxboro, Mass., in October 2011, that could lead to a bigger
investigation: Do college games draw rowdier crowds than pro games? In this case, they
had the fortune of testing both in the same venue:
http://www.thesunchronicle.com/news/college-football-draws-fewer-fans-morearrests/article_f3a35d97-8bb2-5815-a137-287380fc62c3.html
III. THE FUTURE OF THE NCAA
The NCAA is facing some of the biggest challenges in its 100-year history, with dozens
of lawsuits involving player rights, concussions, and other health and safety issues. At the
same time, the association is embarking on a series of changes that could radically alter
the look of intercollegiate athletics in the next five to 10 years.
1. Paying players. The highest-profile lawsuit involves Ed O’Bannon, a former UCLA
basketball star, whose federal antitrust case threatens to upend the ncaa’s amateur model.
If the plaintiffs prevail, colleges will face the prospect of sharing revenues from
television and other licensing agreements with players for the first time.
Questions to ask/what to look for:


In what ways would athletic departments change if players were allowed to enter
into group licensing deals or sign endorsement contracts?



Where would the money come from to pay players?



How will the NCAA remain relevant in a world where the conferences and
schools have more power?



As athletic departments have to share more of their riches with players, they will
have to make some tough choices about what they can and can’t do. Who wins?
Who loses?



If you believe the NCAA’s rhetoric, the changes will lead to the elimination of
sports, a drop in jobs, and a major identity crisis in college sports. In what ways is
any of that happening?



Several lawsuits on the horizon, including one by Jeffrey Kessler, a high-profile
plaintiff’s attorney, could pose even bigger threats to the NCAA’s way of doing
business. Some of those claims target conferences and individual colleges. How
are your campus leaders preparing?



Talk to players and former players. With all the legal challenges flying around,
including a push to unionize athletes at Northwestern University, players are more
comfortable than ever speaking out.



The O’Bannon trial lasted three weeks. What came through your athletic
director’s inbox during that time?

2. Congressional scrutiny
While the national media’s attention has been focused on the O’Bannon and Kessler
claims, the oversight body with the most power to affect change, Congress, is poised to
investigate college sports in as big a way as it has in decades.
Questions to ask:


Which members of Congress have the most ambitious agendas for reforming
sports?



What are their different ideas and how likely are they to make it into legislation?



Why have past Congressional efforts to curb problems in college sports failed,
and what are lawmakers doing to make sure that doesn’t happen this time?



The NCAA and Big 12 Conference recently hired outside lobbyists. Who are they
and how will they shape lawmakers’ opinions in the coming months?

IV. MEDICAL CARE

Two years ago, the NCAA hired its first chief medical officer, Brian Hainline, a
neurologist whose tenure has been marked by criticism that the association has long
failed to protect the health and safety of athletes.

1. Concussions
Dozens of former athletes have sued the association over problems they have experienced
years after they were concussed. Many of those lawsuits have been consolidated into a
class-action claim, and the association is in settlement discussions to resolve the first
wave of problems. But with concussion research at an early stage, and more and more
players willing to take on colleges for their deficiencies in protecting them, this issue will
be around for years.
What to look for:


How are colleges responding to the claims?



What protocols do colleges or conferences have to protect athletes and how have
those changed?



When and how are athletes tested for concussion, and what measurements do
colleges use to ensure they are returned to play safely?



What types of players are at the most risk for concussion, and how are medical
teams treating them?



How do colleges protect their medical staffs from coaches looking to return
players to the field too soon?



Why are the Ivy League and the Big Ten the only conferences with significant
limits on contact in football practice?



How soon will the other major conferences move to limit contact?



Source possibilities: former players, player advocates, researchers, medical
professionals.

Examples:
“League of Denial,” the groundbreaking book by ESPN’s Steve Fainaru and Mark
Fainaru-Wada, investigates the NFL’s decades-long failure to protect players from
concussions and the league’s denial of the problem.

Nathan Fenno, now with the Los Angeles Times, has done important work tracking
concussion litigation against the NFL and colleges. Here’s a database that he and his
colleagues created to track more than 300 lawsuits filed against the NFL:
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/jun/20/price-of-pain-many-ex-redskinsamong-those-suing-n/
Here are a couple of other stories he’s done related to colleges:
“Internal NCAA emails raise questions about concussion policy.”
http://www.washingtontimes.com/blog/screen-play/2013/jul/20/internal-ncaa-emailsraise-questions-about-concuss
“Blind side to concussions: NFL’s latest legal blows give feeble push to NCAA.”
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2013/feb/5/ncaa-concussions-protocol-lagsbehind-nfls-concern/?page=all
“Coach makes the call.” A 2013 Chronicle of Higher Education survey found that several
dozen athletic trainers at the NCAA’s highest level felt pressured to return concussed
players to the field sooner than it was medically safe.
http://chronicle.com/article/Trainers-Butt-Heads-With/141333/
2. Mental health.
Dr. Hainline, the NCAA’s chief medical officer, has said that mental health issues are his
top concern, which says a lot given the seriousness of the concussion problem. This area
is largely unexplored, in part because players aren’t comfortable talking about it. But a
recent ESPN investigation into the death of a University of Missouri swimmer broke
important ground in this area.
Questions to ask:


What are college leaders doing to address the problem?



When and how are athletes tested for mental health problems?



What are some good models of preventive care? The issue is a big enough
concern in the NFL that the Seattle Seahawks have an extensive testing regimen
for players. Pete Carroll, the team’s head coach, told ESPN last year that he would
eventually like to have daily mental health check-ins for his players.

V. LEADERSHIP CHALLENGES
After a series of high-profile scandals in college sports, the NCAA enacted changes
aimed at holding top officials more accountable. The changes have put college presidents,
athletic directors, and coaches on the hook for violations more than ever. While colleges

work hard to shield their problems from the public eye, there are still ways to investigate
the power brokers and the people under them to find out what’s happening on their watch.
Where to look:
College presidents. Many of them use email regularly, and receive a volume of
interesting material. A few years ago, three enterprising Seattle Times reporters
uncovered emails from a wealthy University of Washington supporter urging the
president to fire its head football coach and athletic director, saying he was willing to
donate $100,000 each for their dismissal. Here’s that story:
(http://seattletimes.com/html/huskies/2004116851_uwemails10m.html)
College leaders are also in the middle of the action on conference realignment, and their
emails are filled with letters from anxious fans and donors. Some of them include their
cell phone numbers and other contact information, making them ready sources.
The underlings. The decisions get made at the top, but most of the interesting stuff
happens below them. Spend time building connections with people throughout the
department, paying particular attention to former employees, former athletes, graduate
assistants, contractors, and tutors.
What to ask for:


Among the issues that come across leaders’ desks are data on conference payouts,
realignment talk, stadium or facility upgrades, deferred maintenance problems,
cost overruns, disgruntled donors, NCAA changes, and more details than you
probably care to know about how old white men spend their time away from the
job.

Tips:


Good connections and regular conversations with people in the department will
help you know what documents and correspondence to request.



The more narrow your request, the better. If you’re just fishing around, keep your
request limited to a few days of a leader’s emails. One records request I did last
year for three days of a chancellor’s correspondence took more than a year for the
university to fill.



If you want outgoing correspondence from leaders, you can often find it by
making requests to see the emails of their executive assistants.

Examples:

During the Jim Tressel investigation at Ohio State University in 2011, The Columbus
Dispatch turned up a host of correspondence detailing the coach’s repeated contacts with
his star quarterback’s mentors, illustrating a pattern of deceit that helped get him fired.
http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2011/06/07/details-revealed-on-tresselcalls.html
“Cache of messages reveals leadership challenge of Maryland move to Big Ten.” A year
after the Terps announced they were leaving the ACC, The Chronicle revisited the
controversial decision by reviewing thousands of emails from top officials.
http://chronicle.com/article/Maryland-Emails-Reveal/143455/

