Investigative Reporters & Editors
2014 Conference
Complaints: A roadmap for killer stories
Contact: Brandon.Stahl@startribune.com

*

612-673-4626

Getting information on government employees and licensed professionals

First:



Know your state’s laws for what you can and cannot get when it comes to complaints.



In Minnesota, 99 percent of the time the only record you’ll get on a complaint is when an agency
has taken an action against an employee or licensed professional.



But you can still get summary data: if a government agency received 10,000 complaints, but took
action only 100 times = story. If a medical board received 10,000 complaints, and took away a
license 1 percent of the time = story.

Second:



For whatever target you’re investigating, request a “universe” of cases (an entire year or years,
an entire city department or agency department). If you pick and choose, you’ll get accused of
cherry picking.



When an agency has taken an action, Minnesota requires agencies to list reasons it took that
action: the nature of the complaint, the investigation it did, what it found. Sometimes they’ll say
how many complaints they received before they took an action. Then they’ll have to say what
action they took and defend that action. The agencies have done the work for you. This is a
goldmine of information.

Third:



You could start getting hundreds of pages of records. Take the time to enter your data into a
spreadsheet. You can organize the records, search them and analyze for how many times certain
terms come up. This can be considerable work on the front-end, but will save hours and hours of
work when you’re at the end of your reporting and you start writing.

Other Data/records to get that will bolster your stories:



Police and criminal records. If you see an employee or care professional that’s been busted for
drugs, for example, chances are there’s a criminal history.



Lawsuits: Malpractice, civil cases, judgments, federal suits. Appeals cases have loose lips.



Death data/databases – if you’re investigating care providers, often records of disciplinary actions
will provide the date and location of a patient death. Using that information, use the death data

(which should be maintained by state department of health) to identify the deceased/family
members.



Is the profession you’re looking licensed? In Minnesota, you can find the list at
http://mn.gov/elicense/state_agencies/licensebyagency.jsp Nationwide:
http://www.brbpub.com/freeresources/pubrecsitesOccStates.aspx



Search your state’s office of administrative hearings (supposed to resolve administrative
disputes) and attorney general filings for cases.

