The Kingmakers:
Tracking money and influence in politics
Tipsheet by Michael Beckel, Center for Public Integrity

Question: Where do I find primary source information about how much money companies, unions
and other organizations are spending on federal lobbying?
Answer: Thanks to the Lobbying Disclosure Act (LDA), regular reports are required to be filed
with both the U.S. Senate and U.S. House of Representatives. These reports must be submitted
each quarter. Here are the dates of the deadlines.

Q: Where do I find primary source information about how much money is being raised and spent
by candidates, parties and political action committees including super PACs?
A: The Federal Election Commission (FEC) is the central repository of all such information.
Politicians and political groups need to file regular campaign finance reports with the agency based
on this schedule.

Q: What other organizations actively monitor money in politics?
A: Both the Center for Responsive Politics and the Sunlight Foundation are great resources for
reporters, with numerous tools and data sets. At the state level, the National Institute on Money in
State Politics gathers campaign finance data. The Sunlight Foundation also tracks fundraising events
via their Political Party Time project.

Q: Why don’t Senate candidates file their campaign finance reports electronically?
A: Good question. Bipartisan legislation exists that would require senators and Senate candidates to
e-file, just as their House and presidential counterparts do. In the meantime, some senators and
Senate candidates also voluntarily e-file copies of their reports, which can be found on the FEC’s
website here. About 21 current senators voluntarily e-file, as the Center for Public Integrity has
reported.

Q: Where do I find reports that unions must file with the Department of Labor?
A: The Department of Labor makes these reports available online. Search so-called LM-2 forms by
“payee” or “payer” here.

Q: How many corporations voluntarily self-report information about their giving to trade
associations and other politically active nonprofits?
A: An increasing number of companies disclose this information. The Center for Political
Accountability monitors this issue. In January 2014, the Center for Public Integrity published our
“Dark Money Inc.” project, which tallied information from voluntary corporate filings and
unveiled this interactive database to highlight the financial connections between companies and
politically active nonprofits. These voluntary reports are frequently found on companies’ “good
government” sections of their websites.

