Top Sources of Information on a 990
Annual 990 tax returns filed by nonprofit organizations are submitted long after the group’s spending
takes place, and they don’t include much detail. Here’s where to look to get the most out of them.

1) Page 1 - Summary:
Provides a wealth of quick, useful data, including:



Employee Identification Number (EIN)



Number of employees and volunteers



Name and address of principal officer



Address (and whether the address has changed) and phone # of organization



Fiscal year covered -- often is not a calendar year or a conventional fiscal year



Notifications of termination, amendment, name change, and/or request for exempt status



Revenue, expenditure and grant totals, comparison with previous year

2) Page 7 - Board Members
Provides salary information and the hours per week, on average, devoted to the organization. It's not,
however, a complete list of individuals associated with the group.

3) Pages 3 and 10 - Political Expenses
The most detailed breakdown of the group's expenses that a 990 offers. Though it lacks crucial details, it
does give the public a peek at just how a particular politically active group is defining its activities to
different agencies. For example, American Action Network reported $18.9 million in election-related
spending to the Federal Election Commission (FEC) in 2010. But in its 990 filed with the IRS, it reported
that $17 million of its $25.7 million in expenditures went towards "lobbying." Both can’t be true, at least as
most people would define those categories.

4) Schedule B - Donations
Groups don't have to publicly disclose where they're getting their money. But they do have to disclose that
to the IRS, and they have to release to the public the pages showing donations over $5,000, with the
names and addresses redacted. This can be useful for seeing whether an organization received millions
from a single source, for example, or had many smaller donors.

5) Schedule C - Political Campaign and Lobbying Activities
If the organization answered "yes" to one or all of questions 3 through 5 on Page 3, the organization is
required to file a Schedule C. Not all organizations file this schedule; some groups that spent millions in
2010, according to FEC reports, didn't report any political spending to the IRS. In addition, the totals on
Schedule C forms are often very different from the totals reported to the FEC. Pay close attention to Part
IV, which requires a description of the group's Schedule C-reported activities.

6) Schedule I - Grants
This is where recipients of grants given by the group are listed. Terrific for helping figure out a network.

7) Page 8, Section B - Outside Contractors
Nonprofits must report their five top outside contractors receiving more than $100,000. Here you’ll find
more names and addresses that can advance your reporting, and brief descriptions of the services
provided (e.g., "media placement"). Section B.2 requires a listing of the total number of contractors paid
more than $100,000.
QUESTIONS? Contact us at press@crp.org.

