Tip Sheet
Profiling Investigators in powerful public agencies: Deep Dives II: Broadcast
Investigate each and every person involved in your news story because it
provides a window into his or her actual identity, motivation, and veracity. You
need to understand how the people you are going up against work.
Begin with establishing their identity and all names used. Date of Birth and
Social Security numbers are imperative so you don’t confuse your subjects with
persons with similar names. This will keep you and your employer out of court.
•

Seek out defense attorneys who may know about the investigator you’re
investigating from previous court cases.

•

Seek out and find video depositions in court cases and watch them closely.

•

Study grand jury transcripts in as many cases as you can.

•

What makes them tick? Look for attitude and arrogant behaviors (not afraid
to tell you how great they are).

•

Study behavior under oath.

•

Watch how they answer questions by the opposing attorney.

•

Find out where they live, what they drive, what they like to do when they’re
not working.

Check your subjects against, court civil, criminal and family law records. Never
overlook the federal PACER system.
Bankruptcy records very important because they reveal former spouses, victims
and enemies of the bankrupt.
Voter registrations, dog, fishing and hunting licenses tell us much about lifestyle
and provide surprising phone numbers that uncover business entities and
employers.
Motor vehicle records tell us about addresses, driving habits and vehicles and
their liens. They also have photos.
You need the assistance of a licensed Private Investigator for this and that PI has
to determine a valid reason to access the data. Most everything that made the
subject newsworthy makes them a potential litigation target. That alone is a valid
reason to access the material.
County recorder’s records provide a huge amount of information about
judgments, liens, property transactions, spouses and even military discharges.

