Tip Sheet IRE Conference 2014 –Digging Deeper with on camera interviews
Politicians, Government Employees and the focus of your story should not be allowed to say “no comment” over
the phone or send a response to your questions via e-mail
Tell the person or their PIO the subject of your story has the prerogative to refuse to answer your questions, but
you will ask them on camera in either a Scheduled Interview on their turf or Unscheduled Interview.
You must develop a reputation for doing the Unscheduled Interview if they refuse your “sit down” request…if they
think you really won’t do it, they may blow you off
In the Scheduled Interview
Prepare like you are an attorney in a courtroom and know the answer to every question before you ask it.
Do your research and have the “smoking gun” documents with you to show and get comment from your
subject
Make sure your photographer mics you as well as your interviewee so you can use your questions
Talk to your photog about getting two shots when you are asking the tough questions and then zoom in
tight if the subject is having a rough time answering the question
If the subject or PIO asks to also tape thee interview encourage them to do it and then make a public
records request for the tape. They will usually tape you and now you have a two camera shoot courtesy of
the agency.
If your station has a go-pro try to have it set up for reversals
Save the killer question until you are sure you have enough of an interview in case the interviewee ends
the interview (it has happened more than once)
Roll play you questions and interviewee’s answers in your head before your sit down.. Anticipate what he
might say and what you will come back with if the truth is stretched
Let the interviewee walk into a corner where there is no escape
The unscheduled interview
Good places to do themNews Conferences (if you go to the a news conference be considerate
of the GA reporters and let them get their “on topic” questions
answered, because your question could end the newser )
Government Meetings
Outside the Offices in Public buildings
At their parking space in a public building

It’s not an ambush if you tell them you are coming!
Request their schedule and calendar- (in Florida that is public information)

Determine the one question you want to ask, because you may only get one question…have
other questions ready.. but ask yourself if I can only get one sound bite…or ask one question on
camera, what would it be
Roll play your question and interviewees answer. i.e. if you’re asking about spending and an
elected of government official says “No Comment” Your reply on camera should be
Something like “So you don’t think the taxpayers deserve an explanation of the thousands of
dollars you spent.”
Be prepared for the interviewee to get angry or even physical-if he goes to push the camera out
of the way your response must be “Touch the camera and you will go to jail.” And then you must
follow through with a call to the police because you have evidence of a battery on tape
Allow enough time before the story airs to attempt to get your subject. You may not be
successful the first time. Be patient and persistent
Your I-phone can be a great tool for recording an interview from someone who is trying to run
from you. ..Put it on the “selfie mode” and record the video as you walk or run and talk with your
subject.
The I-phone can also be a great tool to record your audio if you are asking a question at a news
conference where your photog has to plug into a mult box….

PIO’s and Attorney’s must become invisible to you. If you ask a question and the Attorney says no questions, or if
the PIO says we are not addressing that topic, politely say, “Excuse me I’m not talking to you.” And then turn to
your subject and ask the question again. It can make for some interesting exchanges
Be firm, but try not to come off as a bully….This is particularly important for male reporters interviewing a woman
who is the subject of your story

If the subject gets stuck on a response and there is silence, don’t say a word until the subject starts speaking.
Sometimes the silence can be your best sound bite.

Most importantly know everything you can about the issue and the subject, be armed with documents, do your
research and roll play the answers and your response and let them make themselves look bad

Mike Deeson- mdeeson@wtsp.com (813)245-0320

