Brent Schrotenboer
Reporter, USA TODAY Sports
Email: bschrotenb@usatoday.com; Twitter: @Schrotenboer
Lessons from the field (and off): Covering the NFL and its intersection with local
governments
Team doctors, lawsuits, crime and punishment


The team doctors’ conflict: Caring for the players’ long-term health while getting paid by
owners who want to win games now.



Marketing agreements: Many team doctor groups pay the team as a corporate sponsor.
Are teams getting the best doctors or the highest bidders?



Are there any public-health issues with your team’s doctors? Doctors are regulated by
state governments, and their conflicts with patients often end up in local court.



Public safety and law enforcement: Crime in the NFL continues to get attention with
high-profile cases. But context is key. The NFL arrest rate is about half of the generalpopulation rate, though problem areas persist. Drunken driving remains the league’s
biggest criminal problem, with nearly 30 percent of player arrests stemming from such
charges.

What Can You Do As a Reporter?


As concussion and medication issues continue to boil, know your team doctors and
medical staff. Where did they come from? Are they big sponsors of the team? While
many NFL doctors are among the best in their field, it’s worth knowing more about their
relationships with teams in light of the ongoing player health discussion.



Check their government license records and litigation history. License violations or
citations usually can be found on state medical board websites. Lawsuit information
obviously can be looked up at the local court. One seemingly unrelated business
lawsuit involving team doctors can easily bloom into something more relevant to the
public interest.



Check for trends and context when players are arrested. Here is one tool for reference
with more than 700 active NFL player arrests since 2000:
http://www.usatoday.com/sports/nfl/arrests/



The arrest database is a work in progress, but concept behind it can be useful – to track
the data and details over time to spot trends or other larger issues. Keep these issues in
mind as it relates to that data: Is your team’s arrest rate high or low, and why? Do these
arrests often stem from the same nightclub or area of the city? How did the arrests
originate – i.e. was it a traffic stop, checkpoint or complaint? Such trends can shed light
on larger public-safety issues and help provide a fair portrayal of the situation.

