Frenchie Robles’ Mantra:
“Just because the police and prosecutor said it, does not make it true!”
To that end.:
1. Don’t forget the suspects!: too often as journalists we take whatever police and
prosecutors say and run with it, without bothering to find out whether what the facts
they offer are true. You’d be surprised what tips you’ll get from the accused –
both innocent and guilty.
2. Visit inmates in Jail: Depending on where you live, the procedures for visiting
inmates are different. In NY, you can show up as a visitor on visiting day if you
are willing to say you are a “friend.” Otherwise, if deadline is not an issue,
Write the suspect a letter. You can either give them the opportunity to write you
back or set up an official interview approved by the Department of Corrections in
your Home State. Don’t forget to ask the inmate if he/she has filed any public
records requests. Inmates in prison for lengthy terms spend decades sending public
records requests and often getting amazing results – with nobody to share them
with. If you don’t have time for this, often their family members are well-versed
in setting up three-way calls. Talk to the mom, girlfriend, etc. and they can set this
up on the fly.
3. Have your office phone set up to receive calls from inmates. Depending on where
you live, this may mean opening up a pre-paid account so you are ready to take an
inmate’s call.
4. When writing about old cases, don’t forget retired judges: You would be surprised
on the notes they keep and things they remember. Track them down. Maybe
there’s a box in their garage just waiting for you.
5. Find civil rights lawyers who have sued the city police/D.A. in the past. Even if
they are not working the case you are writing about, they are often sitting on a ton
of documents they collected for their lawsuits.
6. LinkedIn premium membership: Take the webinar offered each month on LinkedIn
For Journalists, and you will get an upgraded membership. This will allow you
conduct broader searches.
7. The police initial version of events in a police-involved shooting is almost never
true. Visit the scene yourself, find the witnesses, talk to the suspect if he/she is still
alive. Go back months later and revisit a police shooting you already wrote about to
find what new details have emerged. You will be shocked to see how the story has
changed.
8. Read old case files. Read the case files of other cases the suspect you are covering
was charged with in the past, even if they seem unrelated. Are there patterns? Is he
arrested by the same cop all the time? Do the same witnesses reappear? You may
learn the names of informants or family members you’ve been looking for.
Sometimes there are hand-written letters in the files that make great color. If your
suspect was arrested with some other person in the past, read their old case files too.
You never know what’s in there.
9. My best google tip: Don’t forget quotation marks.: “Suspect name” and
“Police officer’s name” --- These quote marks help you narrow down your
searches. You may find that your suspect was in a police athletic league with the
homicide detective who arrested him – but only if you find a way to eliminate a
few hundred unnecessary google hits.
10. DON’T LET THEM WEAR YOU OUT. If the police or D.A. are dragging their
feet, it’s because they are probably hiding something and are hoping you will give
up and move on to something else. This is a police tactic that must work, because
they all do it. Set up reminders to yourself to ask for those statistics, interview,

police report or whatever again and again and again until you get what you want.
Be relentless. Keep writing on the topic and keep it on the radar even if you think
no one else cares. Eventually, someone will.

