BULLETPROOFING TIP SHEET
By Mark Schoofs
BuzzFeed
Choosing the right reporter
If hiring an investigative reporter from outside your shop:
 Have they landed big projects?
o Investigative reporting isn’t just hard, it’s hard in specific
ways that people who have never done it don’t
understand.
 Can they think both big and small?
o Choose big targets, make the nut graf as sweeping as
possible.
o Being a little OCD helps. (h/t Steve Engelberg.)
 Can they write?
o The web is the hardest taskmaster. If the story slows
down, if the mind wanders, an infinite other reads are
just a click away.
 No jerks or prima donnas.
o Life is too short.
 Would you trust this person with your life?
If promoting from within:
 All of the above (except, obviously, the first point.)
 Do their breaking news and step-back stories make you think,
“Wow, that’s really good.”
o Do those stories have facts that no other reporter
uncovered?

o Do they tend to get documents, not just interviews?
 Do they persevere? No check-the-box reporters!
o “Reporting begins when someone says no.”
 Do they want to learn?
No surprises
Hat tip: Alix Freedman, WSJ.
 When people in a story — especially the main subjects of the
story —should know, in advance, everything about them that
the story will include. In other words, they should never feel
surprised by what they read, hear or see in the final published
version.
 “No surprises” is not giving your subjects control over your
story. You are not seeking permission to publish.
o Subjects of your story can feel outrage, despair, or fury.
What they cannot feel is surprise.
 Inform everyone in the story everything the story is likely to say
about them.
o Include the thesis (nut graf) of the story. (Don’t just just
give disconnected facts.)
o Best to do it by phone or in person.
 Check off every point to make sure you don’t miss
anything.
o If you can’t do it by phone, send an email and/or
couriered letter laying out what you plan to publish.
 Do not send a draft of the actual story.
 Such a letter should be edited and, often, lawyered.
 Beware of libeling third parties in such letters.
 It serves as final fact-checking.
 It gets people to talk.

o Many sources won’t talk until/unless they see everything
you have about them.
o Secondary sources often offer up more, or remember
some additional information.
 It’s ethical.
o Even a rogue should know what you’re planning say
about them.
 It springs from and demands personal integrity and intellectual
honesty.
o Many reporters either don’t do “no surprises,” do it halfway, or, if they work in magazines, relegate the job to fact
checkers.
 These calls can be confrontational and unpleasant.
o But if you’re willing to tell millions of people something
about a person, you should be willing to tell that same
thing to the person directly.

