CAMPUS COVERAGE: STUDENT LOANS, DEBT AND AID
• Lauren Asher
• President, Institute for College Access & Success
• lasher@ticas.org
• Holly Hacker
• Education Reporter, The Dallas Morning News
• (214) 977-8749
• hhacker@dallasnews.com
• Gordon Russell
• Managing Editor/Investigations, The Advocate
• grussell@theadvocate.com

STUDENT DEBT FACTS, DATA, AND CONSUMER RESOURCES
 State-by-State Student Debt Map: Interactive map provides state- and collegelevel data on student loan borrowing in the United States. Select a state, then
click through to the “sortable table” for more detail and the ability to sort schools
by average debt, tuition, and other factors.
 Cohort Default Resource Page: Our resource page on the federal student loan
cohort default rates (CDRs) explains how they work and has links to useful
background and tools, including sortable spreadsheets for two- and three-year
CDRS that make federal school-level data easier to use and understand.
 College InSight: College InSight is a unique interactive web site that makes data
on college affordability, diversity, success for undergraduates at more than
11,000 U.S. schools easy to find, compare, and analyze. In addition to collegelevel data drawn from multiple sources, it features totals and averages for states,
sectors, and other groupings of colleges. You can easily create and download
your own custom tables as you explore and compare individual colleges, states,
and sectors.
 Quick Facts About Student Debt: one-page fact sheet with national figures on
student loan debt at graduation for public, nonprofit, and for-profit four-year
colleges – together and separately -- as well as Pell Grant recipients. Borrowing
rates and average debt are highest at for-profit colleges, and Pell recipients are
more likely to have loans and owe thousands more than other BA recipients.
 Private Loans: Facts and Trends: Private education loans are one of the
riskiest ways to pay for college, and the private loan market is growing again.

This fact sheet has key findings from our analysis of the most recent available
federal data and reveals four in 10 private loan borrowers could be using more
affordable federal loans.
 Data Show No Evidence of "Over-Borrowing" at Community Colleges:
Some community colleges have expressed concerns that their students borrow
more than they need in federal loans. However, the data do not support claims of
"over-borrowing" at community colleges. This fact sheet shows that the vast
majority of community college students do not borrow federal loans at all, and the
few who do borrow do not take out large loan amounts.
 Reducing Federal Loan Eligibility Would Hurt Students at For-Profit
Colleges: Some for-profit college industry lobbyists blame students for the high
debt and default levels at their schools, claiming that their students borrow more
than they need in federal loans. This fact sheet shows there’s no evidence to
support this claim, and giving colleges greater authority to reduce aid eligibility
will make it harder for students to pay for and complete college.
 IBRinfo.org: provides reliable consumer-oriented information about incomedriven repayment plans and Public Service Loan Forgiveness, federal programs
that can help make student loan repayment more manageable. Includes a handy
table that explains the main features of the four income-driven plans.
 studentloanborrowerassistance.org: The National Consumer Law Center’s
online resource for borrowers trying to figure out their options, especially those
who may already be struggling with repayment. Also includes research and
media materials from NCLC’s Student Loan Borrower Assistance Project.
CALIFORNIA
 College Costs and Affordability in California: This graphic shows how
affordability at California public colleges is about more than just the dollar cost. It
spells out how much of their family’s resources students at different income
levels are expected to devote to paying for college, with the lowest income
students facing the highest affordability obstacles -- despite lower net prices.
This is a supplement to the testimony of TICAS research director Debbie
Cochrane at the California Assembly Budget Subcommittee #2 on Education
Finance hearing on the Cal Grant program.
 Cal Grant Snapshot: Illustrated fact sheet on the Cal Grant program, which
provides more than $1.5 billion in need-based financial aid to California's college
students but leaves many low-income students behind.

True Cost of College
www.dallasnews.com/collegecosts
America’s colleges and universities are quietly shifting the burden of tuition
increases onto low-income students. Yet many wealthy families are seeing their
costs rise more slowly, or even fall, an analysis of federal data shows.
The trend could further widen the gap between the nation’s rich and poor, say
financial aid experts and a growing number of university leaders. They worry about
college degrees drifting beyond the economic reach of many students.
Tuition Tracker
www.tuitiontracker.org
Don't let the sticker price fool you. This tool shows what students really pay for college,
based on their family income. Search from more than 3,700 colleges and universities in
the United States.
Webinar on college costs and using Tuition Tracker
www.ewa.org/webinar/how-much-does-college-really-cost
Holly Hacker of The Dallas Morning News and Jon Marcus of The Hechinger Report
give an overview of college costs and Tuition Tracker, and how reporters can analyze
the data to get their own stories.
U.S. Department of Education data
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS)
nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter/
The main source of higher education data from the Ed Department. You can download
entire data files or pull partial ones.
We used the following data files: Institutional Characteristics, Enrollments, Student
Financial Aid, and Graduation Rates.
College Navigator
nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/
Look up a specific college to see what kind of data you can get from IPEDS, including
the net price data. It includes some, but not all, of the data we used for Tuition Tracker.
Click on the Net Price tab for a detailed explanation of Average Net Price, and which
students are (and aren't) included. If you write about net price, you'll want to review this
part carefully.
Suspicious Scholarships

The Advocate partnered with WWL-TV to examine a program through which each of
Louisiana’s 144 legislators gets to award a full scholarship to Tulane University, the
state’s most prestigious (and expensive) university each year. The mayor also gets to
award 5 four-year scholarships each year. It obviously has rich potential for abuse; we
found a lot of connected people getting the scholarships, worth more than $40,000 per
year, while entire swaths of the state seemed unaware that they existed:
http://www.wwltv.com/news/eyewitness/mikeperlstein/Legislate-scholarship-programgoing-226239131.html
Also here: http://theadvocate.com/news/7209962-123/tulane-scholarship-program-stillan
We also found that a suspiciously high number went to the Tulane baseball team,
perhaps the school’s marquee sport, but one where there are limits on the number of
athletic scholarships:
http://theadvocate.com/csp/mediapool/sites/Advocate/assets/templates/FullStoryPrint.cs
p?cid=7212119&preview=y
The Tulane – Louisiana Legislature program, to our knowledge, is unique in that public
officials are giving out awards to an expensive private university (which in turn gets tax
breaks from the city and state). But there are other similar programs out there, mostly
involving public universities. Among the states that have such programs are Maryland,
New Mexico, Washington and North Carolina:
http://www.chicagotalks.org/investigation-series-stories-and-special-reports/a-few-otherstates-give-legislative-scholarships/
Illinois’ program was controversial in many of the same ways that Louisiana’s is. They
got rid of it in 2012:
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2012-07-11/news/ct-met-legislative-scholarships20120712_1_legislative-scholarships-campaign-contributor-and-circulator-illinoislawmakers
Legislators aren’t the only public officials handing out such goodies. In Louisiana,
members of the LSU Board of Supervisors give out a ton of scholarships, in another
little-known arrangement:
http://thelensnola.org/2013/07/11/lsu-board-of-supervisors-awards-1-3-million-throughlittle-known-scholarship-program/

