Building reporter-editor chemistry
By Alexandra Zayas and Chris Davis, Tampa Bay Times, IRE 2104
Any good reporter-editor relationship is built on trust and mutual respect. And while each relationship is
different, there are some basic expectations that both partners should try to meet. Here’s our take on
what we want from the person on the other side of the editing chair.
A reporter’s job (from an editor’s perspective)
Be game. The best reporters are willing to go anywhere for the story and (for the most part) are excited
to do it.
Surprise me. Nothing is more exciting than when a reporter does work I wasn’t expecting and brings
back a nugget of gold for the story. It could be virtually anything, from landing an interview to driving
across the state on a whim, to paying to stay overnight in a homeless shelter. I love it when reporters
take their own initiative to go above and beyond the reporting we’ve talked about.
Be self-aware. A reporter with an honest understanding of their own skills, experience level, strengths
and weaknesses is a breeze to work with.
Don’t be defensive. My editing suggestions aren’t an attack, they’re an honest attempt to improve the
story the best way I know how.
Push through the pain. Reporting and writing a big project is a demanding – sometimes excruciating –
process for editor and reporter. Sometimes you have to slap a little dirt on it and keep on pushing
forward.
An editor’s job (from a reporter’s perspective)
Jump in with me. Great editors know all the players, the backstories, the reporting avenues. They soak
in the information and get invested in the story. They share their reporters’ victories and
disappointments.
Push me. The best editors don’t settle for good enough, they push reporters to get material they don’t
think they can get and do things they’re afraid to do. Just like a good running buddy, a challenging editor
can make reporters defy limitations they thought they had.
Clue me in. Good editors don’t just “fix” copy. They explain the reasons behind their changes to point
the reporter in the right direction for future drafts.
Rein me in. A good editor will force me to prove my findings beyond a reasonable doubt, and be a
safeguard from going too far.
Give me feedback. A good editor takes opportunities to point out growth opportunities beyond the story
at hand. At the end of the project, Chris wrote a memo, making suggestions for improvement in my
reporting techniques. He said I should “be more systematic,” in response to my tendency to chase
reporting avenues based on gut feelings. He said I should think about trying to “report like a scientist in
a lab.”

