Sex crimes: Unraveling the facts about the offenders and the evidence
IRE 2014
Keli Rabon, KMGH Investigative Reporter
Keli.rabon@kmgh.com
303-832-0172

INVESTIGATING RAPE KITS
http://bit.ly/1v3fX59 - “Few rape kits tested in Colorado, police say it’s not necessary”
http://www.thedenverchannel.com/news/call7/rape-kit-investigations - More rape kit stories
REQUEST RECORDS
Sample Open Records Request:
The information should include but not be limited to:
- The total number of sexual assault kits / “rape kits” / forensic evidence exams
collected as evidence.
- The number of rape kits sent for DNA testing.
- The number of rape kits not sent for DNA testing.
- The name and location of the lab(s) that your agency sends rape kits for testing.
- The agency’s policies and procedures for rape kit collection and testing.
 In many states, local police send their rape kits to the state crime lab. Request data from both
sources to see if they correspond!
 If police say they don’t track that information, don’t stop there! Can you get a database
inventory of all evidence?
COMPARE POLICE DEPTS.
 Ask for data from comparable departments within your state and beyond
 One strategy for doing that – look at your police department’s annual reports b/c they
often cite other cities or just ask the PD which agencies are comparable.
FINDING VICTIMS


I called around to several victim advocates and attorneys but didn’t have much success at
first. It’s a tight-knit community, and often private attorneys are former prosecutors, etc.
so they weren’t willing to speak out or risk jeopardizing their cases in the future.
Eventually I asked AEquitas (a national resource for prosecutors on violence against
women) to connect me with an attorney that handles victims’ rights cases. That attorney
was able to help.



You can also request police offense reports for cases that were specifically “Refused by
DA” to get narratives & try to track down victims. Colorado law requires redaction of
identifying information, but you might have better luck.

INVESTIGATING DISTRICT ATTORNEY PROSECUTION
RATES
http://bit.ly/1fCnBxY -“Denver DA refuses to prosecute 70% of sex assaults”
http://bit.ly/1lnVaIG -“DA post ‘Setting the Record Straight’ contains numerous errors”
http://bit.ly/1q60H9V - “DA’s trial-level standards block cases from prosecution”
http://bit.ly/18UtQv7 - “Despite federal grant, DA prosecutes only 29% of sex assaults”
REQUEST RECORDS
Sample Open Records Request:


The information should include but not be limited to:
-

The number of sexual assault cases presented to the District Attorney’s office

-

The number of those cases that the DA’s office accepted and filed charges

-

The number of overall felonies presented to the DA’s office

-

The number of those cases that the DA’s office accepted and filed charges
o



If they say they don’t have the data, try the police department. UCR – the
standardized crime reporting system used by most police departments nationwide
– requires PDs to input a case status. If it was “Refused by the DA” this is
recorded in UCR, so police should be able to provide these stats to you.

Ask for grant applications — have they ever applied for or received a grant to improve
their prosecution? We found our DA sought & received a grant specifically to deal with
the low rates (though he told us, it wasn’t a problem). Grant apps often serve as valuable
resources because they will likely describe a department’s shortcomings, successes, or
both. A grant application may also contain helpful statistics that the department first
claimed it didn’t track.

COMPARE DISTRICT ATTORNEYS


What is the filing standard (probable cause, reasonable likelihood of conviction, proof
beyond a reasonable doubt) for each office? Is there a different “bar” for sex assault than
for robbery or other felonies?



Survey your local DAs & comparable-sized cities across the country

OUTSIDE RESOURCES


Local Victim Advocacy Groups



National Groups

o

AEquitas - Aequitasresource.org

o

Joyful Heart Foundation - Endthebacklog.org

Advice to other journalists planning a similar project:
 Talk to victim advocates and see if they’re aware of the problem. Be

careful here — many advocate groups work closely with the police
and DA’s office, so politics can come into play. Verify the numbers
and don’t just take what they give you the first time.
 Check with the police department, the DA’s office, and the agency/lab
that does rape kit testing. In our case, most departments use a state
agency (CBI), but Denver Police Department has its own crime lab.
 Remember, not all rapes have a rape kit. Ask for “rape kit numbers”
not just “rapes.” Understand that “rape kits” can also be administered
in cases of other sexual assaults, not just rape. Also keep in mind that
rape kits can be collected, but a victim may choose to not officially
report the crime to police. To be fair to police, factor these numbers
out of your tested/untested comparison.
 Understand the difference between the rape kit being ‘analyzed’ or
‘processed,’ and the rape kit being ‘DNA Tested.’ This will help in
asking the right questions early on. Even though Denver has its own
crime lab, it couldn’t tell us how many rape kits it had actually DNA
tested.
 We purchased our own rape kit on the Internet. It helped to add a
visual element to a difficult story to tell in pictures. Being able to look
at the kit and the contents inside helped us understand how invasive
the procedure is, and how delicate we needed to be in our
storytelling.
 Don’t lose sight of the bigger picture – many police told us that testing
rape kits in “known” suspect cases was a waste of resources. But
even if a suspect is known in one case, that same person could be an
“unknown” in a dozen other cases across the state or the country.
Testing kits can create links between old cases and new cases, just
ask Detroit or New York City which have seen huge results after
testing rape kits.
 Ask police or prosecutors which cities they generally compare
themselves to. I found a police department budget presentation from
the year before in which Denver compared itself to a dozen other
cities with similar populations and demographics. This helps you

defeat the argument that will inevitably be made that you’re making
unfair comparisons, because you’re using the same cities they
already use!

