IRE San Francisco
June 27, 2014

Clean Energy: How to Find and Tell the Best Stories
The way we get our energy and what we do with it is being fundamentally
transformed. Our job as journalists is to help Americans sort through the options being
pushed by powerful interests on all sides. We've rarely faced a more challenging or
exciting assignment. At this panel you'll get valuable resources and you'll connect with
IRE colleagues who can help as you develop these groundbreaking stories.
Soon this handout will be posted at the IRE website, so you can use the links.
If you have any questions, please feel free to contact us. We are:
Jeffrey Ball, panelist
jeffball@standford.edu
Jeffrey Ball (@jeff_ball) is scholar-in-residence at Stanford University's
Steyer-Taylor Center for Energy Policy and Finance, a research center based jointly
at Stanford's law and business schools. He also is energy-and-environment columnist
for The New Republic, and his writing appears in various publications. Before coming
to Stanford in 2011, he spent 14 years at The Wall Street Journal, where he was
environment editor and a longtime energy reporter.
Samples of his work:
-- Obama's Climate Plan Will Only Reduce Global Emissions by 1%,
-- The Truth About Stanford's Coal Divestment
-- The Proportion of Young Americans Who Drive Has Plummeted -- And No One
Knows Why
-- How China's solar boom fizzled and went bust
-- Wall Street Journal "Experts"
-- Tough Love for Renewable Energy
Jeff St. John, panelist
jeffstjohn@hotmail.com
Jeff St. John is a San Francisco resident and graduate of U.C. Berkeley’s JSchoool, and worked as a newspaper reporter for the Anchorage Daily News, the TriCity Herald and The Fresno Bee before joining Greentech Media in 2008. He covers
smart grid, energy storage, and renewable energy and believes that energy and
climate change are the defining issues of our time.
Samples of his work:
-- Wal-Mart, Schneider Electric Test the Grid-to-Building Energy Connection
-- California’s Plan to Replace San Onofre Nuclear: Green Success or Natural Gas
Giveaway?
-- California to Utilities: Connect Battery-Solar Systems to the Grid
-- Unique State Models Offer a Glimpse of New England’s Microgrid Future

-- Defining the Operating System for Grid Energy Storage
-- Inside SDG&E’s Plan to Optimize the Distributed Grid of the Future
Ucilia Wang, panelist
ucilia.wang@gmail.com
Ucilia Wang is a freelance journalist in the San Francisco Bay Area and
covers renewable energy technology and policy for publications such as Forbes,
GigaOm, U.K. Guardian and The Wall Street Journal. She also co-founded a digital
publication called Climate Confidential that runs environmental and technology
stories. Follow her on Twitter @UciliaWang.
Samples of her work:
-- A road trip to the land where oil and solar meet
-- SolarCity's Next Move: Bundling Tesla's Batteries With Solar
-- The cost of going solar and how to do the math
-- 5 reasons you should care about California’s new energy storage mandate
-- Replace Your Roof And Generate Electricity From Solar Shingles
-- Driverless Cars Are Data Guzzlers
Mary Fricker, moderator
mfricker@sonic.net
Mary Fricker was a business reporter for The Santa Rosa (Calif.) Press
Democrat for 20 years. Now retired, she publishes RepoWatch.org, which tracks
shadow banking, and she is researching clean-energy finance. Among her awards are
SABEW Best in Business, McGill Medal for Journalistic Courage, UCLA Gerald
Loeb, George Polk, AP Best in Business, and three awards from IRE. She coauthored "Inside Job," a best-selling book about savings and loans.
How she can help you:
Mary is an IRE mentor. She will help you find the information, the right
people and the sources you need for your work.

Suggestions for getting up to speed on clean energy:
-- Sign up for email alerts at:
Climate Confidential
GreentechMedia
The Breakthrough
The Energy Collective
Climate Etc.
Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy
U.S. Energy Information Administration
-- Keep an eye on Jeffrey Ball's column at The New Republic
-- Set Google alerts for keywords you're interest in, like distributed generation
-- How to read the IPCC report
-- If the company you're writing about is publicly traded, read its filings with the
Securities and Exchange Commission by clicking on Edgar here.
-- Follow these writers:
Katie Fehrenbacher — GigaOm

Todd Woody — The Atlantic, New York Times
Kevin Bullis — MIT Technology Review
David R. Baker — San Francisco Chronicle
Dana Hull — San Jose Mercury News
-- Some calculators:
Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies Calculator
kW and kWh Explained
-- Jargon for local reporters:
On-bill repayment
PACE financing
Net energy metering
Feed-in tariff
Community choice aggregation
HERO financing
Power purchase agreement
Renewable energy certificates
Investment tax credit
Capacity markets

A random selection of thought-provoking stories:
The Coming Climate Crash, Henry R. Paulson, June 21, 2014
Solar's power is limited in Congress, Barron's, June 21, 2014
As the volume of PACE loans grows, securitization becomes a possibility,
Greentech Media, May 30, 2014
How electricity auctions are rigged to favor industry, Aljazeera America, May 29,
2014
Why the Best Path to a Low-Carbon Future is Not Wind or Solar Power,
Brookings Institution, May 20, 2014
EPRI Reveals Its Worldview on the Integrated Electrical Grid, Greentech Media,
April 22, 2014
Renewable energy financing, Navigant Consulting, March 11, 2014
The Growth of the Solar Market Depends on PV Module Reliability and
Performance, Greentech Media, February 25, 2014
Solar Power Craze on Wall St. Propels Start-Up, New York Times, January 3,
2014
Goldman Sachs sees "transformational moment" in renewables investment,
RenewEconomy, January 1, 2014
Power struggle: Green energy versus a grid that's not ready, Los Angeles Times,
December 2, 2013
How Government Is Making Solar Billionaires, Wall Street Journal, October 21,
2013
Global warming 'hiatus' puts climate change scientists on the spot, Los Angeles
Times, September 22, 2013
The Encyclopedia of Solar Securitization Part II, Greentech Media,September 9,
2013

The Encyclopedia of Solar Securitization Part I, Greentech Media, September 4,
2013
Solar industry grapples with hazardous wastes, Associated Press, February 10,
2013

Sources:
Biotechnology Industry Organization
California Energy Storage Alliance
Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy Securitization, Kroll Bond Ratings
DSIRE: A database of state incentives for renewables and efficiency
Earth's Changing Climate, 12 lectures by physics professor Richard Wolfson produced by
The Teaching Company
Edison Electric Institute
Electric Power Research Institute
Energy Storage Association
Global warming and climate change - frequently asked questions, University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research
Go Solar, the California Solar Initiative
GTM Research
Navigant Consulting
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Solar Energy Industries Association
Solar Securitization and Public Capital Finance, National Renewable Energy
Laboratory
The Vote Solar Initiative
Union of Concerned Scientists
U.S. Department of Energy's SunShot Initiative
U.S. Energy Information Administration's annual outlook
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Will Securitization Help Fuel The U.S. Solar Power Industry? by Standard & Poors

