Watchdog teams and newsroom teamwork: How to be successful and inclusive
2014 IRE Conference
Greg Borowski, assistant managing editor – projects and investigations
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
gborowski@journalsentinel.com; @GregJBorowski
Lawan Hamilton, executive producer, national investigations
Scripps News
lawan.hamilton@scripps.com; @LHScripps
George Papajohn, associate managing editor/investigations and consumer watch
Chicago Tribune
gpapajohn@tribune.com; @GeorgeWPapajohn

To team or not to team


No one size fits all: Great investigative stories can be generated under different structures. To
generate a consistent flow of watchdog stories you’ll need a point person to provide regular
contact with reporters. Feedback, guidance and deadlines are essential — and best achieved
through regular meetings and a clear sense of responsibility and accountability.



The downside: Reporters on a team can be cut off from the daily flow of stories and ideas while
(possibly) creating a message that only a chosen few will do this kind of work. You can overcome
those obstacles through collaboration and by valuing all forms of watchdog reporting from the
entire staff -- scoops from the beat, rolling investigations and short- and mid-term efforts.



The upside: The team concept has advantages -- laser-focused reporters and editors who will
deliver time and again; the potential to grow and improve; a supportive setting that helps
reporters through inevitable crises and obstacles.



The middleground: Push team members to produce quick-turns and mid-range stories, not just
home-run balls. Singles and double count. Pair them up with beat reporters when news develops
or tips emerge to bring investigative skills to the table and accelerate the reporting.

Investigations as a team sport


Setting the tone: Check egos at the door. Make sure everyone’s voice is heard. Ideas welcome.
Stress every win as a team win, not just an individual one. Insist on rigor and quality, from the
vetting of ideas to the accuracy and nuance of the final cutline. Share what you’re working on.



Build the right team: Make sure team members buy into your newsroom’s goals and
collaborative aspirations. Favor commitment and perseverance. Collectively, does their expertise
cover a range of areas (ie. education, criminal justice, health) and a range of skills (data analysis,
document diggers, kick-ass reporters, great story tellers)?



And the right team for the project at hand: Put together reporting teams based on skill sets,
personalities. Make sure assignments are clear. Create a system to track progress (who has
been called, what has been requested) and to share information (interview highlights, etc.)



Hire with an eye toward new skills: With all mediums merging on digital platforms, it is
imperative that you have an assortment of skills to tap into in your own newsroom. Hire
individuals with new skills (app developers, for instance) – or, even better, multiple skill sets.

The team and the newsroom


Be sure the team is engaged, involved: Not just during the big investigations, but during
breaking news or just for a daily assist (sharing ideas, crunching numbers, etc.) Do brownbag
training sessions to spread skills, share new sources for data and documents.



Don’t take over stories. If the beat reporter got the tip, he or she gets to keep the story. Provide
the help they need to be successful – typically this may mean pairing them with a watchdog team
member – but don’t box them out. There is no faster and certain way to newsroom resentment.



Tamp down resentment: Don’t feed into stereotypes. Don’t act like prima donnas or look for
special treatment. For instance, do your own follow-up pieces. Chip in on daily stories where your
expertise is needed. Seeing a Pulitzer Prize winner pull a Saturday night shift is good for the
newsroom’s soul – and may even lead to a tip or two.



Be mindful of daily needs: The paper/newscast/website doesn’t fill itself. So, look for ways to
get your team’s work in the mix. When holidays approach, be sure they have stories to offer up.

Getting other departments involved


A story doesn’t mean words alone: Engage other departments -- photographers, graphic
artists, designers, news apps developers, producers, the copy desk – early in the process. Let
their ideas shape how you gather and present the information.



Respect everyone’s work: If the reporting is done, there can be pressure (often from the
reporter) to get it out there – today, tomorrow, by Sunday. Push back if the visuals, graphics and
other elements are not ready. Everyone should get the same chance to do their best work.



Don’t wait till the end to envision the final product: Understand how the different pieces work
together. Edit every piece – videos, graphics – as rigorously as the text. Eliminate redundancies.
Each piece doesn’t have to do everything. The package is what does everything.

When a full-time team is not possible


Get everyone involved: With the proper training and focus, watchdog reporting can – and
should – come from all corners of the newsroom. Define investigative reporting by what it is, not
who does it.



Create your own in-house training: Use staff experts, IRE or nearby universities. Start with FOI
and scrubbing individuals on deadline and then go deeper. Reward reporters who display an
investigative mindset with training and extra time to pursue high-impact stories.



Get some early wins: Identify stories with an accountability angle than can be done in a short
amount of time. Focus on a few of those to help build a watchdog mindset – and an appetite for
more. You have to start somewhere. Start small.



Institutionalize record checks: Create a calendar of key records that need regular checking
(campaign finance reports, ethics reports for elected officials, salary databases) and assign these
to specific reporters. This will help assure the basics are covered.

