Investigating Religion: Public records, not-so-public records and just showing up
Eric Gorski, investigative and projects reporter, The Denver Post | egorski@denverpost.com
Investigative Reporters and Editors Conference, San Francisco, 2014
Churches and places of worship are afforded privacy and secrecy not given to other nonprofit
organizations. Reporters often assume that means the paper trail is short. That is often not the case. Every
time a religious group has contact with a public agency, documents are born. Look for those intersections.
Don’t miss-documents and records:
-

-

-

-

-

-

IRS Forms. Churches and places of worship are not required to file Form 990s, which detail the
financial information of nonprofit groups. But religious nonprofit groups are a different story, and
in some cases places of worship start spinoff charities that do file 990s. Check Guidestar.org –
and ask Guidestar for access to records older than three years. Lesser known is the Form 1023, or
application for tax-exempt status. These often include salaries, bylaws, payments made to officers
and board members, projections for revenue and more. Attached is an IRS handout with
information on how to obtain copies. Big warning: getting them could take up to six months.
Audits. If a faith-based organization has taken government money to provide a service, it may
have been audited. Check with the applicable agency, and if an organization is part of an audit
ask for all correspondence and action plans. Also request copies of the materials the organization
filed in seeking the funding in the first place and check on whether it delivered on its promises.
Secretary of state business records: These searches can turn up articles of incorporation and
bylaws - important windows into how religious organizations operate. Look closely at board
structure and changes in the board, and identify those who have left. These are potential sources.
Run individual business searches on each board member and look for links. Does the church have
any relationships with businesses linked to board members or family?
Budgets. Some places of worship make them public – or release them just to members. Cast a
wide enough net with sources to get friendly with someone who has them.
Property records: Just as you should always ask for the name of the dog, always look up the
value of the pastor’s home. If nothing turns up in the pastor’s name, run property records searches
on the church as well as any businesses with ties to the church turned up in those earlier searches.
Other documents to look for: applications for property tax-exemptions at the county level
(could be for homes or even private jets), FAA records on plane ownership, lawsuits/court
records involving the organization, its principals and all associated companies and nonprofits.
Social media: Search your subjects and organizations on Facebook, Twitter and other social
media. Look for critics, supporters and potential story threads in comments and followers.

Not-so-public records:
-

If public records fail you, seek out disillusioned former members to help obtain internal e-mails,
budgets, information on board structure and more. Apostates have an axe to grind, yes, so be
wary. Seek multiple sources. Ex-members have their own blogs, too (a blessing and a curse).
Always ask sources, “Do you have any documents?” and “Who else should I talk to?” Do the
sources have any letters or e-mails from the religious organization to back up their accounts?

Finally … Just show up. Places of worship are accessible to the public. Attend services. Go to classes.
Shop at the bookstore. Record sermons and search for old ones online. Not only will you get a better
understanding of what you are covering, but you will come away with rich dialogue, scenes and narrative
to bring the story alive. Do not misrepresent yourself and be up front about who you are if asked.

