Tip Sheet - Shoddy construction and problematic safety testing
Charles Piller (cpiller@sacbee.com), The Sacramento Bee
This tip sheet emerged out of an investigation of construction and engineering
problems on the new $6.5 billion San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge. The
problems I uncovered are now being investigated by state legislators and the
California Highway Patrol. New laws have been passed and others are in the
pipeline to police the state transportation agency, oversee megaprojects, and
help ensure that the problems are not repeated.
How to get expert help
This can be the hardest part of engineering-related stories. Expect to try 310 experts for every one that will comment. For a high profile job, like the Bay
Bridge, it was one in 10. Most engineers are afraid of the consequences of
talking openly. My sources have been threatened, blacklisted, browbeaten and
intimidated by the California Department of Transportation. Or bought off – one
landed a lucrative consulting contract with Caltrans, then refused to talk with me
after having criticized the agency in my story. switched sides after he criticized
Caltrans in one of my stories. Be sure to check for conflicts of interest before you
approach an expert, because you don’t want to risk tipping your hand to the
target prematurely.








Who probably won’t be helpful:
The Federal Highway Administration is supposed to audit and watchdog
federally funded projects, but actually hardly ever step in, no matter how
egregious the problems. Be aware that the FHWA might share your
questions and its answers with state agencies before you see those
answers and sometimes gives the appearance of oversight while covering
up problems.
State departments of transportation won’t criticize each other, in part due
to the interlocking relationships on policy and regulatory bodies. Most
state engineers can’t talk to reporters without official permission.
Big engineering or construction firms never want to bite the hand that
feeds them or risk alienating future partners.
Standard setting bodies are too tied into the state transportation
departments.

Who might be helpful:
 An insider engineer can walk you through the technical docs off the
record.
 Recent retirees.
 Academics. Most will say no at first. Be prepared to return politely but
doggedly if you sense any interest. But beware – most academic research
in transportation is funded by state agencies. Good ways to find the right
sources: Google Scholar (http://scholar.google.com/schhp?

1

hl=en&as_sdt=0,5) or Microsoft Academic Search
(http://academic.research.microsoft.com/).
 Small consulting firms sometimes want the exposure.
Getting the data - records requests:
 Don’t rush into it – first make sure you know what to ask for. Talk to
someone who knows the job and agency intimately, and pick their brain for
details on every relevant document, preferably by name.
 Get the daily diary logs by inspectors that are required on most
construction jobs – they’re often are the key. In many cases, they offer an
unsanitized version of events, including details that can bring the story to
life – such as the weather on the day something went sideways, the mood,
arguments between inspectors and contractors, and the work-arounds
when things go wrong.
 Get everything. A subset of the documents might miss issues that
undermine or strengthen your thesis.
 Naturally, follow the money. Learn to read the agency’s ledger – it should
have the cost of every item in the contract – and will illuminate cost
overruns that lead to new angles. If work was done overseas, get travel
records and expense reports to see if tax funds were blown on luxury
hotels and the like.
Challenges of data
The best thing about engineering projects – loads of data to sift. The worst
thing about engineering projects – that data is often unstructured. Even when it’s
quantifiable, you can’t just import it into a spreadsheet or database whatever
software tools you use. Three strategies for working with unstructured data:
 Take the long view: In a story about rusty tendons holding up the Bay
Bridge, we had to catalog the conditions for every tendon, by hand, from
more than 80,000 pages of data. Painful process, huge payoff.
 Try www.overviewproject.org to interrogate large volumes of data for
patterns.
 Exploit easy chances: Caltrans made up a new, less scary name for a key
weakness of the bridge – from “fracture critical” to “seismic performance
critical” – to persuade people that the same parts wouldn’t cause the
bridge to collapse if they broke. It proved easy to expose this fiction,
because the agency didn’t sanitize every construction document. Using
the global search across documents in Adobe Acrobat, I searched for
“fracture critical” in about 50,000 pages of inspection reports in 20
minutes. I came up with dozens of references to cracks and other
problems in fracture-critical parts.

2

