Martha Mendoza
Associated Press Writer
mmendoza@ap.org

2014 IRE Conference

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ON BOTH SIDES OF THE BORDER
United States FOIA: Make requests directly to through each agency’s website
Three tips for using US FOIA from Mexico
1. Email if you can. If not, fax. Call the agency if they say you have to mail your
request and explain that “mail is unreliable” in Mexico.
2. Ask for your responses to come in electronic format.
3. You do not need to be a US citizen to make a request.
A few favorite U.S. agencies to FOIA for immigration issues:
_ Treasury Department (www.treasury.gov)
What to ask for: seized assets, repatriated cash, money laundering investigations
_ United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (www.uscis.gov)
What to ask for: someone’s immigration file, changes in policy, enforcement practices
_ State Department (www.state.gov)
What to ask for: Merida spending, embassy correspondence, treaty reports
_ Department of Homeland Security (www.dhs.gov)
What to ask for: disciplinary cases, private firm contracts, correspondence with Mexico
_ Customs and Border Protection (www.cbp.gov)
What to ask for: incident reports, violent assault data, corruption cases
_ Immigration and Customs Enforcement (www.ice.gov)
What to ask for: private firm contracts, incarceration mortality rates, seizure data
_ Executive Office for Immigration Review

What to ask for: asylum statistics, discipline case files
_ Office of National Drug Control Policy (ww.ondcp.gov)
What to ask for: drug seizure data, strategy development notes, budget details
Mexico FOIA: Make all requests at a single website: www.infomex.org.mx
Three tips for using Mexico FOIA from US.
1. Check your Infomex site weekly; they don’t tell you when responses are in.
2. Be patient with the online interface. It’s buggy and slow.
3. You do not need to be a Mexican citizen to make a request.
A few favorite Mexican agencies to FOIA for investigating the border:
_ National Insitute of Public Health (El Instituto Nacional de Salud Publica)
What to ask for: tuberculosis rates, binational public health issues
_ President (Presidencia)
What to ask for: immigration data, talking points on immigration
_ Ministry of Defense (Secretaría de la Defensa Nacional)
What to ask for: immigration and customs training, immigration security
_ Ministry of Finance (Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público)
What to ask for: repatriated currency, correspondence with Treasury, banking policies
_ Ministry of Foreign Relations (Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores)
What to ask for: extraditition requests, visa trends, travel warnings
_ Attorney General (Procuraduria General de la Republica)
What to ask for: prosecution and conviction rates, seized weapons, forensics

