THIS WON’T HURT A BIT
Tips for Digging into the Medical Community
@jenniferlevitz
Jennifer.levitz@wsj.com
1. Do your homework. When writing about a procedure or device that is under scrutiny in one
specialty, put the use in context in the larger field of medicine. Device companies make products with
as many uses as possible, so often an instrument that finds a home in one specialty has also been tried
out or adopted in another. Did another specialty reject the device? Did they adopt it but with more
precautions? If you’re writing about gynecology, for instance, call the professional societies for
urologists and general surgeons and ask if they ever used X device, and why or why not? Similarly,
search PubMed, Sciencedirect.com, etc. for studies about the device and other uses.
2. Talk to the trainers. Early on, search for device-company training videos/materials and download
them to your computer. Device manufacturers have a big hand in training doctors how to use their
products, so training materials are a good way to find out how a particular procedure made it into care
and what doctors are being told in practice. Broadcastmed/ORlive (www.orlive.com) is a handy
website where device companies and hospitals post educational videos for other doctors. Click on a
specialty and then try putting in the name of the device or a popular procedure done with the device. By
doing a Google search for the title of the talk, you can also sometimes find transcripts online. Also,
search company websites for training videos and save them to your computer.
3. Search Edgar to find the doctors who helped roll out the device and did the training. When
introducing a new product, companies often file press releases on Edgar, quoting doctors about
benefits. Also, do a Google search to find the doctors who acted as instructors, or “preceptors.” Google
(specific device name and preceptor or preceptorship). Often doctors put preceptorships on their
resumes, many of which are online.
4. Check patent filings (Google or http://www.uspto.gov/patents/process/search/) for the device to
see if changes, additions, or safety measures were proposed but never adopted.
5. Read medical-conference programs from years past (Google or https://archive.org/web) and read
medical-trade pub coverage (ie, Oncology Times) of conferences to see when an issue hit the radar. If
you get information that concerns were raised at a particular talk or session, call the society that hosted
the conference and request the tape.
6. Keep a detailed chronology of medical studies, conference talks, product-launch dates, and other
key points so you can determine who knew what when.
7. Find doctors to interview by scouring society list-servs (often, they are closed, so find a helpful
doctor, and ask him/her to email you the comments on a particular topic). Also, read the articles on
your topic on www.medscape.com, (register for free) and then look through the comment section,
where doctors often post their names along with opinions.
8. Check conflict disclosures for doctors. Device manufacturers may publish information about fees
and grants to doctors on their websites. Universities, where many doctors hold positions, also often

require disclosures.
9. Get patient records early. When interviewing patients who may fit into your piece, ask them to share
their medical records and connect you with their doctors early on, even if you’re still in the digging
phase and aren’t sure you have a story. As the story unfolds and litigation begins, people will be far less
apt to share personal medical information.
10. Build a list of several trusted experts who you can quickly go to sound out technical medical details
and what you're hearing. A hospital, for instance, might defend a practice by saying that the alternative
is worse. Make sure they aren't leaving out alternatives.

