IRE 2014 On the beat: Healthcare
Christina Jewett
The Center for Investigative Reporting
@JewettCIR ~ cjewett@cironline.org

National data sets that you can localize and dig into for investigations/enterprise
Hospital complaint investigation reports - Association of Health Journalist posts them http://www.hospitalinspections.org/
Idea: Search “immediate jeopardy” and your state
That’s Medicare-speak for “something has gone quite awry”
What’s not there: Routine inspections, hospital responses
Medicare physician data
ProPublica’s Treatment Tracker - http://projects.propublica.org/treatment/
Idea: Search for treatments offered by doctors who have been charged with crimes related
to medical fraud. Ethically challenged doctors can offer inroads into questionable treatments
that you can cross-reference to other doctors using the Treatment Tracker ‘sort’
functions.
Healthcare-associated infections and medical errors
Medicare releases this data, and Jordan Rau of Kaiser Health News offers a solid run-down
of what the data is and how to dig in –
http://bit.ly/1lKvrva
Idea: See which hospitals in your area have high complication rates and seek lawsuits or
Yelp reviews that will help you delve into patient stories of harm
Medicare also puts out data on psychotropic drug use in each U.S. nursing home, rates of
patient readmissions to hospitals and complications at dialysis facilities

How I climbed over the big white wall
Decoding Prime – www.californiawatch.org/prime
Insiders detailed the inner workings of hospitals in these two editions of the ‘Decoding
Prime’ series on unusual billing and aggressive patient admission practices at Prime
hospitals
On billing for rare, lucrative conditions: http://bit.ly/1qauMFb
Drawing patients in through the ER: http://bit.ly/1jiXZq4
Tips:
- Use hospital websites, wrongful termination lawsuits, Accurint ‘People at Work’
search and labor department wage and hour claims to find current and former employees.
- ‘Rolling thunder’ stories, or ongoing series, elicit tipsters. Listen. Talk. Go back to
them and work the daisy chain of people they know.
- If someone describes comments made in a public forum, dig for transcripts, official notes
and call around to see if meeting was recorded.
- Getting a few people on the record helps tip the scales for others who are afraid to speak
out. Assuring them that their voice will be one in a chorus – instead of a solo
performance – helps a lot.

Rehab Racket – www.cironline.org/rehabracket
Government insiders told us about one rehab provider who bribed an inspector. Rehab
counselors admitted to fabricating rehab sessions. One former rehab center staffer even
admitted to bribing a boarding house owner for access to paying clients.
Tips:
-

Find an insider, current or former, to help you understand the record keeping and
documentation around what you’re looking at
If you hear about an interesting paper trail, file records requests with each
government agency involved
Accept that breaching the silence will mean a lot of hang-ups, unreturned calls and
people who won’t talk. Keep going.
Even if you think someone won’t talk to you, try anyway. Sometimes people who
were on the wrong side of a problem decide to come clean or snitch on the other
rogues.
Show up at people’s doorstep and seek interviews that way. Often the first thing
they will say, when confronted with a friendly face, is ‘Oh, I’ve been meaning
to call you back…’

