Tips for covering Asian American communities
Momo Chang / freelance journalist
momo@momochang.com / @momochang_oak
IRE Conference / June 28, 2014
Minority, underserved, marginalized and other communities not traditionally covered in mainstream
media deserve to see themselves represented in media. Their stories need to be reported on with
patience and told with nuance.
Quick Stats
 Asian Americans are the fastest-growing ethnic group, with 60 percent of growth due to
international migration.
 Asians are largest group immigrating to the U.S., surpassing Latino immigration.
 Asians make up about 6 percent of the U.S. population.
 The majority of Asian American adults are immigrants: 3/4 of adults were born abroad. Of
those, half say they do not speak English well.
 Asian Americans include at least 30 different ethnicities and countries of origin, with a wide
variety of immigration experiences (native, immigrant, refugee), educational attainment and
socioeconomic status.
 The Census Bureau projects that the Asian population will grow to 9.2 percent by 2050.
Data Sources
Asian Americans have often been left out of surveys and studies due to the relatively small population
size (usually lumped into “other”). This has been changing. But not all data is created equal. See
Pew’s example.
 Census Bureau
 AAPI Data – an aggregator of Asian American and Pacific Islander research categorized by
immigration, health care, poverty, language access, and also state and regional data.
 National Asian American Survey
 Pew’s “The Rise of Asian Americans” has been criticized for “model minority” frame. The
original report looks at six largest groups: Chinese Americans, Filipino Americans, Indian
Americans, Vietnamese Americans, Korean Americans and Japanese Americans.
Avoid Stereotypes
Be aware of stereotypes. Ex: The Model Minority Myth—that all Asian Americans are high
achieving, college-graduating, middle class professionals. Downside: masks hidden challenges of new
immigrants or refugees, health outcomes, educational attainment, poverty and other issues. Tell stories
with nuance.
Access
If you are looking for everyday people to interview, it may take a while. Many people come from
countries where the government controls the press. Many Asian American and Pacific Islander
communities are not used to being covered in the media.
Expect a wide range of media-savviness and language and cultural barriers. Interviews take twice as
long when using an interpreter. Consider how you introduce yourself (example “investigative
reporter” may scare some people off, but not others). Reach out to local organizations serving the
local AAPI populations. When interviewing someone, make sure they understand their name and story
may appear in the media.
Consider teaming up with others who are from the same cultural or linguistic backgrounds to do
reporting: other staff, freelancers, interns or reporters from ethnic media outlets.

