Rules to remember when covering campaign fundraising
1. The plural of anecdote is not data. From a September 2011
story saying Obama was having problems attracting small donors:
``In interviews with dozens of low-dollar contributors in the
past two weeks, some said they were unhappy with what they
viewed as Mr. Obama's overly conciliatory approach to
congressional Republicans.'' In fact, small-dollar donations
were key to Obama's successful fundraising.
2. It's easy to gather low-hanging fruit. Any viable candidate
is going to be able to gather quickly a sizeable amount of
campaign donations from family members, friends, community
leaders and supporters. Eventually, fundraising becomes a lot
harder as a candidate needs to tap friends of friends, not just
the friends any more. So an incumbent who has been raising money
for a year and has long gathered all of his or her low-hanging
fruit could trail for a reporting period a challenger who has
just entered the race. It means nothing.
3. Don't believe the spin for each reporting period. The
candidates and the congressional campaign committees love to
tout how their nominee has outraised the opponent in a
particular reporting period. Who cares? What matters is how much
a candidate has to spend overall. What's significant is the
total fundraising figure, not for an artificial three-month
period.
4. Super-PACs hold the balance of power. The money spent in a
race by super-PACs (and nonprofits that keep their donors
hidden) can cancel out a candidate's fundraising advantage. Just
ask Dina Titus, Dan Maffei and all of the other Democrats swept
out of office in 2010, thanks in part to the then-unprecedented
surge of outside money unleashed by the Citizens United
decision.
5. The money primary is still important. While super-PACs and
outside groups can pick up the slack, a candidate unable to
raise money is an indication of little support back home. That
means there's not even any low-hanging fruit to pick.
6. Compare apples to apples. A May 2012 story talked about how
Obama's fundraising advantage over Romney was shrinking, as his
10 to 1 cash advantage at the end of March had disappeared in
April because of the influx of fundraising by outside groups.
Actually, those outside groups had been raising money in March
as well and when their numbers were added in the earlier month,

Obama didn't have a 10 to 1 cash advantage. In fact, in both
months, his real advantage was 2 to 1.
7. Donors who want to defeat a candidate often give to the
opposing political party. One story trying to upend conventional
wisdom and show how Obama was still raising more money from Wall
Street than the Republicans compared Obama and the Democratic
Party versus Romney and the other GOP presidential candidates.
The story was off by $2 million -- the amount Wall Street donors
gave to the Republican Party, presumably because the party would
oppose Obama's re-election.
8. Corporate PACs give to winners. And that means incumbents.
Most incumbents still win re-election. And most companies,
especially publicly traded ones, are more pragmatic than
ideological. So yes, oil and gas political action committees are
going to support Democrat Mary Landrieu, the chairman of the
Senate Energy Committee, even if most of their donations go to
Republican candidates. And even then, those PACs are not going
to fund Republican challengers to Democratic incumbents. Defense
company PACs gave to House Republicans at the same time those
lawmakers voted to shut down the government, even though that
action threatened billions of dollars in contracts.

Bill Allison, Sunlight Foundation
ballison@sunlightfoundation.com
Edwin Bender, National Institute on Money in State Politics
edwinb@followthemoney.org
Jonathan D. Salant, Bloomberg News
jsalant@bloomberg.net

