Year in Investigative Reporting

Data: Well data from the
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
Findings: In Wisconsin the number
of high-capacity wells are growing
causing fears for the water supply.
The number of wells has increased
over the years, especially in the
Central Sands area.
“In the early 1950s, there were
fewer than 100 high-capacity wells
in the Central Sands, according to
the state Department of Natural
Resources. Today there are more
than 3,000 — 40 percent of the
state’s total — in the six-county
area.”
Long Lake “ used to be up to 12
feet deep. Now it is closer to 3
feet.” In 2006 it completely dried
up “and all the fish, including 3foot-long northern pikes, died in
the mud. ”

Supplement Shell Game
USA Today probed into dietary supplement
firms run by people with criminal backgrounds

• FINDINGS: Revealed that a wide array
of dietary supplement companies
selling products dangerously spiked
with hidden pharmaceuticals are
headed by executives with criminal
backgrounds and run-ins with
regulators. They’re convicted felons,
thieves, drug addicts, narcotic sellers
and more.
• The company behind Reumofan dietary
supplements uses fake addresses, lies
about ingredients and may not even
exist.

Data: Ohio High School Athletic
Association appeals board decisions.
Findings: A rigid law prevents transfer
students from participating in athletics.
“239 families who have appealed to
OHSAA in the past five years to restore
eligibility for a student after a school
transfer. It’s largely a futile fight —
nearly 70 percent lost their cases and
their children were forced to sit out.”
“Nearly two-thirds of the transferring
athletes moved to a similar-size or
smaller school. About 40 percent of the
denials involved freshmen and
sophomores. Nearly half of the girls
stripped of eligibility were
underclassmen.”

• FINDINGS: This rolling investigation caught
employees of Sysco Corp., the world’s largest food
distributor, committing a number of food safety
violations, including storing food overnight in
metal storage sheds and hundreds of violations for
Sysco truck drivers logging too many hours behind
the wheel

US SECRETLY CREATED 'CUBAN TWITTER' TO
STIR UNREST
• FINDINGS: USAID funded a covert operation to launch a messaging
network that could reach hundreds of thousands of Cubans. To
hide the network from the Cuban government and users, USAID
set up an elaborate system of front companies using a Cayman
Islands bank account, and recruited executives who were not told
of the company's ties to the U.S. government.

SOURCES: 1,000 pages of documents
about the project's development,
public databases to verify the federal
contract numbers, names and project
scope. Interviews with government and
project sources

HOME FREE
• A series of investigations into
the failures of electronic
monitoring programs that
law enforcement and courts
use to keep watch on
criminals who would
otherwise be in prison or jail.
• FINDINGS: A sex offender
cut-off his GPS tracking
bracelet four times in the
months before he murdered
a 13-year-old girl. Seattle's
KING 5 examined records
from the 5-year-old murder.
• “Home detention” for one
offender included trips to the
bar and beach vacation

SECRECY FOR SALE: INSIDE THE
GLOBAL OFFSHORE MONEY MAZE
•

•

In one of the largest and most complex cross-border investigative projects in journalism
history, the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists collaborated with more
than 110 journalists in 58 countries in an attempt to strip away the biggest mystery
associated with tax havens: the owners of anonymous companies.
FINDINGS: Government officials and their families and associates in Azerbaijan, Russia,
Canada, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand, Mongolia and other countries have embraced
the use of covert companies and bank accounts. The mega-rich use complex offshore
structures to own mansions, yachts, art masterpieces and other assets, gaining tax
advantages and anonymity not available to average people. Many of the world’s top’s banks
– including UBS, Clariden and Deutsche Bank – have aggressively worked to provide their
customers with secrecy-cloaked companies in the British Virgin Islands and other offshore
hideaways. A well-paid industry of accountants, middlemen and other operatives has
helped offshore patrons shroud their identities and business interests, providing shelter in
many cases to money laundering or other misconduct.

• REHAB RACKET:

Reporters from The Center for

Investigative Reporting and CNN exposed glaring and systemic failures in taxpayer-funded drug
rehab programs, including pervasive fraud – reporting that led to scores of clinics getting shut down.

•

FINDINGS: Taxpayers had spent at least
$94 million over two years on Los
Angeles-area clinics with clear signs of
fraud or questionable billing. Clinic
directors pressured counselors to pad
bills with “ghost clients” they never saw.
Clinic staff bribed some of the region’s
poorest residents to show up for
counseling they didn’t need. In an
ultimate irony, addicts were enticed to
attend rehab sessions with gifts of
booze and cigarettes.

The Girl Who Got Tied Down
FINDINGS : The three-year investigation reveals several cases of abuse due to the
work of the health service and the police in Sweden. In the wake of the documentary
the senior psychiatrist charged with caring for “Nora” has been sacked from the
hospital where he worked. The private mental health care company which he owns
has lost its contract with the County Council.
Sources: Among
documents and
interviews, Nora’s
diaries and videos.
Reporter also supplied
Nora with a tape
recorder and hidden
mics inside the
psychiatry ward.

“Body of Evidence” unveils a complex
system of corruption and abuse tucked
away in an affluent New Orleans suburb.
“Body of Evidence” went on to peel back
layer upon layer of questionable
spending, taxpayer waste, and eventually
illegal activities. Within weeks “Body of
Evidence” sparked an unprecedented
recall effort. Within three months, he
then had a lucrative contract cancelled, •
and the FBI opened its own investigation.
By the five month mark, state law was
changed and stripped the coroner’s
power over his own budget. At month
eight, the coroner resigned and pleaded
guilty in federal court.

FINDINGS: The coroner of St. Tammany Parish
(County), a bedroom community north of New
Orleans, was the highest paid elected official in
the state, making as much as Vice President Joe
Biden. Lavish meals were charged on a public
credit card and hundreds of thousands in raises
for the coroner and top staff members were
approved after convincing the public to vote for
a tax to increase his budget. He cashed in tens
of thousands dollars in supposed unused sick
and vacation time all while jet-setting around
the globe.

6

Data: Online searchable databases of
public records including financial
disclosures, campaign expenditures,
campaign contributions and business
registrations.
Findings: The reporters take a
lighthearted look at how any citizen
could uncover the people behind an
unsealed FBI complaint in the process
giving a tutorial in campaign finance
research.

Data: Campaign contributions
Findings: The Hillsborough County Public
Transportation Commission set a minimum of
$50 for limo rides. Consumers and some limo
companies sued the Commission because it
“won’t allow consumers to shop for a lower
prices.”
Reporter Mike Deeson analyzed campaign
contributions and found “the same companies
who want the $50 minimum had donated
thousands to commissioners.”
When asked about this, a commissioners
claimed it was for safety and top-of-the-line
limos. When pressed further, he said, “‘I
understand that, as a consumer I shop for a low
price when I go to Manhattan.’ “
Deeson’s story states, “However, in Hillsborough
County the consumer doesn't have that choice.”

Findings: No one knows how
much hazardous materials travel
through Iowa on any given day
but incidents involving them are
tracked.
“Since the 1970s, more than
6,000 hazardous materials
incidents in Iowa have been
documented by the U.S.
Department of Transportation. ”
“The state is ranked 31st among
the 50 states and is home to far
fewer incidents than top-ranked
Ohio, which had 40,000.”

Data: Hazardous Materials Incident Report
Subsystem maintained by the Department of
Transportation

Data: Students with disabilities exiting special education from the Office of Special
Education Programs and US census data.
Findings: Mississippi is one of three states where more students with a learning disability
graduate with an alternate diploma than a regular one. That poses a serious problem for
many students leaving the state’s special education programs.
According to the Hechinger Report, many colleges and employers don’t recognize the
alternative diplomas.

“As a result, thousands of capable
students leave high school with
few career and education options
in a state with one of the nation’s
highest unemployment rates.”

“The I-Team uncovered how the USDOT’s Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration (FMCSA) routinely cited tour bus companies
and their drivers for serious safety violations, but allowed these
unsafe buses and drivers to stay on the road, sometimes with
deadly consequences. The I-Team also documented dangerous
and illegal behaviors of drivers of these ten-ton buses, such as
texting and talking behind the wheel, speeding, and working more
hours than allowed by law--the three biggest causes of fatal bus
crashes. In 2013, California experienced a record number of major
tour bus crashes—11 of them-- with hundreds of people injured
and over a dozen killed”
-IRE Award questionnaire

“Hopefully, you’ve done your homework
on him, because he’s right up there with
the best. He had options.”
-Butler president James Danko

AMERICA’S WORST CHARITIES
• A joint investigation by The Center for Investigative Reporting,
the Tampa Bay Times and CNN identified America's 50 worst
charities.
• FINDINGS: Organizations lied to donors about where their
money goes, took multiple salaries and secretly paid
themselves or their friends through consulting fees and
fundraising contracts. The worst charities on the list have
raised more than $1 billion in the past 10 years, but only a
fraction went to anyone other than the charities' operators
and professional solicitors.
• Check your local nonprofits: Top 50 and Charity Checker

A Star Player Accused, and a Flawed Rape Investigation
•

The New York Times chronicled
the shortcomings of an
investigation by Tallahassee police
into a reported sexual assault in
which Florida State University
quarterback Jameis Winston was
the alleged assailant.

• FINDINGS: Police failed to
conduct a proper investigation
when the incident was
reported, the Times found.
Even after the accuser
identified her attacker to the
police, Winston was never
interviewed and DNA evidence
was not collected. By the time
prosecutors began to
investigate 11 months later .

Data: The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
analyzed data consisting of nearly 3
million newborn screening tests to look at
screening delays across the country.
“But about two dozen states and the
District of Columbia won’t release
meaningful information.”
Findings: Newborn babies are supposed
to have blood samples collected and
tested within 24 hours. “But we found
that thousands of hospitals throughout
the country are late sending the blood
samples for these life-saving tests.
Delays can be catastrophic for a child
with one of the disorders, resulting in
serious medical issues, brain damage
and even death.”

Nebraska prison doors open too soon
The examination of prison records and OWH
calculations revealed that Nebraska Department of
Correctional Services officials had released or were
set to release dozens of prisoners years before
their sentences were supposed to end.
FINDINGS: State officials had carved at least 750
years off the collective sentences of more than 200
of the state’s worst criminals. The problem: The
department was using a formula that doesn’t
square with how sentences should be calculated.
After The World-Herald revealed its findings Friday
to Corrections Director Michael Kenney, he
immediately directed staff to recalculate the
sentences. He said he had been unaware of the
problem.

Data: Gathered spill reports and data from 14
states.
Findings: A months-long investigation by
EnergyWire found more than 6,000 spills and
other mishaps reported at onshore oil and gas
sites in 2012.
“That's an average of more than 16 spills a
day. And it's a significant increase since 2010.
In the 12 states where comparable data were
available, spills were up about 17 percent.
Drilling activity in those states, though, rose
40 percent during that time.”
The investigation found that states track spills
and accidents differently and enforcement for
spills is often lax.

Data: Reuters analyzed electronic bulletin board posts including more than 5,000
from “a Yahoo group called Adopting-from-Disruption.” Along with other records,
the team used this information to create a dataset allowing them to look for trends.
Findings: “By creating a data set from the narrative accounts of the parents who
offered and sought children, we found that, in a single Internet group, a child was
offered to strangers on average once a week during a five-year period. At least 70
percent of those children were said to be adopted from overseas (23 different
countries), and the children were living in at least 34 different states at the time
they were offered.”

Leaky Washington
Data: More than 100 FOIA
requests were made. Data
included Trade-by-trade
information for stocks (Telvent
DTN), trade-by-trade short
sales and economic-indicator
surveys. "Over the course of
our investigation, the
databases we created
comprised tens of millions of
records."

Findings: The analysis disclosed cases where clients made large profits from early
alerts about agency decisions that affected the value of certain stocks.

Other than Honorable
•

•

According to Defense Department records, more than 20,000 soldiers and
Marines were booted from the military between 2008 and 2011 with otherthan-honorable discharges. Current federal law says these former service
members -- even if they suffer from the mental or physical wounds of war -lose their automatic right to veterans’ medical benefits.
FINDINGS: An increasing number of soldiers, including wounded combat
veterans, are being kicked out of the service for misconduct, often with no
benefits, as the Army downsizes after a decade of war.

Findings: The investigation found more
than 1,000 accidents reported at
amusement parks in five years and
poor oversight by the state agency
charged with regulating amusement
parks
leaveshttp://publicsource.org/investig
ations/pa-s-regulation-of-amusementparks-falls-short-inspectionsenforcement questions of safety.

Data: PublicSource combined data and built a
database to get a better look at amusement
parks in Pennsylvania. Records used include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Accident reports
Inspection reports from certified private inspectors
Inspection reports from the bureau’s state inspectors
Records related to registered rides, owners and operators
Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board meeting minutes
Itineraries
Internal emails
Court filings

Many parks failed to turn in all of their
certified inspection reports. “The
agency had no reports at all for 12 of
the state’s 117 permanent parks and
water parks PublicSource analyzed.”
-In 2011 a water park had remained
open despite having no inspections for
a year. An official said, this was
“among the most blatant of

•

•

FINDINGS: South African diamond companies, including De Beers pay a
royalty rate far lower than that of other African states. Companies can
also reduce or cancel out export taxes if they offer locally-mined
diamonds to the country for purchase — even if the South African
government never buys the gems.
The country is missing out in tens of millions of dollars per year.

Data: Worker’s
compensation
claims.

Web presentation:
Includes a
searchable database
of claims and cost
by body part.

Findings: The claims provide a look at violence in schools. “Of the
school district’s 866 workers’ compensation claims in the last fiscal
year, 293 were labeled assaults or altercations, and eight were
referred for criminal charges. ”
“School employees report more injuries than those in any city
agency except the Police Department.”

Data: Reporters made
429 records request to
obtain kindergarten
daycare reports for the
entire country of
Norway.
They inspection reports
can in different formats
and reporters combined
them into a database
that they later made
searchable for readers.
Read more about how
they handled the data in
IRE’s Behind the Story.

Findings:
-Half of the kindergartens
violated the law.
-Security issues were found
in “one out of six.
-Critical hygiene violations
in one out of five.
-Too few adults in one out
of ten.
-One of ten reports are
prepared by the
kindergarten itself.
-55 municipalities did not
have any inspections at all.”
-About half of the
kindergartens had never
had inspections at all.

