Immigration reporting workshop, IRE, June 2014
Zita Arocha, director borderzine.com, UTEP, zarocha@utep.edu
Some pointers for reporting on ethnic communities











Learn who lives there. Create a demographic portrait of the community using
the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Factfinder. Here
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml you can drill
down from overall city stats, to specific neighborhoods and even blocks, and
obtain information on income, education, jobs, even language spoken at
home.
Get to know where immigrants buy groceries, send money home, worship,
seek medical assistance or go for other help. Visit these places on a regular
basis and introduce yourself and your media outlet.
Investigate which immigrant advocacy groups and community centers work
with immigrants. Get to know the key players. These folks have their ears
close to the ground and probably know what is going on with workplace
raids, law enforcement, asylum seekers, deportations, etc.
Interview local immigration lawyers and find out what cases they are
working on. Sometimes there will be a local spike in asylum claims. Attorneys
will know because they typically take on these cases.
A good way to gain access to detention facilities and immigration courts is to
go with an immigration lawyer when he visits his clients.
Only mention someone’s legal status if it pertinent to the story.
Practice SPJ’s golden rule: Do no harm. You may not want to use someone’s
name or personal details if it might lead to detention and deportation.
Familiarize yourself with the language and culture of the people you are
covering. One way is to take a beginning language class. Although you will
probably not become fluent, it will be easier to establish rapport with an
immigrant you are interviewing if you know a few words and key phrases. If
you face a difficult interview and language is a barrier, ask a fellow journalist
who speaks the language to join you or an immigrant advocate to translate.

