Public Records and You
August, 2014

!

Brad Heath • USA TODAY • (202) 527-9709 • bheath@usatoday.com • @bradheath
Alia L. Smith • Levine, Sullivan, Koch & Schulz, LLP • (202) 508-1125 • asmith@lskslaw.com

!
Open records basics
!
•

•
•

•

•

Federal, state and local records: The federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
gives you the right to copy or inspect records held by federal agencies. Every state
has its own open records law; most share the same basic features, but the details are
different (in New York, you make a “FOIL request;” in New Jersey, you make an
“OPRA request,” which is fun to say). State open records laws also give you access
to records held by county and local governments.
What you’re supposed to be able to get: Almost any record from an executive
agency, including written documents, e-mails, databases, maps, and more.
What you can’t get: Records from the White House, Congress or the judiciary.
Records that are specifically exempted by statute, including those that are protected
by attorney client privilege, would reveal agency policy deliberations, are trade
secrets, are (properly) classified, would “constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of
personal privacy” or are related to wells.1 (You can see the basic list at http://bit.ly/
1riM4wR.) They turn out to be surprisingly broad.
How you get the records: Submit a written request to the agency that describes (to
the extent you can) the records you’d like to receive. Each agency has its own FOIA
contact; each should be listed on its website.
What to expect: The FOIA gives an agency 20 working days to respond, and they
can take a 10-day extension if “unusual circumstances” require it.2 That’s not the
deadline to send you a polite letter acknowledging your request – that’s the deadline
to determine whether or not you’ll get the records. Very few federal agencies come
anywhere close to complying with it.

!
Improve your chances of getting records, and getting them faster
!

o Do some reporting before you send the request. If you have a sense of what you’re
after, try to figure out exactly what the records are called and who has them. How
many years of records should they search? More targeted and knowledgeable
requests get a better response.
o Always ask for expedited processing. And always give a reason grounded in the law.
You must show an “urgency to inform the public concerning actual or alleged

1 5 U.S.C. §§ 552(b)(1)-(9)
2 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(B)(i)

Federal Government activity.”3 Saying you’re a reporter or that you have a deadline
won’t work. Reasons that do (sometimes) work:
▪ Congress is considering pending legislation on the subject.4 (Don’t know if
legislation is pending? Check http://govtrack.us.)
▪ There is extensive media interest in the subject (give examples).5
o Don’t reinvent the wheel. Ask the agency if anyone else has requested similar
records before. If they have, ask for a copy of whatever the agency sent to that
person. They should be able to do that very quickly.

!
When the answer is “no”
!

o Ask the agency to explain. Most rejections letters are just boilerplate; they’ll tell you
what exemption the agency thinks is applicable, but not why it applies. Call and ask
them to explain exactly why the records are exempt. Sometimes they might be right
(a rare surprise); other times, when they have to actually explain it, they’ll realize
they’re wrong and change their minds (an ever rarer surprise).
o Appeal the denial. Each agency has a designated appeals officer. But don’t send
boilerplate; spend some time thinking about what parts of the denial were wrong and
why. Some basics to help you:
▪ Remember that one of the guiding principles of FOIA is that it exists so
citizens can “be informed about what their government is up to.”6
▪ It often happens that some parts of a record are exempt and others aren’t.
When that happens, the government has to give you the parts that aren’t.
Many agencies forget this.7
o Write about the denial, especially if it’s egregious.
o Tweet about the denial. Make sure you mention the agency’s Twitter handle; they do
monitor those, and may respond. (They don’t like public complaints.)
o Use the denial as leverage with a source who might give you the records outside
FOIA. (“Look, I tried. They’re being stupid. Now can I have them?”)
o Sometimes the denial is the story. Is the government saying it doesn’t have any
records you’d expect it to have? That it doesn’t keep track of something that it’s

3 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(E)(v)(II)
4 Gerstein v. CIA, No. 06-civ-4643 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 89847 (N.D. Cal. Nov. 29, 2006) (“[T]here is a significant

recognized interest in enhancing public debate on potential legislative action.”); Leadership Conf. on Civil Rights v.
Gonzales, 404 F. Supp. 2d 246, 260 (D.D.C. 2005) (finding an urgent need to inform the public where requests “could
have a vital impact on development of the substantive record in favor of re-authorizing or making permanent the special
provisions of the Voting Rights Act”); ACLU v. U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 321 F. Supp. 2d 24, 31 (D.D.C. 2004) (finding
requestors were entitled to expedited processing of a request that could have shed light on pending legislation).
5 ACLU of N. Cal. v. U.S. Dep’t of Defense, No. 06-civ-1698 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 36888, 21-22 (N.D. Cal. May 25,

2006) (“[E]xtensive media interest usually is a fact supporting not negating urgency in the processing of FOIA
request.”).
6 U.S. Dep't of Justice v. Reporters Comm. for Freedom of the Press, 489 U.S. 749, 773 (1989).

7 5 U.S.C. § 552(b) (“Any reasonably segregable portion of a record shall be provided to any person requesting such

record after deletion of the portions which are exempt under this subsection.”).

supposed to keep track of? (But beware: Some FOIA shops do very poor searches. In
that case, the absence of records doesn’t prove the records are absent.)
o Ask OGIS for mediation (see https://ogis.archives.gov/). Sometimes they can bring
everyone to the table. And sometimes agencies will tell OGIS things they won’t tell
you.
o If all else fails, go to court.

!
When the answer is no answer
!
•

•
•

Be in contact often. Talk to the analyst assigned to your request or to the public
liaison. Ask for an ETA. Ask if there’s anything you can do to simplify matters.
Always call monthly. If things are bad, call daily. And e-mail. And send a letter.
Call the agency’s public liaison. Each agency is supposed to have one, and their job
is to help navigate these problems. Some do a better job than others.
After 20 days (or 30 if the agency claimed an extension), your request is has been
constructively denied and you can go to court.8 But that’s slow, too.

!
When the answer is “yes, but first send us a lot of money”
!
•

•
•

•

Ask the agency to send you a sample of the records before you pay. There are few
things worse than sending an agency a huge check and getting back either something
you didn’t want or thousands of blacked-out pages.
Be prepared to challenge the fees. If they seem high, ask the agency to itemize your
bill. Then you can start to ask why things cost so much.
Do you work for the news media? You don’t have to pay search or review fees; only
the “reasonable standard charges for document duplication.”9 And they have to throw
in the first 100 pages for free.10
Did the agency fail to respond to give you the records within 20 working days (or 30
if it claimed an extension)? You don’t pay search fees, either.11

!
Some tools that will simplify your FOIA life
!
•

For filing and tracking requests: FOIAMachine (http://foiamachine.org) and iFOIA
(http://ifoia.org) let you submit and track requests online using standard templates. What
used to take minutes now takes fewer minutes.

!

8 Oglesby v. U.S. Dep't of Army, 920 F.2d 57, 65 (D.C. Cir. 1990) ("Congress adopted the time limit provision in the

FOIA in order to contribute to the fuller and faster release of information, which is the basic objective of the Act.”)
9 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(ii)(III) (“[F]ees shall be limited to reasonable standard charges for document duplication

when records are not sought for commercial use and the request is made by … a representative of the news media.”)
10 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(iii)((II)
11 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(viii) (“An agency shall not assess search fees … under this subparagraph if the agency fails

to comply with any time limit under paragraph (6).”)

•

•

!

For understanding the law:

!

o The U.S. Justice Department publishes a very detailed summary of federal FOIA
law, including good explanations of each FOIA exemption and how it applies. http://
www.justice.gov/oip/foia-guide.html
o The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press has good state-by-state
summaries of open records laws. http://www.rcfp.org/open-government-guide (See
also state information from the National Freedom of Information Coalition: http://
www.nfoic.org/state-foi-resources.)
o The federal FOIA: http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/5/552
o Every federal agency has its own FOIA regulations, which usually spell out in fairly
understandable terms how they process requests.

!

For more resources and general guidance:
o IRE: https://www.ire.org/resource-center/foia/
o FOIA.gov: http://www.foia.gov/index.html

