1

TWITTER TRICKS & ANALYTICS
Doug Haddix
ELECTRONIC VERSION of this handout is available at go.osu.edu/twittertricks.
ADVANCED SEARCH: https://twitter.com/search-advanced

2

BOOLEAN SEARCH IN TWITTER

LISTS
 To get to your lists page, click your Twitter avatar and select Lists from the choices:

3
 Think of lists as channels that you can tune into occasionally.
 Lists can help trim the number of people you follow – making your main Twitter news feed more
manageable.
 If you put someone on a list, you can get updates from them there rather than following them.
 You can create public lists (that allow others to subscribe) or private lists (to monitor people without
them knowing it – there’s no way to know which private lists that you or anyone else is on).
 You can Subscribe to lists (either created by you or public lists created by others)
 You likely are a “Member of” public lists created by others

HOW TO CREATE A LIST
 Click on “Create new list” on the right side of your Lists page:

 Add a name and short description for your list.
 Make your list public or private.

4
 Your lists – public and private – show up on your main Lists page. Only you can see and access private
lists (designated by the padlock icon).

HOW TO ADD SOMEONE TO A LIST (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE)
 You can follow people on Twitter AND add them to a list. (They show up in your main news feed and
whenever you click on that list to tune into what people on it are tweeting.)
 You can add people to a list WITHOUT following them. (They don’t clog your main news feed. You
decide when to tune into their tweets – and others on the same list.)
 On someone’s Twitter profile, click on the little gear icon to see your options for that account:

 Click “Add or remove from lists…” to get your choices:

5

HOW TO SEARCH FOR PUBLIC LISTS
1. Search for a key word or phrase.
2. Click on “Timelines” on the left rail.
3. Click on Lists or Collections.

 Click on any list to explore and sample it. See who’s on the list.
 When you find a list that you like, click on Subscribe on the top left rail and the list will show up on
your main Lists page as a channel:

6

ANALYTICS
Analytics from Twitter itself:
 Sign into your Twitter account.
 Go to https://analytics.twitter.com

7

 Export data into a spreadsheet-friendly file for deeper analysis and tracking

8

FREE ONLINE ANALYTICS:








Foller.me: http://foller.me/ -- Online tool to do quick analytics on any public Twitter handle. Good way
to quickly background someone on Twitter to see if they're legit, helpful, a true expert or a bot.
Provides key stats (e.g. followers ratio, number of lists the person is on, top hashtags, top @ mentions
and more).
Followerwonk: https://followerwonk.com/ -- Online tool to dive deep and analyze Twitter followers,
their bios, compare users, etc. Answers questions like: where are my followers located geographically?
When do they tweet? Which ones have the most followers? How can I best target my biggest
influencers?
My Top Tweet: https://mytoptweet.com/ -- Searches any Twitter handle (most recent 3,200 tweets) and
produces the Top 10 tweets from that account that had the most retweets.
SumAll: https://sumall.com/ -- Gives in-depth reports and comprehensive monitoring tools and
analytics for your social media and ecommerce data.
Twtrland: http://twtrland.com/ -- Twitter search and analytics tool -- for yourself or anyone on Twitter.
Can search by key topics/location to find sources, key influencers and people to follow. Free version
provides searching, top 50 results for influencers (by key word or location). Free version provides
robust analytics on your own Twitter account or Twitter accounts you manage. Business version ($49,
$99 or $249 monthly) offers competitive analysis, keyword monitoring, export, etc. All have a 14-day
free trial.

