Daniel Lathrop
The Dallas Morning News
(soon: University of Iowa)
daniel.lathrop@gmail.com

NICAR 2015: Tracking Diseases
What happened in Dallas? In late September, Ebola struck in a Dallas
hospital. Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian national, was diagnosed with
the disease. Two nurses were eventually diagnosed as well. The caught
the disease because of preventable failures at the hospital.
If that happens, here’s data you can (and should) pursue.
Hospitals Inspections (CMS 2567)
www.hospitalinspections.org (AHCJ)
Search the facilities involved, but also search for the disease.

Read the research (really) to find out what probably went wrong
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
scholar.google.com
We broke stories about what didn’t happen in Dallas, but should have
been known, because it’s already been written by smart experts.
Virtually all medical/health scientific literature of the last 50 years can
be searched (but not necessarily read) in the combo of PubMed and
Google Scholar.

Read the documents with a critical eye
By comparing the county’s Ebola guidance (in use at the hospital) and
the CDC’s we discovered that the county’s had holes that Thomas Eric
Duncan slipped through.
ER waiting times
projects.propublica.org/emergency/
Is there a problem at a hospital or your community with ER
performance? Did that contribute.
Hospital financials and performance measures
CMS “cost reports”
www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/DownloadablePublic-Use-Files/Cost-Reports/
But those data are a nightmare, so think about using a service like this
one if it’s not a lot of hospitals: www.costreportdata.com
SEC filings
www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html
Even private and nonprofit hospitals issue bonds as well as stocks.
Municipal bonds
emma.msrb.org
These bonds are issued by governments, but can involve private
hospitals (like the one in Dallas).
Meaningful use of electronic health records
www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/DataAndReports.html
www.cdc.gov/ehrmeaningfuluse/jurisdiction.html
This is actually a huge issue across healthcare. These systems,
incentivized and subsidized with Medicare and Medicaid funds, are a
mixed blessing at best. But, at minimum, find out how much money has
locally has gone into these systems and whether they’re doing their
jobs.

