Uncovering Racial and
Economic Divides Using
Data
Nikole Hannah-Jones
ProPublica
nikole@propublica.org
@nhannahjones

Mapping the Creation of Segregation

It is one of the most common arguments used to
justify federal inaction in pushing communities that
get government housing dollars to become more
racially diverse:Class, not race, determines where
people live, the argument goes. African Americans
and Latinos are poorer than white Americans, and
therefore, cannot afford to live in whiter, wealthier
areas.
ProPublica evaluated race and income data for
Westchester County – the affluent New York City
suburb under a federal desegregation order – to
determine whether income alone accounts for the
high degree of racial segregation experienced by
African Americans there.

Finding National Trend: Easier Said
Than Done
When President GeorgeW. Bush came into office, approximately 595 school districts nationwide—including dozens of
non-southern districts—remained under court-ordered desegregation, according to a ProPublica analysis of data on
school desegregation orders compiled by Stanford University education professor Sean Reardon. By the end of Bush’s
second term, that number had plummeted to 380. Nearly 60 percent of all the districts that have been released from
their desegregation orders since 1967 were released under Bush, whose administration pressed the Justice Department
to close those cases wherever possible. The trend has slowed under the Obama administration, but it has continued.
Today, about 340 districts remain under cour
t order.
ProPublica examined 24 years of demographic data compiled by the National Center for Education Statistics and found
that districts grew steadily more segregated after their desegregation orders ended.

Making Our Own Data

Truth Squadding

Sometimes the simplest data is
the most revealing

Higher education Health outcomes Unemployment
Incarceration rates K-12 education Juvenile

justice Housing Health disparities Foreclosures
Death penalty Toxic waste sites Urban renewal
Public housing Wealth Homeownership
Lending Felon disenfranchisement Income
Life expectancy

Infant mortality

Data is just the beginning
1.) Find it.
2.) Analyze it.
3.) Interrogate.

Nikole’s data favs
1. Census
2. Censusscope.org
3.) Brown University US2010 project (John Logan)
4.) U.S. Dept. of Education Office of Civil Rights
5.) HUD
6.) Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
7.) National Institutes of Health
8.) Local school board, housing authorities

“Racism gets reduced to
intent, as if intent is all
that matters.”
David J. Leonard, professor of critical culture, gender and race studies, Washington State
University

Racial inequality is
not an accident or
simply a legacy of
the past

CooperCenter.org

