Market Health Index
Zillow calculates the Market Health Index on a scale from 0 to 10, with 0 being the unhealthiest and
10 being the healthiest, illustrating the current health of a region’s housing market relative to other
markets across the country. The Market Health Index is formed from ten different metrics including
the monthly change in ZHVI; the annual change in ZHVI; the percent of homes selling for a gain; the
Zillow Home Value Forecast; days on Zillow; the number of foreclosed homes; foreclosure re-sales;
negative equity; delinquency rate; and unsold REOs. The Market Health Index is available at the city,
county, metropolitan area, state and ZIP code level.

Home Sales
We produce a time series of new and existing home sales of arms-length transactions of single family,
condominium and cooperative homes on the national, metro and county levels. The series goes back
to June 2008, and the transaction date is the closing date recorded on the county deed. The home
sales time series are adjusted for latency in county reporting of home sales. Data is available for
selected counties and metropolitan areas.

New and Existing Home Sales Forecasts
We forecast the existing home sales release from the National Association of Realtors and the new
home sales release from the U.S. Census Bureau using both historical data and a model of housing
market fundamentals. Our models are uniquely able to explain the economic factors driving home
sales each month. We release a forecast of the reports a few days before the scheduled data release.

For more information contact press@zillow.com

Zillow Real Estate & Rental Data Products
Real Estate Market Reports
The Zillow Real Estate Market Reports are a monthly overview of national and local real estate
and rental markets. The reports are compiled by Zillow Real Estate Research and are released on
a monthly and quarterly basis 2-3 weeks after the close of the prior month. The reports include
forecasts, foreclosure data, for-sale inventory, home values and rents. For more information,
visit www.zillow.com/research/.
The following metrics and more are produced regularly as a part of the Zillow Real Estate Market
Reports and are available for free download at www.zillow.com/data. Most data is available at the
national, state, metropolitan area, county, city, ZIP code and neighborhood levels.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

List prices
Sale prices
Home sales
Home value per square foot
List price per square foot
Sale-to-list price ratio
Percent of listings with price cuts
Percent of homes sold for loss/gain
Homes foreclosed
Foreclosure re-sales
Percent of homes increasing/decreasing in value
Percent of homes sold in the past year (turnover)
Price-to-rent ratio
And many more ...

Below are more detailed descriptions of our most popular indices and metrics:

Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI)
The Zillow Home Value Index is the median home value for a given area on a monthly basis,
and includes single-family, condominium and cooperative homes, regardless of whether they sold
within the given month. It is expressed in dollars, and is seasonally adjusted.

Zillow Rent Index
The Zillow Rent Index is the median estimated monthly rental price for a given area, and covers singlefamily, condominium, and cooperative homes in Zillow’s database, regardless of whether they are
currently listed for rent. It is expressed in dollars and is seasonally adjusted.
Need Data?

Zillow.com/Data

Zillow Home Value Forecast

Breakeven Horizon (Rent vs. Buy)

The Zillow Home Value Forecast uses past home value trends and data on current market conditions,
including home sales, months of housing inventory supply and unemployment, to predict home values
over the next 12 months for the country and for more than 250 markets nationwide.

Zillow’s breakeven horizon calculates the point, in years, at which buying a home becomes less
expensive than renting the same home. It incorporates all costs associated with buying and renting,
including upfront payments; closing costs; anticipated monthly rent and mortgage payments;
insurance; taxes; utilities; and maintenance costs. It then factors in historic and anticipated home
value appreciation rates, rental prices and rental appreciation rates.

Negative Equity
The Zillow Negative Equity Report calculates the share and number of homeowners in an area that
are underwater on their mortgage, owing more than the value of their home. The data in the report
incorporate mortgage data from TransUnion. The report includes, but is not limited to, negative equity
rates, “effective” negative equity rates (homeowners with less than 20% equity in their home), loan-tovalue ratios and delinquency rates.

Zillow Housing Confidence Index

To calculate negative equity, the estimated value of a home is matched to all outstanding mortgage
debt and lines of credit associated with the home, including home equity lines of credit and home
equity loans. All personally identifying information is removed from the data by TransUnion. Overall,
this report covers more than 870 metros, 2,500 counties, and 24,700 ZIP codes nationwide.

The ZHCI is based on a unique, national survey that collects more than 300,000 responses from more
than 10,000 Americans. The overall ZHCI is made up of three separate components that measure
consumers’ perceptions of current market performance; their expectations for future performance;
and their attitudes toward the value of housing in general and its social impact. The ZHCI is calculated
twice annually for the U.S. as a whole and in 20 of the largest metro areas nationwide, covering more
than 100 million Americans. The ZHCI is sponsored by Zillow and conducted by Pulsenomics LLC.

For-Sale Inventory

The Zillow Housing Confidence Index (ZHCI) measures consumer confidence in local housing markets,
both currently and over time. As a forward-looking indicator, the ZHCI can also help determine future
trends in consumer spending and overall housing demand.

Zillow Research produces raw and smoothed, seasonally adjusted time series of the for-sale inventory
of homes. Each week, the number of single-family, condominium and cooperative housing units listed
for sale on Zillow are counted. This listing count includes standard, real estate owned (REO) and forsale by owner (FSBO) listings, but excludes pending, auction and new construction, as well as Zillow’s
Make Me Move and Coming Soon listings. The median of these counts within a month is calculated as
the monthly value, and a seasonally adjusted value is reported. This seasonally adjusted series is then
smoothed using a three-month rolling average.

Zillow Home Price Expectations Survey

Buyer-Seller Index

S&P Case-Shiller Forecast

The Zillow Buyer-Seller Index combines the sale-to-list price ratio, the percent of homes that have
been subject to a price cut and the time properties spend on the market (measured by Days on Zillow).
In this analysis, a sellers’ market is not necessarily one where home values are rising, but rather one in
which homes are on the market for a shorter time, price cuts occur less frequently and homes are sold
at prices very close to (or greater than) their last listing price. In buyers’ markets, homes for sale stay
on the market longer, price cuts occur more frequently and homes are sold for less relative to their
listing price.

Zillow Real Estate Research forecasts the S&P/Case-Shiller national, 10- and 20-City Home Price
Indices, one month before the numbers are officially released. A few hours after Case-Shiller releases
new data, we forecast data for the next month, with a current median absolute error of 0.2%.

The quarterly Zillow Home Price Expectations Survey is sponsored by Zillow and conducted by
Pulsenomics LLC. The survey asks more than 100 leading economists, real estate experts and
investment and market strategists to predict the path of the U.S. Zillow Home Value Index over the
next five years. The survey also asks the panel to weigh in on important economic trends, including
what could happen to mortgage interest rates and the ongoing role of investors in the market.

Days on Zillow
We estimate the median days on market of homes sold in a given month within states, metros
and counties. For a single observation, we must have a date on an official transaction record and
a listing record on Zillow for that same address. We smooth the series with a simple three-month
symmetrical moving average, which weights the center observation twice as heavily as the days on
market observed in adjacent months. This series is available for select counties, metropolitan areas
and states.
Need Data?

Zillow.com/Data

