MaryJo Webster
“Analyzing jobs in your community”
NICAR 2015
mjwebster71@gmail.com
@MaryJoWebster
“Where the Jobs Are”
multi­part series by USA Today (and some Gannett properties)
Methodology

Data we used:
Metropolitan statistical area (MSA)­level estimates of the number of people employed by
occupation in 2013, plus a projection for 2017. This data uses the 6­digit Standard
Occupational Classification codes. In addition, this data included whether or not it met the MIT
living wage threshold for that metro area, the minimum education required for the job, the
percent of workers age 55 and older (i.e. nearing retirement), the average annual openings
estimate, location quotient, median hourly wage, the hourly wage at the 75th percentile.
Source: Economic Modeling Specialists Intl.(see below)

Hurdles/issues we had to deal with:
­­Assigning a “skill level” to each occupation. There is a lot of debate about what should be
considered “middle” skill (especially the line between low­skill and middle­skill). The
methodology linked above explains our choices.
­­Important to look at only jobs that pay a “livable wage”; we relied on the ​
living wage formula
created by MIT; they have figures for states, counties, and places. There is not a national
living wage formula (that I could find)
­­We wanted to show our readers which jobs were growing by 5% or more, but that included
many occupations where there were only a handful of jobs in that metro area. EMSI also told
us that the projections get a little “mushy” when you get into small numbers. To get around
this, EMSI helped us develop a “floor” that varied depending on the size of the metro area
(cutoffs of 75, 125, 250, 500, 750, 1000) So for example, occupations in small metros like
Asheville NC needed to have at least 75 jobs and 5% growth to be included in our online
interactive. Atlanta was set at 750 jobs. The largest metros (N.Y. and L.A.) had cutoff of 1,000
jobs.

Key things to know:
­­You can get employment data (from Bureau of Labor Statistics or EMSI or others) tallied up
either by occupation or by industry. Occupation is more focused on the type of work the
person is doing, while industry pertains to the overall category of the company the person
works for. So for example, a computer support person who works for a hospital will be
categorized under “computer occupations” in the Standard Occupational Classification Codes
(SOC), but would be counted under “hospitals” using the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS).

­­The “minimum education” for each occupation is something the Bureau of Labor Statistics
keeps track of, but you’ll find that it doesn’t always match up with reality. It’s truly the most
basic education that some employer out there might be okay with. However in our reporting
we found that a lot of industries tend to require something more. For example, registered
nurses is listed as “associate’s degree” for minimum education ­­ and that is still true in a lot of
places. But if you want to get a job at a hospital, you need at least a bachelor’s. Many of the
blue­collar jobs are the same way ­­ the BLS category often says “high school diploma,” (or
sometimes less) when in reality the worker will need an industry certification or an associate’s
degree or some other type of pre­job training.

Bureau of Labor Statistics
You can only get ​
national ​
occupation projections data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
They currently have ​
projections ​
out to 2022, paired with median wage, education level and
annual job openings. Check out their ​
Occupational Outlook Handbook,​
too. To get state or
local projections, check with labor economists in your state government (usually it’s a
workforce or economic development agency)
You might also want to check out ​
O*NET, ​
http://www.onetonline.org/
It’s a database of information about each occupation including employment, projected growth,
median wages, top industries where you’ll find this occupation, related occupations and then
this enormous list of characteristics of the job (i.e. tools, technologies, skills, abilities required
for the job)
­­And it has an API, ​
http://www.onetcenter.org/dev_web.html

Other analysis approaches:
In my reporting, I learned about some new analysis techniques that are being used in the
workforce development world. These are three I heard the most about (and these are also
three of EMSI’s marquee products):
Gap analysis
This is an attempt to measure where there might be a shortage or an oversupply of potential
workers in a particular occupation. Initially, this is the data we wanted to use for Where the
Jobs Are, but we found too many flaws when we tried to look at it by metro area. It would be
much more manageable if you are just looking at one metro area ­­ versus trying to do a big
national look like we were. The most common problem was with the “supply” side ­­ this data
typically uses IPEDS data to count the number of people completing programs of study at
local colleges. So inherently there are a number of flaws, including the fact that the supply
doesn’t include people coming from outside whatever region you are looking at (i.e. someone
moving from one state to another after college). Second, it only counts programs that report to
IPEDS. People trained outside that higher education system are not counted (i.e. truck drivers
who attend a commercial driving school).

Atlanta actually proved to be a case in point why we decided to not use this data ­­ state labor
economists pointed out that a large number of workers get their education in other parts of
Georgia and then get jobs in Atlanta, so the data for the Atlanta metro appeared to have low
supply and high demand, but in reality our “supply” number was not realistic.
I found some states have been either doing their own analysis or contracting with EMSI, so
you might find that somebody already has this data compiled. Example: ​
Georgia trades
openings and completions​
(compiled by EMSI; I obtained it from the Georgia Department of
Economic Development­Workforce Division)
­­Supply­demand analysis example ​
from Monroe Community College in Rochester, NY
Economic Impact analysis
Community colleges, particular, are jumping on this bandwagon. What this analysis does is
assess the economic impact of each graduate from a major or career pathway or field of study
­­ effectively telling the college which programs ones are worth spending money on and which
ones need to be ditched or revised. (basically looks at the added wages to the economy of
that student completing the program of study and getting job)
example: ​
Monroe Community College
Job posting analytics
Explanation from EMSI
EMSI is the first to admit that this data has some significant flaws, but it seems to be
improving with time so it’s worth keeping on our radar screen. (and there are others out there
besides EMSI trying to do this kind of analysis) This combines two data points ­­ the number
of unique job postings for a particular occupation and the number of hires in that occupation.
The job postings comes from CareerBuilder and other online job sites, while the number of
hires comes from the BLS. EMSI also looks at “posting intensity” ­­ how much effort
employers are putting into finding workers in a particular occupation.

Economic Modeling Specialists (EMSI)
Their blog is worth following: ​
http://www.economicmodeling.com/blog/
­­​
Brochure​
about their data products (available at state, county, MSA or zip code levels)
­­New: ​
Labor Market Index
CONTACT: Joshua Wright, Director of Marketing and PR
208­892­5596
jwright@economicmodeling.com
Twitter:​
@DesktopEcon
​

