PIVOT TABLES – NICAR Tipsheet
What is a pivot?
Pivot tables are a powerful way of manipulating excel worksheets so that rows can be
turned into columns and vice versa. They are good for counting and adding values from
multiple cells – for example, several entries which are classified under one category such as
payments to the same person or political party.
When to pivot – not every calculation needs a pivot table, although once you get the hang
of it, it’s awful tempting to pivot everything. Think of a time before computers, when every
record might be on an individual index card: you can sort cards, by date, or alphabetical
order, - sorting and filtering in Excel. But if you need to count up the number of cards in one
category, or add up values on a group of cards, then you need to pivot.

Pivoting. Step 1
First make sure you highlight just one cell inside the data you plan to pivot. Select the
“Insert” ribbon, and choose “pivot table” on the far left

When you click on pivot table you get the following wizard:

The range of cells to be pivoted cannot be edited manually. The only way they can be wrong
is if you have highlighted the wrong area of the table. If so, cancel, select the single cell
inside the data, and try again.
When you click OK – and we recommend always accepting the “new worksheet” option, you
get a new worksheet which looks like this:

This is a blank table.
Step 2
The columns from the original worksheet are all listed in the menu on the right. You are
being invited to decide which of them should be the rows, and/or columns, in the new table.
Normally you decide this first, then drop the values you’re calculating into the value fields

area. This is typically going to be where you total expenditure, amounts, and other sums;
Excel will always try to count or add up – if you were to drop a set of zipcodes into the
values fields, Excel would count them. Likewise dates or serial numbers will be counted, not
summed.
In Excel 2007 and later, the menu includes a diagram on the right which allows you to see at
a glance what column has been placed in which field area – A, B, C.
This makes it very easy, not only to drag and drop a
category into one of the areas, but also to change
the selection if you need to. It also makes it easy to
put more than one category into the field; it is well
worth trying out this option, and finding out how
the order of the category affects the finished table.

See how the row fields change in the following two
screenshots, just by reversing the order of field in
box A:

When using a pivot table, filters and sorting don’t work in the usual way.
A drop down filter selector appears with each field:

But sorting has to be done by right-clicking in any once cell of the field you need to sort, and
then sort selected from the resulting menu.
A useful feature is that selecting a cell with a value in it, and double-clicking, will make Excel
create a new worksheet which shows all the records which make up that total – so in the
current example, clicking on the £724000 total for donations to the Liberal Democrat party
will result in a new sheet which shows all 20 transactions which made up that sum.

Pivoting is a powerful feature of Excel. It is worth practicing before you need to do it in
researching a story – it is all too easy to make Excel do ridiculous things without realising it:
always remind yourself what you’re trying to achieve before you click! And if something
looks odd, you may have made Excel answer an impossible question! Try again. Play around,
see what works, what doesn’t, and what effect the various options have.
What if I don’t have Excel?
Although this tipsheet is concerned with MS Excel, Office for Mac, and Libre Office will do
the sme kind of operations, albeit with different menus. Google spreadsheets also have a
powerful pivot function. The principles are the same, even though the menus and
appearances are different.
Further reading
There is plenty online; Googling “Excel Pivot” will get you a long way. There are “Excel
Bibles” on the various editions. Although expensive, they are worth the money. The most
useful book on Pivot Tables that I have found is – Pivot Table Data Crunching in the Mr
Excel Library series. Well worth a read if you want to get the most out of your pivots.
For questions, feel free to email me – jonathan.stoneman@gmail.com
JS March 2015

