1

IMPORTING DATA INTO EXCEL
NICAR 2015
Patti DiVincenzo, WSB-TV
With the explosion of government data available on the web, it’s not hard to find data that can
be downloaded as an Excel file. But there are three other common types of files you might find
that will require you to import the data into Excel yourself.

HTML FILES
If you don’t have an HTML file, and you want to look at a specific example, here’s how to get to the one
used in this tip sheet. First go to www.gadoe.org. There’s a search box in the upper right. Type “private
school list” and click on the search icon.

The first option you’ll see is “Private School Data Collection.” Select that and you’ll see three new
options. Choose “Private School List.”
Now you’ll see a full page of data. Copy the URL in the address bar of the web page. Then, open Excel
and select the “Data” tab. On the left, choose the option that says “From Web.”

2
A “New Web Query” box pops up. In the address bar, erase what’s there and paste the link you copied in
the last step. Now, this is what Excel should now look like. Click on the arrow nearest the data you want
to keep and select “import”.

Excel now asks where you want to put the data. If the option says “=$A$1”, click OK, (if it doesn’t, type it
in) and watch the magic happen.

Note that in order for this to work, the data in the table you’re working with needs to be static—not
searchable-- on the page. If you see searchable data on the web, this import option won’t work. If that’s
the case, try a low-tech solution: copy what you’ve found, and paste it into Excel.

3

PDF FILES
PDF files need to be turned into something else before you can work with the data. In this tip sheet,
we’re working with a PDF that’s been run through “optical character recognition” software. To check
that, go to the far upper right corner of the PDF, and in the “Find” bar, type a word that you see in the
PDF.

If the word you selected is highlighted, congratulations. You have the type of PDF file we love. If the
“Find” tool can’t find the word, that means you have a scanned, (or what I call evil) PDF. (There is a way
to make these searchable, look at the bottom of this PDF for more details.)
The associated exercise file for this part of the tip sheet is called “PDF ex file”. If you haven’t
downloaded it to your computer, do that now.
My go-to-tool for getting a PDF file into Excel is Cometdocs.com. Anyone can register for a free account.
IRE members get a free upgrade to a premium account. Write Cometdocs@ire.org and ask for the
upgraded account. IRE will verify membership, pass it on to Cometdocs and Cometdocs will send you an
email confirming the free upgrade.

Once you’ve logged in, look for a green “Upload” button.

Select “upload, then navigate to where you’ve saved your PDF, and select “open to upload it.

4

Once it’s ready, look directly below the PDF file and select “Convert.” Then, simply drag the PDF
down into that box.

Cometdocs gives you several conversion options, select “To Excel”.

Next select the “Convert” button and wait. When the conversion is finished, just save the file to
your computer.

TEXT FILES
There are two kinds of text files. By far, the most common type is called “delimited.” The other
type is “fixed-width.” Most government agencies are getting away from fixed-width files, but if
you happen to run across one, IRE has some great tip sheets on that. I’ll tell you how to access
those at the bottom of this tutorial.
This shows you how to import delimited files. The associated exercise file for this is called “Txt
ex file”. If you haven’t downloaded it yet, do it now. This data contains complaints filed with
the U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

5

Open up Excel. Again, we’re going to the “Data” tab, only this time, select “From Text.” Find
your file on the computer, select it, and choose “Import.” This is what you’ll see:

The “Text Import Wizard” has the “Delimited” file type already checked. So click “Next” to get
to step 2 of the Text Import Wizard.

Now we have to decide what delimiters the data contains. Look at the data preview box.
If you guessed it’s the “comma” delimited box, you’re right. If you can’t tell, go ahead and make
different selections. When you’ve hit the right one, you’ll know it.

6

Select “Next” for the last step. The Text Import Wizard wants to know what type of information
is in your columns. The default is “General”, but look at the description for “General.”

This particular file contains zip codes, and some zip codes start with a zero. If you let Excel
decide for you, it will read a zip code as a number and drop the leading zero. So, unless you plan
to do math with the number, convert it to “Text.”

7

Do that for each column, selecting “Text” for text, the complaint ID and the zip code, and MDY
for the two date columns. If you had a number you’d want to do calculations with, you would
keep that as “General”, but this data doesn’t have anything we need to keep that way.
Select the “Finish” button. The next box asks where you want to put the data. If your box
doesn’t say “=$A$1”, type it in, click “OK”, and you’re done.

More info:




For a great lesson on importing a fixed-width text file, look at IRE tip sheet #3491
Tabula is another free tool that works much like Cometdocs. Find out more on IRE tip
sheet #4187.
Document Cloud (also free) will take those evil scanned PDFs and turn them into
searchable documents. And Document Cloud does so much more. Check out IRE tip
sheet #4176.

