Transforming Data
!

Using Abstraction to Gain
Knowledge from Numbers
!
!
!
!
NICAR 2015
Atlanta, GA • March 6, 2015
!
Robert Simmon
Planet Labs
simmon@mac.com
@rsimmon

What is abstraction & how does it relate to visualization?
Case Studies with:
Line Graphs, Logarithmic scales, Mapping, Cycle Plot, Slope Graph

NASA/NOAA/DoD

Throughout my career I’ve worked with “realistic” representation of the Earth. From city lights …

Piqiang Fault
China

… to true-color Landsat imagery …

NASA

… to the Blue Marble.

After 20 years at NASA, that work continues at Planet Labs

NASA

Where we use small satellites (deployed from the ISS on Friday!)

Yarlung Tsangpo
China

Planet Labs

We’re going to image the whole world, from the Yarlung Tsangpo near Lhasa, Tibet

Yazghil Glaicer
Pakistan

Planet Labs

… to glaciers in Pakistan

Grand Canyon
USA

Planet Labs

the Grand Canyon …

Kashima Industrial Zone
Japan

Planet Labs

Japanese Steel Mills

Desert Irrigation
Turkey

Planet Labs

massive development projects in the arid Middle East

Dog Fence
Australia

Planet Labs

and the Australian Outback. This fence separates the dingoes from the tasty sheep!

Itumbiara, Brazil
August 8, 2014

Planet Labs/NASA/USGS

Every day. (Soon)

Itumbiara, Brazil
August 9, 2014

Planet Labs

Change happens rapidly, as shown by these burning sugarcane fields.

The more images I work with, the more I’m interested in “pure” visualization. Using pictures to communicate
numbers and ideas. Gas trapped in Antarctic ice reveals past climate.

NASA/WHRC

This can include maps of quantities: the amount of carbon stored in trees in the U.S., using a color scale that’s
evocative of the underlying dataset.

Paciﬁc Cyclones
2013

Carefully chosen abstractions do a better job of communicating information than simply showing the data.

Abstraction &
Representation

Starting with the basics, what do I mean by abstraction?

cc Jeanette, ﬂickr

Something concrete: a single peach. (But yes, this is not a pipe.)

cc Kate Ter Haar, ﬂickr

For small groupings, we can read the number instantaneously. No counting required.

cc Judy Baxter, ﬂickr

But as soon as you get above about 5, maybe 7 or 8, you need to count. So we use numbers to represent these
quantities.

cc Brent Moore, ﬂickr

Of course, with even larger amounts of peaches we change from counting to using pecks and bushels.

Georgia Peaches
Year

Production (tons)

Price ($/ton)

2014

35,500

1,090

2013

35,250

826

2012

35,300

961

2011

36,000

930

2010

40,000

817

2009

32,000

930

2008

28,000

773

2007

13,000

819
source: USDA

Tables are precise, but hard to find patterns—
even for small datasets like this.

source: USDA

Just like we use numbers to represent quantity, we can use graphics to encode numbers. In this case increasing
height represents larger production.

source: USDA

The true power of visualization is to reveal relationships that are otherwise hidden. So does the price of peaches
affect production? (Too little data in this case.)

source: USDA

The scatterplot removed the time component, but a connected scatterplot adds some (but not all) of that
information back in.

The Power
of Visualizaion

NOAA

As I mentioned before, all any group of numbers large than a handful are extremely difficult to parse.

NOAA

But a simple line graph reveals multiple patterns: both seasonal patterns and long-term trends.

Case Study:
Differences

Sometimes our eyes can deceive us:

!

Although plotting two datasets simultaneously may seem straightforward, our visual system tends to evaluate the
closest point between two lines, not the distance in a particular direction

Cleveland & McGill. Graphical Perception: Theory,
Experimentation, and Application to the
Development of Graphical Methods.

William Playfair. “The commercial and political atlas which represents at a single view, by means of copper plate
charts, the most important public accounts of revenues, expenditures, debts, and commerce of England” 1786
one of, if not the first, line graphs.

Cleveland & McGill. Graphical Perception: Theory,
Experimentation, and Application to the
Development of Graphical Methods.

Plotting the difference between imports and exports—the balance of trade—reveals a very different picture than
the pair of lines.

Cleveland & McGill. Graphical Perception: Theory,
Experimentation, and Application to the
Development of Graphical Methods.

So if you want to show the difference between two trends, plot the difference! (and read this paper: https://web.cs.dal.ca/~sbrooks/csci4166-6406/
seminars/readings/Cleveland_GraphicalPerception_Science85.pdf)

Case Study:
Maps

Why do we use maps? What choices do we make so that our maps suit a specific purpose?

NASA Astronaut Photograph ISS025-E-13525

A realistic view of the Earth: decidedly not flat, lots of atmosphere in the way. (which makes my current job
difficult, but keeps me employed)

“Aerial photographs from great
heights, even in color, are often
quite misleading ... Colors and
color elements in vertical
photographs taken from high
altitudes vary by a greater or lesser
extent from those that we perceive
as natural from day to day visual
experience at ground level.”
Eduard Imhof, Cartographic Relief Presentation

Washington, DC

NASA/USGS/Landsat

For many tasks, there can be too much information
True-color satellite view of Washington, DC. September 12, 2013.
Detailed view of urban areas, vegetation, water, clouds, haze, a contrail ...
Accurate, but not useful for navigation or more than basic categorization.

Accurate Metro

Open Street Map/WMATA

Accurate map of the DC Metro
Shows lines and stations in their real-world locations
pink is NASA Goddard
notice that some stations aren’t even on the map, and others are crowded together
(Perhaps) useful for driving to a Metro station, but not useful for navigation within the system

WMATA

focused on what’s important for riders:
routes linked by nodes
small amount of ancillary data for context
based on the London Underground map

WMATA

Henry Beck, London Underground map, 1933
Evolved over decades

Metropolitan Atlanta
Rapid Transit Authority

Now used by almost every subway in the world, including Atlanta’s MARTA

Case Study:
Global Temperature

How do you show long term trends in highly variable data? Averages are good, smoothing is better, but plotting
the change in trend over time is even better.

Annual average vs. the 30-year average from 1951-1980
Trend is partly hidden by noise, and appears to level off after 1998

5-year moving average helps focus on the trend,
but still shows a “pause”

How about longer-term averages? 17-year trend from 1998–2014. Clearly rising, but slowly. Not sufficient to
accurately show trends with observed annual variability.

30 years of data are required to detect patterns in data this noisy, so how about a 30-year trend?
SUCCESS!

!

30-year timescale isn’t arbitrary, it was chosen as the minimum time period to fit the observed inter-annual
variability.

And if you plot the change in 30-year trend over time, it’s clear there’s no “pause” in warming. Chloe Whiteacre,
Bloomberg Graphics

Case Study:
Sea Ice

How to show a long-term trend in data with strong cyclical variation?

!

Cycle plot.

MitchMaloney (CC BY-ND 2.0)

View of Helsinki from Suomenlinna Island

NASA

Sea ice at a particular time and place—shows local distribution, but no short- or long-term change

NASA GSFC SVS

You can animate maps to show change over time, but it’s not quantitative and a slow transfer of information.

National Snow & Ice Data Center

Plot the area every day for 35+ years?

!

It’s a mess.

National Snow & Ice Data Center

Show both seasonal patterns and long-term trends
standard deviation hard to understand, may not fit data, removes detail.

Small Multiples

Show many thumbnail-sized graphics for comparisons

NASA GSFC SVS

Can see broad trends and some of the cyclic pattern, but consumes *a lot* of space and not precise. http://
svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/details.cgi?aid=4204

NASA GSFC SVS

some details are visible zoomed in …

Cycle Plot

But to accurately see the annual cycle and long term, it’s best to use a cycle plot.

National Snow & Ice Data Center

Plot each month of the year separately.
Show both seasonal patterns and long-term trends
downside: need to explain how to read the figure:
is it worth it?

Case Study:
Nitrogen Dioxide

How to show change in spatial data? Do we even need to use maps at all? Logarithmic scaling, revisit small
multiples, introduce the slope graph.

Los Angeles, CA

cdshock CC BY 2.0

Smog (primarily NO2) in LA

Linear

NASA/KNMI

We can map the distribution of NO2, but it looks like China is the only polluted region.

Log10

NASA/KNMI

We’re all gonna die!

Square Root

NASA/KNMI

Taking the square root is a happy medium.

2005
NASA GSFC SVS

But how do we show change over time? Sequential maps show a reduction of NO2 in the U.S.

2011
NASA GSFC SVS

… but it’s not very quantitative.

NASA

A bubble plot is an improvement.

Hilboll et al., 2013

But why use a map at all?
Try small multiples. Shows seasonality, but hides differences between cities & trends.

Hilboll et al., 2013

Remove chart junk, set to consistent scale, & improve typography to reveal difference between cities, but trends
remain hard to determine.

Slope Graph

solution: slope graph

Hilboll et al., 2013

Shows relative pollution in cities worldwide, and shows change over time. Important to use trends, not just
connecting two data points.

!

No spatial relationships.

Finally, some
counter-examples

Sometimes it is best to just show the data.

Seasons

©2011 EUMETSAT

This can lead to some surprising views of Earth
6:00 am every day
September 2010-September 2011
clearly shows what causes the seasons
choice of what not to display is as important as what to display

!

EUMETSAT

It’s hard to understand just how fast a satellite moves. But showing an overpass in real time gives some sense.

It’s important to create visualizations that fit the dataset, message, and audience.
When necessary, transform data to use the strengths of our visual system, and mitigate the weaknesses.

Inspirations
Cynthia Brewer Color Brewer
Robert Bringhurst The Elements of Typographic Style
Alberto Cairo The Functional Art
William Cleveland The Elements of Graphing Data
Philip B. Meggs History of Graphic Design
Donald Norman The Design of Everyday Things
Edward Tufte Visual Display of Quantitative Information
Colin Ware Information Visualization: Perception for Design

selection of resources that influenced me
heavy on design and typography

Contact
simmon@planet.com
@rsimmon
!

planet.com
thumbsupviz.com
earthobservatory.nasa.gov/blogs/elegantfigures

Thank You

Seriously, thanks for reading. And feel free to hit me up with questions or feedback.

NASA/NOAA/DoD

