Topher Sanders
Investigative Editor/Reporter
The Florida Times-Union
Topher.sanders@jacksonville.com
NICAR 2015 Atlanta

Policing the Police
 Ask for your Police departments legal settlements
o This will give you something cool to report on in and of itself. But what you really want to do is look
at the settlements for trends.
 Are there lots of wrongful arrest settlements?
 Do your police officers have a lot of car accidents?
 Are the K-9s biting lots of people?
o Those trends will point you in the direction of other cool data and documents to hunt down. If you go
back far enough (five years or so), you’ll get two to three solid stories out of it.
 State/District Attorneys
o Request data looking at drug crimes. How many people committing non-violent drug crimes are
being sent to jail/prison by your DA?
 This is a good story that will stir the passions of both your liberal and conservative readers.
o Juvenile data
 Go to your state juvenile department and ask them about what juvenile crime data is out
there. You’ll be surprised how much is available if you only ask and how willing the juvenile
folks are to give it to you.
 Are the juveniles in your area being given light sentences and lollipops? Or are they being
hammered by a system intended to reform them?
o Ask for salary data for all the prosecutors in your local office. Elected DAs and State Attorneys often
control their own budgets and have very little oversight so you might see some weird stuff with
salaries like unsanctioned bonuses and raises.
 Example: Corey handed out $425,000 in temporary pay increases that may have violated
law, experts say
 Door knocking is a must
o You must be willing to drop by the homes of both police officers and citizens without them knowing
you’re coming.
o Do your research. Know what you’re there for and have your pitch ready. You’re surprising someone
at home, so don’t dilly-dally.
o Use handwritten notes. If you miss someone at home, write a handwritten note and leave it in the
source’s door or mailbox along with your card. I love this; it rarely fails to generate a call back. After
 Example: Name mix-up in sexual battery case sends wrong Clay County teen to jail for 35
days (After Cody Williams told me “no,” through his attorney a handwritten note at the
house prompted a call back)
 Use outside agencies
o If you’re at a small paper like mine and you don’t have the time or money to fight long drawn out
legal battles, you have to be creative.
o Think about all the places your police department either sends data to or receives data from (State
departments, school systems, health systems, local government offices, the feds).

o

These agencies will be more than happy to hand you huge data sets when they realize the story likely
isn’t about them. :-)
 Example: Juvenile Justice Project.
 Feet on the ground (Sourcing, sourcing and more sourcing)
o We can all agree, data is awesome, but you’ll never know about the super amazing data your local
police department keeps locked away in a volt without sources.
o Go at your source’s pace. Let them know you’re eager but don’t scare them away being too
aggressive.
 Make sure you keep good sources in the loop as you make public records request and calls.
 Example: Jacksonville Sheriff John Rutherford voided tickets for WJXT TV-4 traffic anchor;
Rutherford: tickets are voided all the time
o Stay in contact with sources who have given you stuff before and go to them if you’ve got an idea and
need to know if there’s data out there that speaks to it.
o Even stay in contact with sources you think hate you.
 Yes, that guy too. He hates you now for writing that story about his second cousin, but next
month he’s going to be in the middle of an Internal Affairs beef and he might just be your
best friend.
 Useful data that could lead to good watchdog stories
o Citizen complaint database: Your cops likely have this, but are they going to give it to you. Try. Ask
for the whole thing and see what happens.
o Forfeitures: Ask for the complete list of forfeitures. Both the cash and items. Find out where the
stuff is going and how your police department is using the stuff. If they say they are selling it. Get
the backing documents (invoices, receipts, etc.) and verify it for yourself. You just want to make sure
the chief hasn’t inappropriately acquired a new curved TV.
o Motor pool inventory: This is great because it will tell you how many cars are working, damaged,
totaled, etc.
o Use of force reports: In our community these are big and expensive. Start by just asking for the
summaries. Summaries are usually just a few pages, but do a decent job of summing it all up. They
also usually tell you whether the force used was justified. The summaries will also allow you to go
back few years and broaden your scope.
o Truancy data: This is good one that may be kept diligently by the school systems. Then the cops will
have data on how many parents they arrest for contributing to truancy. Are the truancy laws being
implemented equitably across the community? Are some areas being hit for truancy sweeps when
others aren’t?
o Curfew data: Everyone loves a curfew story. You’re elected city officials will chime in on this one and
parents will have a lot of complaints about how the law is or isn’t enforced. Again is it equitable
across town?

