POLICING THE POLICE Tipsheet
NICAR 2015
Ben Poston
Los Angeles Times
@bposton

FBI Uniform Crime Reporting data integrity
A guide to scrutinizing your local police department’s crime statistics
I’ve uncovered widespread flaws in the crime data in Milwaukee and Los Angeles. Here’s what I
learned along the way.
- The FBI's audits are a joke. The audits are known as Quality Assurance Reviews, and they are
done in each state on a triennial basis. It’s a classic government audit - just enough to say we
audited something, but not a robust sample to be able to draw conclusions.
- In many states, the Department of Justice doesn’t do audits and city controllers rarely do.
Some departments don't even audit themselves.
- So basically no one is checking the cops.
One crucial thing to understand: the FBI has two main crime types - Part 1 and Part 2. Only Part
1 (serious) crimes are counted in a city’s violent or property crime rate. Any serious crimes
(such as rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, theft) that are misclassified as Part 2
crimes are not counted in the official tally and artificially lower the city’s crime rate.
Go straight to the source. Request a copy of your police department's automated reporting
system database. You should be able to ask for the fields of information on the face sheet of a
police incident report. The most important fields are the unique incident report number, police
division number, FBI crime code classification (numerical or text), weapon codes,
time/date/place, and a short narrative that describes the elements of the offense.
If you are able to get this data (preferably 3 or more years), simply compare the FBI crime
classifications to each narrative. Look for incidents that were classified as minor offenses, but
whose narratives suggest they should have been classified as serious offenses. For example, if
someone is shot, stabbed or beaten unconscious that should be classified as an aggravated
assault, but I’ve found hundreds of examples where police under-reported crimes like these as
minor assaults. Look for burglaries that are under-reported as trespassing or vandalism, and
thefts that are misreported as “lost property.” Also, be sure to check for “over-reporting” -- that is
incidents that were reported as serious offenses that should have been minor crimes.
If you cannot obtain a database of incidents, you should ask for a smaller sample, such as 1
month worth of paper incident reports. Again, you just need need the key fields mentioned

above. If you find a high percentage of misclassified violent or property crimes in your sample,
you can report on that and raise questions about the accuracy of your police department’s crime
data and make a case for why you should access to more records or data.
Consult crime-coding experts before you go to your police department to make sure you
interpreted the FBI UCR handbook correctly. This will help greatly for bulletproofing your
analysis.

Disparities in traffic stops
In 2011, I reported the story “ Racial gap found in traffic stops in Milwaukee. Here are some tips
I learned along the way.
Hit the streets and talk to real people. Minority communities are the most negatively impacted
by aggressive policing tactics like those found in Milwaukee or New York City. Talk to
stakeholders like community groups, NAACP, etc.
Stand on the shoulders of giants. Criminologists have been studying disparities like this for
decades. I read Lorie Fridell’s “By the Numbers: A Guide for Analyzing Race Data from Vehicle
Stops” several times before I started my work. It’s like the Bible for this subject.
Reach out to experts early and often. I talked to criminologists throughout my reporting and
also shared my detailed findings with them to make sure I wasn’t misinterpreting the data. I
wrote all this into my methodology sidebar story.
There is no perfect benchmark. Census demographic data is the least ideal benchmark,
licensed drivers by place is next, not-at-fault drivers in two-car accidents are better and actually
counting drivers in cars in the field is the best (but it’s super time-consuming and not feasible in
most cases).
Confront your target to give them a fair say. I approached the Milwaukee Police Dept.,
Milwaukee County and Dane County sheriff’s departments and the Wisconsin State Highway
Patrol more than a month before publication to give them a chance to respond to the findings. It
adds context to the story, but also will save you from making a crucial error.
No matter what you do, you will be criticized for your story and methodology. I used the
best benchmarks available to me, but still got hammered by the Milwaukee County Sheriff and
local media. A conservative radio talking head read this entire letter on air. However, the story
withstood the criticism and no facts were ever challenged.

