Finding and Analyzing Data on FEC.gov
Updated 3/6/2015
Christopher Schnaars, USA TODAY
cschnaars@usatoday.com, @chrisschnaars
The Federal Election Commission offers several flavors of campaign finance data. You can view an
individual report in PDF or HTML format, look at charts and maps summarizing campaign finance data or
search for specific contributions and expenditures. You also can download datasets ranging from the raw
text data for an individual report to a summary file containing all individual contributions made during the
two-year election cycle.
There’s a lot to digest and a lot of pitfalls that can trip you up along the way. Your best bet is to read this
guide and look over the URLs provided below, then spend some time poking around the FEC website to
familiarize yourself with all the other cool stuff I left out. If you find something particularly interesting, or if
you have any comments or suggestions for this guide, please email me: cschnaars@usatoday.com
If you need help, send me an email or post a message on the NICAR listserv. There are lots of people
with NICAR – Derek Willis, Aaron Bycoffe, Jacob Fenton and Scott Klein, among others – who have
taught me a lot about campaign finance data. Alternatively, you can reach Judith Ingram in the FEC’s
press office at JIngram@fec.gov or (202) 694-1220. She’s extremely helpful and can put you in touch with
the FEC’s data folks.
A note about committees:
Throughout this document, I refer to committees. In this context, a committee is any entity required to file
campaign finance reports with the FEC, which assigns each committee a “C-number” (the letter C
followed by an 8-digit number). A committee could be a candidate’s principal campaign committee, a
legislator’s leadership political action committee (PAC) or joint fundraising committee, a PAC for a
corporation or union, or an independent expenditure only committee (sometimes referred to as a Super
PAC). Entities not required to file reports with the FEC that detail contributors – most notably 501(c)(3)
and 501(c)(4) non-profits – don’t apply here, and you won’t find contributor data for these groups on the
FEC website other than, perhaps, contributions from those nonprofits to committees that file reports.
Candidates for political office also receive an ID number from the FEC. These IDs are similar to
committee IDs but are prefixed with P, H or S (rather than C) depending on whether the person is a
candidate for president, the House or the Senate. The FEC assigns multiple IDs to candidates who run
for more than one office.
A note about the Senate: They suck (albeit a little less)
My favorite rant about campaign-finance data is the Senate. While this is the 21st century and virtually
every Senate candidate surely uses a computer to track contributions and generate these reports,
senators still allow themselves to file reports on paper, thereby obscuring the identities of their donors and
making that data a lot more difficult to work with. The FEC, in turn, spends taxpayer dollars to pay
contractors to input the once-computerized data from these paper reports. A limited number of these input
fields show up in the weekly master data files (discussed below), but because of the lag between when

the FEC gets the reports and how long it take a contractor to input the data, weeks or even months can
pass before any of that data is available electronically.
In late 2014, the FEC made a slight improvement to this system: You now can download individual
reports electronically once they have been keyed in. You're still stuck in terms of having to wait a while for
this data to be keyed in, but individual reports contain a lot more data than the subset of fields housed in
the weekly master files, most notably donor addresses and parsed donor names.
Of course, if all you want to do is eyeball a report, PDF images of Senate reports -- which often are
several thousand pages -- can be viewed on the FEC website, but it usually takes a week after the filing
deadline for them to show up. (A handful of senators opt to file their reports electronically. You can search
for these “unofficial” reports here: http://docquery.fec.gov/senate)
Now I'm going to hop onto my soapbox for a minute: Too often, the end result of the long delay in the
availability of Senate data is we ignore it because by the time it becomes available, it's old and we've
moved on to other things. I'm as guilty of this as everyone else, and we shouldn't let them get away with
it. Look at the data, even if it's old. Write a story about the data, even if it's only a brief. If a senator or
Senate candidate you're covering doesn't file "unofficial" electronic reports, ask for them electronically. If
he or she doesn't comply, ask why and write about that. I'm doubtful the Senate will ever surrender its
paper-filing privileges, but it definitely won't happen without an incentive for them to do so, namely
pressure from the media and an indifferent public.
1) Third party data
If you want to save yourself a lot of pain, you don’t need to see campaign finance reports the day they’re
filed and don’t have issues crediting a third party, there is a lot of very good data available from the
Sunlight Foundation (http://sunlightfoundation.com) and the Center for Responsive Politics
(http://www.opensecrets.org) that you can download and use for free.
The Sunlight Foundation's Influence Explorer site (http://realtime.influenceexplorer.com/download-index),
for example, boasts bulk FEC data files for Schedules A, B and E as well as data on a per PAC or per
candidate basis. New data often is available within 12 hours of when a report is filed.
You’d be wise to check out these websites before reading any more of this guide and deposit it in the
nearest recycling bin if Sunlight or CRP data meet your needs.
Note that just as with any other data, if you use data compiled by the Sunlight Foundation or CRP, you
should make sure your story and any related graphics credit the organization for its work.
2) Weekly master files
If all you care about is contributions, and you don’t want to use data from a third party, the fastest, easiest
way to get the data you need is to download the master contribution files compiled by the FEC. You can
find them at: http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftpdet.shtml
You’ll see there’s a link for seven files per election cycle. Each of these summary files is useful, but the
four files I’m going to focus on now are highlighted below:

Links to data dictionaries are provided in the far-right column.

The indiv file supposedly contains all individual contributions of $200 or more to federal committees.
However, contributions that appear to be from corporations, PACs or other organizations sometimes are
included in campaign-finance reports on the line set aside for itemized individual contributions and
therefore show up in these master files. (You can use the Entity Type field to identify these.) Contribution
refunds, usually found on Schedule B, also are included.
Similarly, the pas2 file contains contributions to candidates from committees, and the oth file contains
contributions from one committee to another.
NEW! The FEC recently added a weekly master file (oppexp) listing committees' operating expenditures,
which are found on Schedule B. Also, the FEC has ceased offering three files listing adds, changes and
deletes for the individual contributions file each week. These files were intended to help people manage
weekly changes without having to re-download the whole indiv file each week. This isn't much of a loss,
however. I don't know anyone who used those files, particularly given the messy, error-prone process of
trying to update your database each week. Despite the file's size, it's much easier to just reload fresh
individual contributions data each week.
Besides links to the files, the chart above contains the record count for each file, the date the file was last
updated and links to data dictionaries, where you can get the data type and a brief description of each
field. The contributions and expenditures files are updated every Sunday. The candidates, committees
and candidate-committee linkage files (which I don't discuss here) are updated daily.
The rest of this guide largely focuses on how to download and analyze individual reports. But if you find
the weekly master files meet your needs, you most likely are better off using them rather than individual
filings. Before you go, though, let’s take a quick look at the pros and cons of each.
3) Using the weekly master files vs. individual reports
Here are some reasons you might want to use the weekly master files discussed above rather than
download individual filings:
1. Fewer files: You need to download only three files to have all contributions of $200 or more for
the election cycle.
2. Transaction types: The FEC adds a Transaction Type code to each row. This field can be used to
characterize the type of contribution or disbursement on a much more granular level than just

using the line number field contained in the original filing. Presently, there are about 75 different
transaction types, though you’ll find fewer than half of them in the master files. The data
dictionary for each master file lists the specific transaction types included in that file. A complete
list of transaction type codes can be found at:
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/metadata/DataDictionaryTransactionTypeCodes.shtml
3. Refunds included: An important gotcha when you use the original filings is you have to be careful
to check Schedules A and B for contribution refunds. Refunded contributions are included in the
master files for you. To find refunds, look for Transaction Type 22Y.
4. No amended reports: If a report has been amended, only contributions from the most recent
reports are included in the master files. When you work with individual electronic filings, you
always have to check to see if a report has been amended.
5. FEC vetting: In addition to the transaction type codes, the FEC looks for missing or incorrect
candidate and committee IDs and adds this data to the master files.
Here are some advantages to using individual filings rather than the master files:
1. Timeliness: You can download these filings as soon as they’re uploaded to the FEC website
whereas the master files are generated only once a week (Sunday afternoons).
2. Address information: The master files contain a donor’s city and state but omit street address
data found in individual filings.
3. Names parsed: The individual filings include separate fields for first, middle and last names as
well as prefix and suffix and a completely separate field for organization names. In the master
files, names are concatenated into one field.
4. More forms and schedules: The master files include contributions, operating expenditures and
refunds from Schedules A and B and some data from Schedules E (independent expenditures)
and F (coordinated expenditures). All data found in another 12 schedules are excluded, though
other than loans, you probably won’t care about most of this missing data anyway. Additionally,
while this guide focuses on Form 3 and all related schedules, there are other interesting forms
you won’t find in the master files, including committee statements of organization (Form 1), 24and 48-hour contribution and expenditure notices, statements of candidacy (Form 2), lobbyist
bundlers and the full text of miscellaneous correspondence sent to the FEC (Form 99).
5. More contributions: I’ll discuss the technicalities of when a contribution has to be itemized later in
this guide, but the important distinction here is that itemized contributions found in electronic
filings are found in the master files only if they are for $200 or more.
6. More fields: The master files contain fewer fields than the individual filings. Whereas Schedule A
offers nearly 50 fields, for example, fewer than two dozen are included in the master files (though
other than street address and parsed names, all the important ones are there).
7. Smaller: If you only want specific reports or committees, you can download only what you need.
The master files include all contributions for the entire election cycle, so the files are very large.
4) How to find a committee’s reports
Now that I’ve shown you the quick and dirty way to get at campaign contributions, let’s dive into working
with individual filings. Again, if after reading the pros and cons of each type above you think the weekly
master files will serve your needs, you can skip most of the rest of this guide (though in the next section,
I’ll point you to some additional files that can give you summary numbers for each report, such as total
contributions, cash on hand and total disbursements).

To find an individual report, go to www.fec.gov, where you’ll see a menu on the left side of your screen.
Hover over (but don’t click) Campaign Finance Disclosure Portal, then Searchable Systems, then click
Candidate & Committee Viewer (screenshot below). Or you can skip all that and just click/type/bookmark:
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml
On the search page that comes up, you can enter an ID or partial name for any candidate or committee. If
you type “obama” (without the quotes) and click the Get Listing button, you’ll see four entries for Barack
Obama near the top of your search results: Three rows for his three candidate IDs (one each for
President, House and Senate) and a listing for Obama for America, his principal campaign committee in
the presidential race. Each candidate has exactly one principal campaign committee. This committee,
rather than the candidate individually, is the fundraising arm that accepts campaign contributions.

Navigating to the Candidate & Committee Viewer

Performing a search using the Candidate & Committee Viewer

If you click the link for P80003338, then select the Filings tab, you’ll see only Statements of Candidacy
(also known as Form 2). On the far-right of each row, you’ll see a link to view that form in PDF or HTML
format or to download it as text. Ignore the text link for now and click either the PDF or HTML link to see a
printer-friendly version of the report.
There’s not much to it, but you’ll see Joe Biden listed as Obama’s running mate. You also will see the
campaign mailing address, the name of Obama’s principal campaign committee (Obama for America) and
a reference to a second authorized committee called Obama Victory Fund. This is a joint fundraising
committee. It allows donors to write single big checks to one group which in turn disburses that money up
to legal contribution limits to a host of other organizations, such as Obama’s campaign committee, the
Democratic National Committee and state Democratic parties.
Notice that Form 2 contains no financial information and there are no financial reports on this page. That’s
because you’re looking at the candidate rather than his campaign committee. To see financial reports,
you can either look under Committee Information (near the top-right corner of your screen) and click the
committee’s hyperlink or go back to your search results and find a link there.

The Filings tab for Barack Obama as a candidate for president, with links to his statement of candidacy and campaign committee.

Before we look at a financial report (Form 3), here’s your first curveball: There are four different versions
of Form 3. The version filed depends on the type of committee filing the report. Candidate committees for
the House and Senate use Form 3; presidential campaign committees use Form F3P; PACs, Super PACs
and other committees use Form F3X and lobbyists use Form F3L. I’ll discuss these distinctions a little
later. For now, all you need to know is that while they contain similar information (contributions,
disbursements, loans and so on), there are subtle and some not-so-subtle differences. (Note that
lobbyists are a different animal, and their reports aren’t covered in this tipsheet.)
One nice consistency, though, is the different flavors of Form 3 share the same subforms. Just like a
1040 tax form, Form 3 has a bunch of optional “schedules,” such as Schedule A (contributions), Schedule
B (disbursements) and Schedule C (loans). The schedules go all the way up to L, but you’ll rarely use
anything but A and B. I’ll come back to this later as well.

Now let’s look at a report. Click the link for Obama for America, then click the Filings tab. Look for (but
don’t click) the July 2013 quarterly report. Do you notice anything? There actually are FOUR reports
(screenshot below).
The first report, filed on 7/15/2013, is the original filing. The next row is a request for additional
information (RFAI) from the FEC, and the third and fourth rows are amended reports. It’s not that
interesting, but if you click the PDF link for the RFAI, you’ll see the FEC had questions concerning some
contribution refunds and a debt. The committee then filed an amended report to address the FEC’s
questions, but it’s likely the new report contains more than that: Look at the page counts for the original
report and the amended report. The amended reports contain an additional 228 pages.

Obama for American amended its July 2013 quarterly report twice after the FEC requested more information.

Amended reports are filed ALL THE TIME, and this often is done to correct mistakes or add additional
information without any prompting from the FEC. So if you write a story using numbers pulled from one of
these reports, it’s a good idea to check the FEC website for amended reports before you publish.
Sometimes amended reports are filed years after the initial filing. In this example, the most recent
amendment was filed eight months after the original. Even the first amendment filed to address the FEC's
concerns took five months.
5) How to read a report summary
Now click the PDF link for the amended report filed on 12/13/2013. Generally speaking, if you want to
look only at summary numbers atop a report, the HTML link is better. Whereas the PDF link will load the
entire report into your browser, the HTML version displays only the topline numbers for the report and
provides links to specific line numbers within the various schedules. Note that Obama’s post-general
election report is more than 300,000 pages! The July 3013 report is small enough that you can grab the
whole PDF, though.

You’ll find Summary numbers near the top, but Cash On Hand is the only really useful number here. Dig deeper for better stuff.

At the top of the report, you’ll see basic information, such as the committee’s name and ID number, the
treasurer’s name and the period the report covers (in this case, 4/1/2013 through 6/30/2013). Reports
generally cover a month, a quarter or six months.
The next page has a Summary section, but the only number of interest here is line 10: cash on hand at
the close of the reporting period. If you’re covering campaigns on deadline and looking at a recently filed
report, cash on hand is a way to take a quick pulse of the committee’s war chest going into the next
period. Do they have millions of dollars to spend on media buys and voter outreach, or are they broke?
You might think total receipts and total disbursements are interesting numbers, but they contain a lot of
extraneous stuff, such as candidate loans (for receipts) and contribution refunds (for disbursements). It’s
better to bypass these summary numbers and go a little deeper into the report.
The next gold nugget is Line 17, which is broken down into individual contributions (itemized and
unitemized), as well as contributions from political party committees (such as the DNC and the RNC),
other political committees (PACs) and the candidate. Line 18 shows transfers from other authorized
committees, which typically are joint fundraising committees.

Line 17 (or Line 11 for House, Senate and PACs) is where you can get details on individual and PAC contributions.

Notice that there are two columns of numbers. The first column shows amounts for the three-month
reporting period. The second column shows numbers to-date for the election cycle.
Here’s another pitfall to be aware of: While candidate committees’ election cycles are two years or more,
the clock resets for PACs and Super PACs – including the RNC and DNC – every January 1. This means
that if you want to look at how much money a PAC received and spent during the 2014 election cycle, you
might want to look at the PAC’s year-end report for 2013 AND 2014.
The difference between itemized and unitemized contributions can be confusing. Let’s demystify it now:
Contributions must be itemized when the total amount given (the aggregate) by a particular donor
EXCEEDS $200. Let’s use an extreme example: If John Smith makes four $50 contributions to Obama
for America, all of that money can be counted as unitemized contributions. But John really wants to give
all he can, so he digs into his couch cushions, finds $1 in change and mails it to Chicago. That $1 – and
only that $1 – must be itemized while the original $200 can remain unitemized. When you start looking at
the Schedule A records a little later in the guide, you’ll see that contribution records include two dollar
figures: the amount of the specific contribution and the aggregate amount given during the election cycle.
John's latest contribution would be listed as $1, with an aggregate of $201. (Occasionally, committees
voluntarily itemize contribution aggregates of less than $200, but this is rare.)
Looking at the Line 17 numbers as a group can tell you a little about a candidate’s financial support. One
calculation I often do is Line 17a2 (unitemized contributions) divided by Line 22 (total receipts) to show
how much of a candidate’s money comes from small contributions, indicating the level of grassroots
support. Comparing 17a1 with 17a2 can show you to what extent wealthier donors back the candidate.
Line 17d shows whether the candidate is fueling his or her own campaign. Line 17c shows how much

money the candidate got from special interests (PACs), though you should dive into the Schedule A data
and look at the details to be sure.
Under disbursements (lines 23 to 30), you generally care most about operating expenditures on Line 23,
but lines 24 and 25 will tell you if the committee is giving money to other committees and how much it’s
spending on fundraising. If the committee is in debt, you’ll want to pay attention to Line 27.
The FEC also compiles master files summarizing the topline numbers for all electronically filed reports.
You can find those summary files at http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftpsum.shtml. One nice thing
about these files is they are updated DAILY, so they’re very current.
If you think you’ve got a handle on everything so far, let’s mix things up a little.
6) Dealing with multiple versions of the same form
As I mentioned above, presidential candidates, House and Senate candidates, PACs and lobbyists each
use a slightly different version of Form 3. For presidential candidates, contributions are on Line 17. House
and Senate candidates and PACs (forms F3 and F3X) use line 11.
Make sense? Well, there’s more. From time to time, the FEC changes the headers for one or more forms.
The most recent header version is 8.1: the fourteenth version of headers released to date. When you
consider all the different header iterations of all the different forms required by the FEC, there presently
are 664 different sets of headers.
However, while this demonstrates a large variation in the data’s format over time and a potential
complication to be aware of, generally it’s not a big deal and matters only when you’re downloading data.
If you’re just looking at the PDF or HTML version of a single report, you can clearly see what each
number means. Additionally, not all forms change with each iteration. The headers for all but three forms
remained exactly the same when the FEC moved from v8.0 to v8.1 in January 2014.
I know I’ve been saying this a lot, but I’ll come back to this point later. For now, I’m going to give you
some resources you can use to see the different forms and header versions. Bear with me. It’s important,
and the reasons why will be clear very soon.
First, here are links to blank PDFs for Form 3, each of which includes all related Schedules. You should
download or at least bookmark these:


Form 3 (House/Senate): http://www.fec.gov/pdf/forms/fecfrm3.pdf



Form 3P (President): http://www.fec.gov/pdf/forms/fecfrm3p.pdf



Form 3X (PAC): http://www.fec.gov/pdf/forms/fecfrm3x.pdf



Form 3L (Lobbyist): http://www.fec.gov/pdf/forms/fecfrm3l.pdf

Now let’s get information on the various headers. If you go to
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftpefile.shtml and scroll down, you’ll see a chart listing each version
of the headers and the dates during which each version was used.

Various header formats and the dates they were used.

Near the top of the webpage, you’ll see a link for “Filing Format Documentation.” Click this link or just go
to http://www.fec.gov/elecfil/eFilingFormats.zip to download the headers. When you unzip this file, you’ll
see a file called: “e-filing headers all versions.xlsx” Open this file and go to the second tab (all versions).
You’ll see the headers for each version of every form. The other tabs are form-specific and don’t contain
any additional information.

A snip of the worksheet listing the headers for all versions of all FEC forms.

Open the FEC_v8x folder, then open: “FEC_Format_v8 1.xlsx” This file gives you a summary of all
changes made since v8.0. As it turns out, changes were made only to Form 5, Form 5.7 and Schedule D.
So all versions of Form 3 and all Schedules except D remained the same.
The various tabs in this Excel file also show the schema for each form and schedule, which you’ll need if
you want to import campaign-finance data into Access or some other database manager. Sadly, the
documentation for each field is scant at best. Looking at the blank forms (URLs provided above) is a good
tool to help you puzzle out what a particular field means.

If this seems a little overwhelming, don’t worry. I’m showing you all the header versions and schema now
so you’ll have these resources handy later in the tutorial. For now, all you really need to keep in mind is
that headers change over time, and now you have the tools you need to discern the differences when it
matters.
7) How to inspect the detailed data in schedules A, B and so on
The text data for an individual filing can be confusing because that one file contains the summary
numbers and all schedules. Each schedule can have a different number of fields as well as its own
headers, none of which is in the file.
Let’s look at an example. Download the amended post-general report for the Texas Democratic Party:
http://docquery.fec.gov/showcsv/nicweb312910/908542.fec, then open the file in Excel or some other
spreadsheet program. To make it easier, you can change the .fec extension to .csv for this exercise. If
you open the file in Excel, you’ll see something like this:

908542.fec from the Texas Democratic Party

At first glance, this doesn’t look too bad. The first row is a header for the file. The only really useful piece
of information is the third column, which tells you the version of headers used in the report (8.1). The
second row is the longest: It contains all the topline numbers, and if you scroll all the way to the right,
you’ll see there are more than 120 columns.
The schedules data begins on the third row, and the key to deciphering each row lies in the first column. If
you look at cell A3, you see: SA11AI. This means the row contains a Schedule A (SA) record that applies
to line 11ai in the topline numbers. If you go to Form F3X used by all PACs, you’ll see that itemized
individual contributions are recorded on line 11ai.
I won’t spend a lot of time on this file, but let’s chop it up a little bit:


Row 40 shows a $120 contribution from Cargas for Congress. In this file, the amount of the
contribution is in Column U and the aggregate for the election cycle is in Column V.



Rows 41 to 44 show more than $50,000 in transfers from Democratic groups.



Rows 48 to 116 show that a bunch of groups – mostly state and local politicians – paid more than
$75,000 for access to the group’s voter and email lists. (This is noted in Column W.)



Rows 117 to 137 itemize the group’s operating expenses (Schedule B, Line 21b). As with
Schedule A, some details concerning the transactions are in Column W.



Rows 138 to 141 show contributions to federal candidates.



Payroll is on lines 310 to 323 (Schedule B) and lines 406 to 422 (Schedule H4), with a Memo
about payroll on line 480.

Those are the highlights. If you’re curious about the rest, just use Column A to figure out what line
number the row refers to, then go grab the appropriate headers.
A note about delimiters:
Revisiting the above example, if you go to the Candidate and Committee Viewer
(http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml), search for filings by the Texas Democratic
Party (C00099267) and click the link for the February 2014 report (FEC-908542), you get a pop-up
window asking whether you want a CSV (comma-separated values) or ASCII file. If you’re going to view
this data in Excel, pick CSV. But if you’re going to import the data into a database manager other than
Access, consider ASCII (specifically, ASCII 28).
As someone who has worked with data in various formats for more than a decade, I’ve always been
mistrustful of CSV files. Because commas occur so frequently in data, you often have to surround your
data fields with some kind of text qualifier. The FEC uses quotation marks as its qualifier. If a committee
submitting an electronic report includes quotation marks in a field, however, it can cause all kinds of
headaches for someone trying to parse the data.
The FEC’s alternative to commas is the ASCII-28 delimiter. Unfortunately, I don’t know of an easy way to
import a file using this delimiter into Excel or Access, but if you’re using a different database manager,
ASCII-28 offers a couple advantages. First, you won’t find ASCII-28 in any data field submitted to the
FEC, so it parses quite smoothly. Second, because ASCII-28 doesn’t show up in the data, it doesn’t need
text qualifiers (quotation marks) around every field, thereby reducing the size of the files. If you don’t think
this is a big deal, consider this: the CSV version of the Texas Democratic Party file you’ve been working
with is 40 percent larger than the ASCII-28 version. This size difference disappears once you convert the
file to Excel format or import it into a database, but you still have to download all those files.
8) Viewing an electronic report in Excel
As you saw above, you can get a ton of information from the topline numbers of a campaign finance
report. If you’re writing a story on the filing deadline, when the reports can be submitted as late as
midnight, this might be all you have time for. But your story is going to be just a numbers comparison with
little or no context and – hopefully, at least – a few quotes. In short: it’s going to suck.
If you can find as little as 10 minutes, you can dig into Schedules A and B to get some context and rich
details that will give your story some depth and a diversion from just reporting a bunch of big numbers.
These numbers also will help you pinpoint human sources for your story and provide ideas about what
questions to ask

As you saw above, with a whole bunch of data from different forms with different headers cobbled
together into one file, viewing Form 3 data in Excel is cumbersome at best. So let’s deal with that problem
once and for all by creating an Excel template.
One caveat: Because even the latest version of Excel is limited to a little more than 1 million rows, this
solution is not going to work if you are trying to look at a larger file with more than 1 million rows or if you
are using a version of Excel older than Excel 2007 (where you’re limited to 65,536 rows). In those cases,
you’re going to need to import the data into a database manager. This is covered later.
If you’re lazy: I can’t promise how long these links will be active, but here are pre-made templates for
header versions 8.0 and 8.1. You can download these and skip ahead to the section on using the
templates.
 https://s3.amazonaws.com/NICAR2015/FEC/Form3Template_v80.xlt


https://s3.amazonaws.com/NICAR2015/FEC/Form3Template_v81.xlt

To create your template:
1. If you didn’t already do so in Step 3, download the .zip file from the FEC containing all the header
information (http://www.fec.gov/elecfil/eFilingFormats.zip), decompress it and open: “v8.1 e-filing
headers .xlsx”
2. Make sure you’re on the first tab: v8.1 headers.
3. Click cell B1.
4. Press Shift-Ctrl-End to highlight all your data except Column A.
5. Press Ctrl-C to copy this data.
6. Press Ctrl-N to create a new worksheet.
7. Click on cell A2. (You want to leave a blank row at the top.)
8. Type Ctrl-V to paste your copied data onto the new sheet.
9. We don’t need Column B, so click the B heading to highlight all of Column B, right-click
somewhere in this highlighted column and select Delete to delete the entire column.
10. Now let’s create some generic headers. Go to A1 and just type a 1, Col1 or something similar,
then go to B1 and type 2, Col2, etc.
11. Highlight A1 and B1, grab the fill handle (the little square in the bottom-right corner of the frame
around the two highlighted cells) and drag it all the way to cell GX1. This will give you 206 generic
column headings.

The Excel fill handle is a handy way to copy incremented data to other cells.

12. Go to File, Save As to save your template. Make sure you select the Excel Template file type and
give it a name like Form3Template_v81.xltx.

To use your template:
1. Download (but don’t open) the report you want in CSV format.
2. Open your template.
3. To make sure you don’t overwrite your template by accident, immediately go to File, Save As and
save a copy of your template as a regular Excel Workbook. A good name is one that reflects the
report you’re going to view, such as: TexasDemPty_Feb2014Monthly_908542.xlsx
4. Click on the first blank cell in Column A, which should be A50.
5. Go to Data, Get External Data, From Text. Navigate to the report you downloaded.
6. Navigate to the electronic report you downloaded and double-click it to open the file.

Step 1: Select Delimited data, no headers.

7. When the Text Import Wizard opens, make sure Delimited is selected and the “My data has
headers” box is unchecked, then click Next.
8. In Step 2, uncheck the Tab delimiter, check the Comma delimiter and make sure the text qualifier
is set to double quotation marks. Click Next.
9. In Step 3, leave the defaults and click Finish.

Step 2: Select comma delimiter and quotation marks as the text qualifier.

You might see an Import Data window after you click Finish.

10. If an Import Data window pops up, make sure “Existing worksheet” is selected and the cell
address is the first blank cell (which should be “=$A$50”). If you want to disable the data
connection between your Excel file and the source text (I would), click Properties, and uncheck
“Save query Definition.” Click OK, then click OK again. Save your file.

Use this window to break the connection between your Excel file and the text data.

11. Now you’re ready to look at your data: Click a non-empty cell near the top of your spreadsheet,
then go to Data, Filter. You’ll see the generic column headings in the first row now have
dropdown arrows.
12. Click the dropdown arrow for A1 and select Text Filters, then Begins With.
13. In the dialog that opens, enter “SA” (without the quotes), then click OK, and voila: You are now
looking at just your Schedule A data, with a nice row of headers in the second row.
14. If you want to keep your headers visible at all times click the first cell of your first data row (below
the headers). If you’re using the Texas Democratic Party file, it should be A53. Then go to View,
Freeze Panes.

Setting the text filter in your template.

Using our template to filter for Schedule A records.

This template is not ideal. You probably should avoid sorting, since you can scramble your data if you
don’t have everything selected, and this may be more likely to occur with some rows hidden by filtering.
What’s more, even with the filter on, you’ve got two rows of headers. Excel doesn’t know the second row
needs to stay at the top and will freely move it around your file if you’re not careful.
If you want to keep the file long term, you could take the time to split this sheet up into separate tabs (or
maybe just for Schedules A and B). To do that, turn off the Filter, highlight all your data and sort by

Column A to get your header row and all your data into one contiguous block. Then just copy and paste to
a new tab.
Now that all your data is in one place, you can more easily examine it: Who are the big donors? Where
are those donors from? (Are they out-of-state?) Are certain employers or industries providing a
disproportionate amount of support? What PACs are giving to this group and vice versa? How much are
they spending on their payroll? What other expenses do they have? Now that the data is in Excel, you
can sort and filter to answer some of these questions and discover new questions.
If you like the template, you can create additional templates for older header versions (8.0 and so on), but
you might not need them unless you want to go back and look at older reports. No reports filed after midJanuary 2014 should use older headers, Schedule D is the only part of Form 3 that has changed since
8.0, and 8.0 has been in use since September 2011.
If you have any experience with Access, mySQL or other database managers, you’re probably thinking
about how much easier it would be to work with campaign finance data using one of those tools. Sadly,
this is not an easy proposition. But before we discuss the pros and cons of putting campaign finance data
into a database, let’s look at another pitfall. Heck, let’s look at two: Excluded rows and contribution
refunds
9) Excluded rows
The Texas Democratic Party report you’ve been working with doesn’t contain an example of what I’m
about to cover. If you want to test the skills you’ve learned and make a template out of another report,
download file 907289.fec, an amended 2013 year-end report for Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor
Party (C00025254). Otherwise, just read along and look at the screenshot.
You’ll note that Column 43 in Schedule A is called MEMO CODE. This is a horrible name for this field,
particularly since the next column is called MEMO. You might think MEMO CODE, which should always
be blank or contain an X, just means there’s something in MEMO, but that’s not the case. MEMO CODE
means this row is not included in the topline number referred to in the first column because the amount
already is counted somewhere else.
This happens a lot with joint fundraising committees and other groups, such as ActBlue, that collect
money from a bunch of donors, then write one big check to a campaign. In cases like this, the grand total
is counted in the topline numbers (meaning the MEMO CODE field is blank). The excluded rows that
identify the individual donors satisfy the disclosure requirements, and excluding those rows is a way to
make sure no money is double-counted. However, if your goal is to identify individual donors and you
omit any rows with an X in MEMO CODE, you’re stripping out a lot of the data that identifies those donors
and using a faceless aggregate.
In the case of the Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor report, if you filter on Schedule A records with an
X in MEMO CODE, then look at the MEMO field, you’ll see notes pointing to Dollars for Democrats,
Minnesota State Party Victory Fund and Minnesota Senate Victory 2014. You’ll also note all of these rows
point to Line 12, which is where money transferred from other committees is tallied.

If you look for SA12 records where the MEMO CODE is blank, you’ll see a contribution from the
Democratic National Committee and two contributions from Minnesota Senate Victory 2014. If you add
these up, you get $25,275. The same amount is recorded on Line 12 at the top of the report.
If you add up the SA12 rows that have X in MEMO CODE (screenshot below), the total is more than
$86,000, including about $57,000 in unitemized contributions from Dollars for Democrats and State Party
Victory Fund. If you back these out, the sum you get is now within $4,000 of the amount on Line 12, but
they still don’t match. Maybe the group decided not to include contributions where the aggregate is less
than $200. Backing these out gets the two numbers within about $2,000 of each other, but again: They
don’t match.
This kind of discrepancy can be immensely frustrating, particularly when you are trying to be exceedingly
careful with an extremely complex dataset. Unfortunately, such discrepancies are the norm. If you really
need the numbers to match, you’ll need to call the organization. Otherwise, all you can do is get as close
as you can and learn to be comfortable with being in the ballpark.

907289.fec: A sample of data rows excluded from Schedule A, Line 12.

10) Contribution refunds
If you’re bleary-eyed from reading this far, consider this: I think the only time (knock, knock) I’ve had to
run a correction related to an analysis of FEC data was when I missed a contribution refund, thereby
overstating the amount of money a donor had given to Super PACs.
If you’re going to report how much an individual or group gave to a committee, make sure you check for
refunds. Refunds generally should be in Schedule B, but sometimes they show up as negative amounts
in Schedule A. Keep in mind that weeks or months might pass between the contribution and the refund,
so the two transactions might not be on the same report.
A good rule of thumb is to do name searches on Schedules A and B to look for all contributions and
refunds. You also can check TEXT records to see if there are references to refunds (though these should
be in addition to, rather than in lieu of, Schedule A or B records showing the refund). Also pay attention to
the aggregate of the most recent contribution to make sure everything adds up.

11) Putting FEC data into a database
Now that you finally know how to find and download campaign finance reports from the FEC and inspect
the guts using an Excel kludge, you might be thinking, “This would be so much better and easier if I just
put the data into Access/SQL Server/mySQL/etc.” Well, yes and no.
Unless you cover campaign finance nearly full time, it probably is not worth the effort. For one thing, if you
don’t take the time to build some kind of system to automate a lot of this data maintenance, you’ll need to
manually check the FEC website for new and amended filings. It’s not feasible to do this for more than a
handful of committees, and a manual process is error-prone and time-consuming at best.
To give you some perspective, the system I’ve pieced together during the last three years contains more
than 600,000 files that go back to the 2000 election cycle. The database itself is more than 100 GB in size
and hosted on a fairly nice SQL Server box. To keep it all up and running, I have an army of Python
scripts to download, parse and load the data. (If you’re curious about this, all of my code is available on
github at https://github.com/cschnaars/FEC-Scraper-Toolbox; I recently added code to help you create
the necessary database objects as well.)
If access to hardware is the only issue, you could scale back the volume of data by just building a system
in support of the 2016 Election. You also could delete amended data and might even limit your database
to specific committees, schedules and/or fields. If you do all these steps, you might even be able to get by
with SQLite or Microsoft Access. An older version of my FEC database
(https://github.com/cschnaars/FEC-Scraper) downloads reports only for the committees you specify.
But automation is the key here, and that means working knowledge of a scripting language such as
Python or Ruby. You need a system in place to help you maintain and load all the data, and that system
has to be good enough that, on the eve of publishing a story, you can say: “I’m confident my data is
accurate, complete and up-to-date.” If you can’t do that, your system has a fatal flaw.
12) In conclusion
My goal with this tutorial has been to shed some like upon the murky nature of campaign finance data
and help journalists competently and confidently work with it. The toll the economy has taken on
newsrooms throughout the country for much of the past decade has, I believe, resulted in fewer reporters
to keep an eye on money in politics. Given the vehicles that allow donors to pump unlimited millions of
dollars into an election – largely through 527s, Super PACs and 501(c) nonprofits – helping to make this
data more accessible to other reporters is critical. We still compete for stories, but I think collaborating to
help everyone obtain clean, workable data is in the best interest of readers everywhere.
When I first took an interest in campaign finance, some very smart reporters at various news
organizations helped me get started and have been an ongoing resource over the years. Without their
help, I never would have gotten to the point where I could write the guide you have now. I’d like to thank
some of them now: Derek Willis, The New York Times; Bob Biersack, Center for Responsive Politics;
Aaron Bycoffe, Huffington Post; Paul Clark Jr., Federal Election Commission; Jacob Fenton, Sunlight
Foundation; Scott Klein, ProPublica; and Fredreka Schouten, USA TODAY.

