Wrangling federal
campaign finance data in
a ‘real’ newsroom
Jacob Fenton ( as Chris Schnaars )
Main presentation link:
bit.ly/CAMPFIN2015

Some assumptions, if Ben hasn’t
already said ‘em
- Y’all know campfin already, right? Kidding.
Almost no one knows *all of it*. But you guys
are smart, and we assume use the web.
- We’re gonna go quick, leave time for
questions, and include links to detailed
guides. But we’ll go over stuff in more detail
later if you guys want. Sarah and I work with
this data *all the time* so bug us later.

The obvious
- Campaigns file reports and you can get them from FEC,
especially on filing deadline
- Get the campaigns to give them to you ahead of the
deadline!
- Some spending isn’t reported to FEC. Or to anyone.
USA! USA! More on this later.
- There are some good stories that aren’t on deadline.
- Senate files on paper. SOPR?

Sidebar: “a tired charade” - Paul Ryan, CLC
Hillary Clinton: The Clinton Foundation is *definitely not* serving as an
exploratory committee
Scott Walker: "Our American Revival" is a 527
Jeb Bush "Right to Rise PAC", "Right to Rise SUPER PAC"
Bobby Jindal: Super PAC
Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, Marco Rubio have Leadership PACs
Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum:
501(c)(4) organizations
See: http://host.madison.com/news/local/govt-and-politics/with-group-scottwalker-joins-long-list-of-candidates-pushing/article_20c217b7-f592-5419-bc8a6a7fc6db2e6c.html#ixzz3TcwQXx1U

Disclosure
- I built a site for doing realtime campaign
finance (and more) to handle the things that
FEC and CRP don’t really do.
- FEC is getting better. 18F!
- We’re retooling for the new cycle, and things
are a little odd as we switch. I’ve been bad.
- Upside of retooling is that we’re adding stuff,
so if you want a feature

On deadline
- You’ll want to look at candidate reports!
- FCC’s e-filing feed is here ( use IFTTT!):
http://efilingapps.fec.gov/rss/display?input
- Don’t trust me? Trust Derek, who I ripped
off: http://itemizer.herokuapp.com/
- My thing is here -- set up alerts! : http:
//realtime.influenceexplorer.com/newestfilings/ also--note the download links!

What to look for in the reports?
- I don’t need to answer that, right?
- A pitch for CRP: they do donor
standardization and coding, and we don’t
bother to do it immediately. You *were* at
the machine learning talk Chase just did
where he explained how to solve this, right?

New rules: there’s always a deadline
- “independent expenditures” are reported within 24
hours. Sometimes there are *a lot*. Do you care?
- Get a source!
- Issue ads on TV don’t count!
- Get alerts sent to you! IE page is here: http://realtime.
influenceexplorer.com/outside-spending/
- FEC has a page here: http://fec.
gov/data/IndependentExpenditure.do but ! Danger !
Candidate ids missing on reports aren’t added

Show me the (bulk) data
- Campaign finance--it isn’t just a once-a-quarter story!
You probably need data.
- Simple answer--there’s lots of data in lots of different
places. I’m gonna show you where, and talk about it, but
not do the download dance here
- Chris has a great explainer on how to handle some of
these filing

FEC ftp data
-cycle-by-cycle detailed files of contributors, payees,
candidates, committees
- contributors, payees updated weekly.
- leaves out street addresses
- takes care of amendments for you!
- still have to worry about ‘memoized expenses’
- relational files--need to join tables
- Worry about transaction codes -- joint fundraisers!

Sunlight, CRP bulk data
Sunlight ‘realtime’ data: pretty current and
generally don’t need to join, but is raw, and
uses line numbers. Includes street addresses.
CRP: lags a little, but has donor ids and
industry codes. The gold standard. Oddly hard
to find (you need an account).

FEC summary files
Oddly split between two places: FTP and the ‘data catalog’
FTP includes: candidate financial summary, all candidates,
PAC summary
Data catalog includes: administrative fines, bundled
contributions, candidate disbursements, candidate
summary, committee summary, electioneering
communications, independent expenditures,
lobbyist/registrant committee statements of organization,
new committee registrations

FEC raw files
FEC is awesome because it makes the raw
electronic filings available before it does any
procesing on them. See chris’ guide, or use
some code to process it. Most difficult (but how
Sunlight, and Itemizer do it).
FEC also makes the converted OCR
documents available via FTP. Also need code
for this--consult the vendpak.

Code / APIs
APIs: NYT ; Sunlight realtime; sunlight
influence explorer (older data; NIMSP data
included though lags a lot).
FECH NYT’s polished ruby gem ; there’s also
lots of python hackery.
FEC will have an API, thanks to 18F-ers!

