Editing Data Stories
NICAR 2015
Panelists:
Joel Engelhardt, Palm Beach Post
Shawn McIntosh, Atlanta Journal Constitution
John Walton, BBC News
Moderator:
David Armstrong, Georgia News Lab

Tips on Initial stage reporting
Scope of work: You don’t want to finish an analysis and begin reporting and realize you really
should have gotten another year. If you can, get the whole database -- then you can let the
reporting dictate how far back in the records your story will go. If that’s not possible, make sure
you talk it out with everyone involved in the project to avoid having that awkward story
reference: 11 months of state records show…
Going after the records: Don’t accept the first No. Keep going back until you break through the
technological void and find someone who actually knows what the government’s databases can
provide and how. Keep the editor involved as you battle. You may need the editor’s help
pressuring a bureaucrat or reaching out to lawyers. And it will help the editor understand what
you’re seeking.

Tips on Analyzing the data
Brainstorming: Work closely with reporters and editors to brainstorm the data. Walk through
queries to see if there’s some angle you’re forgetting. It’s true that the editor doesn’t have to
understand what he or she can’t about query language but make sure the editor understands
what you’re doing and how you’re doing it at a larger level because some understanding will go
a long way toward bullet-proofing the story. The editor needs to understand the limits of the data
as much as the strengths.

Tips on Presentation and Engagement
●
●

Presentation is important - use it both to communicate your story and make your
organisation stand out
Always put the user in the story, data gives you an opportunity to do this by telling
people how a particular story may affect them at a personal level. The more granular the
data set the more opportunity there is to do this.

●

Principles we work to ...
Tell the story - sounds simple but it is very easy to lose yourself in data
By visually stimulating - ideally your graphics and interactive should convey meaning
in a way that is compelling and memorable
Keep it simple - as with text if a sentence isn’t necessary chop it out, do the same with
graphics
Always keep the audience in mind - find out as much as you can about how your
audience gets to your content and what devices they are using. Do this on a regular
basis as things can change fast

●
●

User-test early - particularly if you know you have a complicated story to tell
If formal user-testing isn’t an option try other people in the office who don’t work in your
team, if that’s not possible just grab a colleague - do this early and often
Circulate working (or semi-working!) prototypes early - before its too late to make use of
any feedback you might receive
Look for opportunities to re-use content across platforms - if you have a great web app is
there a broadcaster you can partner with on it, for example? Web apps can be talking
points on air - which is a great way to get people to know about your project
If you have a rich series of graphics, don’t just share one example of that on social
media, post all of them

●
●

●

Tips from the AJC Newsroom
●

●
●

●

The editor needs to understand what the data means – even if he or she doesn’t quite
understand the methods used to analyze the data. An editor doesn’t need to be able to
replicate the data analyst’s or reporter’s work, but should know enough about computerassisted reporting and statistics to spot holes. – Alan Judd, investigative reporter
Make sure reporters are considering possible data for every story. – Brad Schrade,
investigative reporter
Sarah (Cohen’s) favorite writing tip: For the main story, focus on one number (or a very
few numbers) that tells the story. Leave the rest for a sidebar, or an online app or
visualization. – John Perry, senior data journalist and technical director
Note to editors: Review the data and ask questions about the analysis. It’s VERY easy
to make a mistake when you’re dealing with databases. It’s part of an editor’s job to ask
questions about the data and to think about which calculations and benchmarks might
make sense. Make sure your reporter understands the dataset – and PLEASE do not

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

wait until the end of the process to do this. Engage early on.. And especially if your
reporter is working on the analysis alone, help out by doing some spot checking. Most
reporters will be so grateful for a backstop. – Carrie Teegardin, investigative reporter
Ensure data graphs accurately reflect the data. Again, they are often only a few graphs
but want to make sure they are accurate. – Brad Schrade, investigative reporter
Maybe this is obvious, but ask, what are the possible ways that the data, or our analysis
of the data, could be wrong, and what we’ve done to check the possibilities. Data
collection problems? Missing data? Bad data export from the agency? Import errors? If
the answer’s none, then you haven’t thought hard enough. – John Perry, senior data
journalist and technical director
It’s an editor’s job to make sure the analyst or reporter has asked the right people to
review the analysis (much as we did with a bunch of experts on the test-cheating
stories). – Alan Judd, investigative reporter
Spot check data against documents (if possible) with the reporters. – Brad Schrade,
investigative reporter
Allow time to share data and results with the sources and targets of a story. Better that
they find problems before publishing than to rush the process and find them afterward. –
John Perry, senior data journalist and technical director
Sit down side-by-side with reporters and test the data, understand it as well as the
reporters. – Brad Schrade, investigative reporter
Timelines for data stories are always tentative until you actually have the data in hand
and have had time to explore it. – John Perry, senior data journalist and technical
director
When I’m fact checking a story, I mark every number, then go back and double check
the process, query, and analysis that generated that number. – John Perry, senior data
journalist and technical director
Data is often only a few graphs in the story but a mistake can change the entire premise.
Double-check, triple-check data long before publication. – Brad Schrade, investigative
reporter
As a data reporter, I find I can’t get enough of an editor challenging my analysis. I
suppose that’s true with all reporting, but it really helps to make sure that I’m not missing
something huge in the data picture. – Jeff Ernsthausen, newsroom data specialist
Make sure data folks and non-data folks are in sync on your team(s) and
communicating. – Brad Schrade, investigative reporter

●

Another thing, of course, is language, and in a way, it’s the flipside of challenging the
reporter’s analysis. I really appreciate that an editor pushes me to be more clear, and
straight-forward, with the conclusions that I reach from the data. My academic nature
(which I am sure is a nature shared with many data reporters) would lead me to couch
everything in a hundred hedges and caveats. So I think it’s great when an editor pushes
that, even if the process is a bit painful. But it’s best if the editor has done the
challenging, and then knows the limits of what the data will support and pushes the
reporter to write to those limits. – Jeff Ernsthausen, newsroom data specialist

● @GNLarmstrong; david.armstrong@georgianewslab.org
● @JoeleEpbpost; JEngelhardt@pbpost.com
● @shawnmcintosh; smcintosh@ajc.com
● @walt_jw; john.walton.02@bbc.co.uk

