Midwest Watchdog Workshop ­­ April 8, 2015, Madison, Wis.
Andy Hall, executive director
Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism

608­262­3642 ahall@wisconsinwatch.org

The Art of the Interview
and Source Development
How to do great interviews, on the fly or going deep
1) Focus on the story before the interview.
●
●
●
●
●

What’s my story? Be able to say it in a sentence or two. Refine it as you learn more.
How much time do I have for this interview, and for this story?
What do I already know about this person or topic?
What sources will help me report and tell this story?
How will I cultivate those sources, for this story and for the long term?

2) Prepare for the interview.
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Why I am talking with this source?
What role will this source likely play in my story?
What type of interview is this – empathetic, informational, or confrontational?
What type of source is this – idealistic, victim, all business, or reluctant?
With time available (even five minutes), background yourself by talking to other sources, reading
research, data and others’ stories, and going to online sources including Lexis ​
www.lexis.com​
and
Google ​
www.google.com​
but especially The Reporter’s Desktop ​
www.reporter.org/desktop​
.
Conduct interviews in person, when possible.
Select an interview site that involves action or reveals something about the person or issue. Strive to
meet reluctant sources on their own turf.
Be open to interviews at nights and on weekends.
Write questions, keeping in mind: “What will open this source up?”
Practice key parts of the interview in your head while jogging, driving or showering.
Dress to blend in with your source and the scene.
Bring along key documents to cite details and to impress the source with your thoroughness.

3) Do it.
● Use a tape recorder or digital recorder, when possible, for accuracy and for critiquing your interviewing
skills.
● Start with the easy stuff – name, age, family, biographical details.
● Consider using a chronological approach – a natural storytelling format.
● Be guided by your curiosity. Let the interview develop naturally, but refer back to your questions to

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

make sure you’re covering all key areas.
Embrace silence.
Listen lots, talk little.
Ask how the source knows the information. This is to check credibility and to seek additional sources.
Press for specifics, including anecdotes and data.
Probe for differences between the way things are supposed to work, and reality.
Try slo­mo interview techniques, switching to present tense for phrasing of questions. Begin with benign
queries, such as “What are you wearing?” and “What’s the weather like?” to help the source focus on key
times and events. It works for Pulitzer winner Eric Nalder, and it’ll work for you, too.
Know when to use an open­ended question, and when to use yes/no.
Pause and be sure you’re on track.
“​
End” the interview; the source may relax and really start talking.
Ask the source whom else to interview, and what else to read.
Get contact information – and don’t hesitate to contact the source with follow­up questions. Source is
welcome to contact you with more information, too.

4) Look back – and ahead.
● Keep learning by evaluating your work and by drawing upon great tips from Eric Nalder, John Ullmann,
Mike McGraw, Joe Stephens, Christine Willmsen, Jane Hansen, Mark Skertic, David Cay Johnston,
Diana Henriques, Michael Berens and other IRE members whose ideas appear here and on other
tipsheets at ​
www.ire.org/resourcecenter​
.
● Check back through your notes to clear up any loose ends.
● Be critical of your performance: Did you miss any opportunities? Did you talk too much?
● File open­records requests, track down data and figure out where you should go next.
● Cultivate the source by checking back after the story appears and continuing to build a relationship based
on trust and respect.

How to find, develop and interview sources for any beat
Essential sources
Every journalist needs sources who:
● Know what's happening on the beat and in the community ­­ at ground level as well as at the top.
Salespeople may be worth more than CEOs. Clerks may be worth more than judges. Neighborhood
police officers may be worth more than mayors.
● Know how to get in touch with vulnerable residents — the poor, immigrants, the uninsured, mentally ill
and people in bad neighborhoods. You can build ties to social workers, activists and sources in schools,
hospitals and government and nonprofit social­services agencies. They connect directly with vulnerable
residents.
● Know accounting. Take a CPA or an accounting professor to lunch. Know how to find information on
the Internet and in libraries. Seek out librarians at public, law and university facilities.
● Know how to interpret laws and court documents. Build ties to prosecutors, defense attomeys, public
defenders, legislative analysts and professors.
● Know how to retrieve and analyze property records. Maybe one of your colleagues is married to
someone at a title company.
● Know how to acquire and analyze data. University, state data center and think­tank researchers often are

eager to help.
● Know lots of other people and hear lots of gossip. Examples include hair stylists, restaurant owners,
school counselors, politicians and developers.

How to find sources
● Ignore Mom's advice: Talk to strangers. That person next to you on the plane or behind you in line may
be brimming with insights and story ideas.
● Compliment a source and win a free prize: More sources. Thank your sources for being helpful and ask
them how they acquire so many insights. Presto! Now you've got access to their sources, too. Read:
Fifteen minutes on Google or Lexis/Nexis, or poring through reports, can introduce you to local and
national sources on any topic. It's never been so easy. See who's producing interesting work and who's
helping other journalists.
● Show up at meetings and groups‘ fundraisers and picnics — not just to file stories but to mine the crowds
for sources and story ideas.
● Work the sidelines and work your neighborhood. It will help you cross socioeconomic boundaries. If
your child is in a sports league or other activities, get to know the other parents. They can turn into
helpful sources within development companies, banks, schools, regulatory agencies, police departments
— anywhere. Use key documents to find key people. On any beat, on any story, it's essential to
understand the system — particularly the places where complaints and problems surface, and where the
money flows. It's equally important to find the people who understand and manage those documents.
● Read grant applications, for example, to find descriptions of problems, data, and lists of sources in your
community.
● Sign up for every listserv, newsletter, agenda and board packet delivery list for boards and interest
groups. Turns your e­mail into an automatic source­finder and story tip generator. Hint: Do learn how to
skim those agendas and board packets, which contain the exhibits the board will use at its meeting. It's
really not hard if you recruit help from insiders or critics.
● Relentlessly interview your colleagues ­ over lunch or a beer. Too many journalists fail to draw upon the
expertise within their own newsrooms.'Remember that their spouses and children may become sources,
too.
● If your community has one, tap into its 211 database — the social­services version of the 911 system.
Search its text to generate lists of programs and experts dealing with hundreds of local issues ranging
from alcoholism to workers’ rights.

How to develop sources
● Prove you're committed by publishing or broadcasting stories about an issue. Even if the stories aren't
breaking much new ground, sources will be impressed.
● Use a trusted source to build a bridge to others safely and efficiently. For example, a social worker in a
troubled neighborhood often enjoys revered status for bringing help to gang members’ children — and
may be willing to help journalists interview gang members. The Golden Rule really is golden. Promise
sources that you'll treat them fairly and that they'll always be given a chance to respond to criticism. Then
keep your word. Sources checking up on your will hear that you behave honorably. In turn, they're more
likely to speak with you.
● Be honest about your intentions. You needn't reveal everything you know or suspect. But sources
generally deserve to know the general scope of your inquiry. Admit ignorance. There's no point in
pretending to understand things that you don't. And if you ask “dumb” questions, your readers and
viewers will be rewarded with clear, insightful coverage.
● Be there. Telephone calls and e­mails are efficient, but they're poor substitutes for eye­to­eye contact,

handshakes, shared food and drink, and the perspectives that develop while out in people's homes,
neighborhoods and workplaces. Learn the lingo. It'll help you translate conversations and documents, and
you'll impress sources with your willingness to learn the difference, for example, between a guilty plea
and a no contest plea.
● Find common ground. A mutual love of coffee, dogs or underdogs may provide a foundation for a
relationship. But be wary of letting your friendliness become a bond that may hamper your ability to
report the truth. Learn the system. Sources will be impressed that you don't merely show up at meetings.
You actually know how things are supposed to work. And you recognize it when things go wrong.
● Keep track obsessively. Contact information including cell number for every source is stored in Outlook
or other software where it's instantly searchable. Strive, too, to keep notes in searchable form such as
single long Word file or, better yet, a Google Doc that can be easily shared with collaborators.

