Open Records
Using the law to get what you want
Talia Buford, The Center for Public Integrity
Ron Nixon, The New York Times

What is FOIA?
Is it for me?
What can I use it to access?
How do I use it?

Federal FOIA (5 U.S.C. § 552)
COVERED
All Federal agencies
The White House*

NOT COVERED
Congress
Federal courts
State/local agencies
private businesses

*A Note on the White House
On March 17, the White House removed regulations that required its Office of Administration to
comply with FOIA requests. The office handles human resources, information technology, facilities and
record-keeping support for the White House. It will continue to release visitor logs, staff salaries and
other items at its discretion.
HONORS FOIA REQUESTS
Some offices within the Executive Office of the President,
including:
Council on Environmental Quality
Office of Management and Budget
Office of National Drug Control Policy
Office of Science and Technology Policy
Office of the United States Trade Representative

Source: USA Today, http://usat.ly/1FZkuhx

DOESN’T HONOR FOIA REQUESTS
The White House Office (the immediate office of the
president)
Office of Administration
Office of the Vice President
Council of Economic Advisers
National Security Council
Office of Policy Development
Domestic Policy Council
Office of National AIDS Policy
National Economic Council
President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board

No FOI Required
●
●
●
●
●

Final court opinions and orders
Final statements of policy not in Federal Register
Administrative staff manuals & instructions that affect the public
Records that have already been FOIA’d, & likely to be requested again
Agency’s annual FOIA report (# of requests, time to process, backlog,
etc.)
● Other records deemed appropriate by the agency for affirmative
disclosure
Source: National Archives, http://www.archives.gov/foia/foia-guide.html

State Open Records
Similar to federal FOIA, but each state is
different; know the local laws
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
State Open Government Guide:
http://bit.ly/1MbcFdW

State laws can be tricky
REAL (E-MAIL) REJECTION LANGUAGE!!
The requirement that transcripts must be obtained from the court reporter is not based on
copyright law, but instead, is based on our Department’s Permit Procedures found at 20.1.5
NMAC within New Mexico’s Administrative Code. Pursuant to 20.1.4.500.A NMAC, “[a]ny
person desiring a copy of the transcript shall order a copy from the court reporter at his or her
own expense.”
New Mexico’s Inspection of Public Records Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 14-2-1 to -12, contains
various exceptions that exclude certain public records from inspection. In particular, Section
14-2-1(A)(8) provides that “[e]very person has a right to inspect public records of this state
except: (8) as otherwise provided by law.” We apply this exception from the Inspection of Public
Records Act to except the transcripts referenced in the New Mexico Administrative Code at
20.1.4.500.A NMAC.

Requesting Records
What do you want?
How do you want it?
Is a FOI request the best way to get it?

What do you want?
● Report it out
o What records do they keep?
o How are they kept?
o Who keeps them?
o Which records do you want?
● Be specific
o Name the documents, use their language/jargon

Sample record description
I request that you provide us copies of the records identified and described below – or of
records containing the information identified and described below:
·
All records reflecting any communication between [X ] and [ Y ] concerning [ Z ],
including but not limited to letters, e-mails, memoranda, reports, appointment calendars,
and telephone call logs, and dated between [ date ] and the date you process this
request;
·
A letter from [name] to [name], dated approximately [date], concerning [subject];
·
All records in your custody or under your control that [describe the records broadly],
including but not limited to [identify a specific class of records known to exist]; and
·
A database or other similar electronic copy of [identify or describe records, as
above];
·
[other items].

How do you want it?

Electronically.

Sample format description
Format: we prefer to receive records in the following formats, listed in order of
preference:
(1) an electronic data format such as a spreadsheet, delimited data set, database file, or
similar;
(2) other non-proprietary electronic format;
(3) word processing file, text-based PDF, or similar;
(4) paper copies.
Please also provide any and all documentation related to such electronic records,
including but not limited to data dictionaries, database documentation, record layouts,
code sheets, data entry instructions, and similar printed or electronic documentation
materials.

Is a FOI request best?
Just ask for what you want
Does anyone else have it?

Getting Past No
● Talk to your FOIA officer
o Maybe you can better tailor your request? Maybe they misunderstood
what you wanted?
o Ask for an index of the documents (eg: correspondence log; FOIA log)
to help you narrow, if possible
● Formal Appeal - challenge fees, exemptions, etc.
● File a lawsuit
● Write stories
● Find the information somewhere else

Let’s revisit New Mexico...
● Transcript of a 3-day public hearing that you want for your story
● State law provides an open records exemption for transcripts, so they don’t
have to give you a copy, even though you’re in D.C.
● State offers you two choices: pay the court reporter for a transcript or fly to
Santa Fe to see the document

What do you do?

Steady FOI Flow
Recurring requests
ask for documents/budgets/calendars/emails/etc. on a rolling basis

FOIA Fridays
Get in the habit of filing FOIAs -- and tracking them -- regularly

Resources
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
create, send, maintain FOI requests - iFOIA.org
Free speech, access and other guides - rcfp.org
FOIA Machine
Request generator from CIR, Knight Foundation & Reynolds Institute
foiamachine.org
National Freedom of Information Coalition
Sample FOIA requests/appeals letters, state/federal FOIA guides, etc.
NFOIC.org
Government Attic
Electronic copies of Federal documents obtained via FOIA requests: governmentattic.org

More Resources
Federal agency FOIA offices
foia.gov/report-makerequest.html
FOIA Online
Government FOIA portal
foiaonline.regulations.gov
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552 as amended
(via Cornell University Law School)
law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/5/552

Questions?
Talia Buford, The Center for Public Integrity
tbuford@publicintegrity.org
@TaliaBuford
Ron Nixon, The New York Times
nixon@nytimes.com
@nixonron

