Quick hit investigations
Midwest Watchdog Workshop 2015
Dee J. Hall
reporter
Wisconsin State Journal
Madison, Wis.
dhall@madison.com

What is a quick hit investigation?
Most of what I do at the Wisconsin State
Journal is quick hit investigations. They often
start with a tip or observation and blossom into
a full-fledged story or series of stories. Over a
period of weeks or months, I gather records
and sources while continuing to ‘feed the beast’
of daily journalism.

This story started as a criminal complaint that led to so much more…

Convicted thief hired and rehired by the state
FEBRUARY 27, 2005 12:00 AM • DEE J. HALL WISCONSIN STATE JOURNAL

Malini Sathasivam was hired three times by the state of Wisconsin, and not once did the state check to see if she had a
criminal past.
If they had checked on two of those occasions, state officials would have discovered a history of forged checks,
embezzlement and deceit that landed the Fitchburg woman in prison in the mid-1990s on state and federal convictions.

Since no one looked into her background, Sathasivam, 49, used her extensive financial experience, charisma and two
name changes to keep a series of taxpayer-funded positions that put her in contact with lots of the public's money.

Because of lax supervision by the state, this woman was able to steal more than $3
million from Madison-area banks. She’s serving a 16-year prison term.

Advocates said inmates
were not getting paroled....
So I asked for records over
the past 10 years and found
a clear pattern:
Under Gov. Scott Walker,
paroles had virtually come
to a halt.

Bill’s origin takes shocking turn
I wrote a story about a curious
child-support bill that would give a big
break to parents earning $150,000
or more a year.
It didn’t start as an
investigation but quickly
turned into one thanks
to a tipster and readily
available legislative records.

The fallout….
Reaction to the story was
swift. Editorial boards
across Wisconsin decried
the influence one wealthy
donor had on the
Legislature. After a few
days of heat, Republican
leaders pulled the bill.

This was typical
of the reaction
to the bill.

This started as a tip from an
inmate’s attorney. It resulted
in an end to work-release
at the plastics factory,
reversal of the inmate’s
discipline and additional
OSHA scrutiny of work-place
safety at the plant.

How to find quick hits?
They come from a variety of sources:

-

Personal observation: This doesn’t look right.

-

Complaints from individuals or groups about the way a government
program works -- or doesn’t.

-

Follow stories past the initial tip or observation. Often that’s how reporters
get the best investigative stories.

How to do a quick hit?
- Start collecting records and sources
- Keep doing your regular beat or general assignment
duties while collecting material
- Once you’ve pulled everything together, carve out some
time to write the story
- Consider breaking a series of stories and not just one
huge investigation
- Watch as the additional tips pour in
- Keep investigating until all relevant questions are
answered.

What kinds of records are available?
If it’s on paper or electronic, chances are you can get it!
Audits, databases, payroll documents, time slips, office calendars, phone
messages, text messages, chats, complaints, police reports, criminal referrals,
disciplinary reports, legislative bill drafting records, airplane flight logs and
passenger manifests, official calendars, prosecutors’ files, 9/11 tapes,
surveillance video (including cameras on police cars), “work product,” invoices,
receipts, “secret” court documents, applications for jobs, resumes, data from
gated government parking garages, sick notes turned in by public employees,
photos, emails (including those sent and received from private accounts if done
for public business.)
In Wisconsin, you can obtain drafts but usually only after a final version is
available. It’s sometimes interesting to compare the drafts of bills, reports and
contracts to the final version.

What kinds of records can’t you get?
Medical and psychiatric records: This is not a hard and fast rule, but such records in
Wisconsin are very difficult to get unless the person mentioned in them agrees to it. I have had
success in several cases in which people with mental illness or other medical problems have
agreed to let me receive copies of their medical records. Also, there are some specific
exemptions under the law, including:
Government Accountability Board records: State law specifically prohibits GAB from
revealing anything about investigations until/unless enforcement action is taken.
Prosecutors’ files: Prosecutors can give you access to their files if they want, but a 1991 court
decision allows them to exempt such files if they choose.
Lawmakers’ records: While you can have access to state legislators’ records, they are not
required to retain them, like other public officials are. That means they can delete emails as
soon as they come in, or ash-can records they might find embarrassing. They can’t do it,
though, if you’ve already requested them.
Juvenile court records: You can see juvenile court records and even quote from them, but
you generally cannot keep copies and cannot reveal the names of juveniles involved.

How to find sources?
If you’re investigating an agency, a program, a government official or a crooked
business or nonprofit, these may be useful sources:
Ex-employees
Experts
Associates
Enemies/opponents - political or otherwise
Attorneys
Regulators
Successors
Predecessors

QUESTIONS?

Now go get ‘em!

