Statehouse reporting: Getting the goods and bads

Midwest Watchdog Workshop
April 8, 2015
Madison, Wis.

Panelists: Steve Walters, WisconsinEye; Shawn Johnson, Wisconsin Public
Radio; and Dee J. Hall, Wisconsin State Journal
Covering a state Capitol, like covering Congress, has been compared to drinking from a
firehose. Here are some tips to help you navigate the torrent. For an electronic copy of
this tipsheet with links, email Dee J. Hall at ​
dhall@madison.com​
.

Human sources
Make contact with the legislative leaders and staff and get on their email lists.
Get on the email list for the governor’s office. If just starting the beat, introduce yourself
to the governor and/or staff.
Get on email lists for committee chairs of important committees; in Wisconsin, that
would include the budget committee, the ​
Joint Committee on Finance​
. Also, make
contact with minority party members of the committees to get their perspectives.
Committees and lawmakers have staffs. Let them know that you’d be happy to hear
about bills before they’re introduced, bills as they gain or lose support or other tidbits.
Make sure you’re also on the email list for state agencies that your news organization
regularly covers from the Capitol.
Once you begin writing about issues (such as drug­testing welfare applicants,
right­to­work, prevailing wage, university budget cuts) tell advocates on both sides to
keep you apprised of developments as bills make their way through the Legislature or in
the budget process.
Make contact with relevant advocacy groups and lobbyists. In Wisconsin, that list would
include the ​
Wisconsin Democracy Campaign​
which tracks campaign spending and
other issues; ​
Common Cause in Wisconsin​
,​
One Wisconsin Now​
or ​
Wisconsin
Manufacturers & Commerce.
Legislatures can have arcane working rules. In Wisconsin, the ​
Assembly Chief Clerk’s
Office​
and the ​
Senate Chief Clerk’s​
office can answer specific questions.

Non­human sources
Check Capitol news services such as ​
WisPolitics.com ​
or The Wheeler Report
(​
www.thewheelerreport.com​
) for a roundup of news from the governor’s office,
Legislature and state agencies.
Set up a Twitter account and follow lawmakers, newsmakers and agencies.
Set up ​
RSS feeds for bills​
. You can select either specific bills you are tracking or to
receive notification of all bills and all actions related to those bills.
For questions about how the Legislature operates, how to check on the status of bills
and other frequently asked questions, see ​
http://legis.wisconsin.gov/about/faq
The ​
Government Accountability Board​
has an ​
online database of lobbying activities​
,
campaign finance reports​
, and ​
election­related information​
. You can also request
statements of economic interests for hundreds of state officials ​
here.
Although far from complete, the state also has a ​
“contract sunshine” website ​
to see who
is getting state government business.
WisconsinEye​
is a valuable resource for watching legislative hearings, floor sessions,
newsmaker interviews and press conferences. Can’t make it to the Capitol?
WisconsinEye live streams some events.

Legislative service agencies
The ​
Legislative Fiscal Bureau​
has ​
experts​
on agencies and programs in state
government. They produce ​
budget memos​
and ​
other reports​
that put a price tag on bills,
programs and services. When possible, talk to the experts who write these memos.
The ​
Legislative Reference Bureau​
performs a similar function when it comes to the
history and development of legislation in Wisconsin​
. The LFB also has a collection of bill
drafting records that are public after a bill is introduced. For current session bills, you
must visit the office at 1 E. Main St., Suite 200 in Madison. For previous session bills go
to ​
http://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/drafting_files​
.
The ​
Legislative Audit Bureau​
conducts audits of state government functions. Subscribe
to its ​
RSS feed​
to be notified of released audits. The website also lists ongoing audits.
The ​
Legislative Council​
staffs study committees that examine state problems and make
recommendations. The council’s website includes ​
reports and presentations​
used by
the committees. The council’s attorneys also are experts in state law and produce
memos​
giving legal opinions to lawmakers.

