Federal Aviation
Administration

Memorandum
Date:

MAY -:.5 2015

To:

James H. Williams, Manager, Unmanned A' r ft Integration Office, AFS-80

From:

Mark W. Bury, Assistant Chief C-cm: s_e

Prepared by:

Dean E. Griffith, Attorney, AGC-220

Subject:

Media Use of UAS

s,

GC-20~

This memorandum addresses three issues concerning the use of unmanned aircraft for
newsgathering: (1) whether members of the media may use unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) for
newsgathering; (2) whether the media may use pictures, video, or other infmmation collected by a
person using UAS; and (3) whether a person who sells images collected by UAS would need
authorization for his or her operations.
I. Use ofUAS by the News Media

Commercial media may use a UAS for news gathering if the FAA authorizes the flights. Until the
FAA issues specific regulations for UAS operations in the national airspace system, all unmanned
aircraft operations must be authorized by the FAA unless they can be conducted as model aircraft
operations under the Special Rule for Model Aircraft of section 336 of the FAA Modernization and
Reform Act of 2012. Because the use of an unmanned aircraft by a media entity to gather news
would be in fmiherance of that entity's business, the operations would fail the "hobby or
recreation" test of section 336(a). Accordingly, UAS operations by a media entity for
news gathering purposes could not be conducted as model aircraft and would need to be authorized
by the FAA.
A corollary to this question is whether a media entity using a UAS to conduct research and
development at a FAA test site or other location could use images obtained during such operations
research operations in its news repotis. The use of such images in news reports would be
permissible provided the flight is authorized and is conducted in accordance with the terms of that
authorization and any conditions or limitations of the aircraft's certificate of airworthiness
(assuming one has been issued to the aircraft). We also would caution that the use of a U AS to
collect the images must be part of the research and development activity.

2

II. News Gathering by a Person Using a UAS
The news media also may use pictures, video, or other information obtained from a UAS operated
by a person not affiliated with that media outlet. The FAA does not regulate whether a third party
not involved in the operation of an aircraft- manned or unmanned- can receive pictures, videos,
or other information that was gathered using that aircraft, or how that third party can use those
pictures, videos, or other information. The focus ofthe FAA's oversight instead will be on the
operator and operation of an aircraft: whether the operation of the UAS to collect the pictures,
videos, or other information has been authorized by the FAA (unless the UAS is operated as a
model aircraft under section 336); and whether the operation was conducted in accordance with the
terms of the authorization. A media entity that does not have operational control of the UAS and is
otherwise not involved in its operation falls outside ofthe FAA's oversight. 1 Whether the media
entity pays for or obtains the pictures, videos, or other information for free would not affect this
analysis.
A person who wishes to operate a UAS to take pictures or videos or gather other information that
then would be sold to media outlets would need an FAA authorization for the operation, just as any
other unmanned aircraft operation that does not fall within the section 336 carve-out for model
aircraft would require an FAA authorization. Consistent with the discussion above, the use of an
unmanned aircraft by a person media entity to take pictures or videos or gather other information
for resale would be in fmiherance of that person's business. Therefore, the operations would fail
the "hobby or recreation" test of section 336(a) and would need to be authorized by the FAA.

Whether an individual taking pictures or videos or gathering other infmmation using a model
aircraft under the section 336 carve-out could later sell those pictures, videos, or other information
would depend on the person's original intentions in conducting the operation. Ifthe individual's
takes the pictures or videos or gathers other information as part of a hobby or recreational activity,
then a later decision to sell some or all of those pictures, videos, or other information would not
change the character of the operation as part of a hobby or recreational activity that falls within the
section 336 carve-out for model aircraft. No FAA authorization for that operation would be
required.
However, if the individual is conducting the operation with the primary intention of obtaining
pictures, videos, or other information to sell, then the operation is commercial in nature and not
part of a hobby or recreational activity. As noted above, such operations currently would require
an authorization from the FAA. Evidence that may indicate an individual's true intentions in
conducting an operation may include the frequency with which pictures, videos, or other
information collected using an unmanned aircraft is later resold. Operations that frequently result
in pictures, videos, or other information that is sold to a third party may indicate that the operation
is in fact commercial in nature notwithstanding the individual's claim of a hobby or recreational
purpose. The FAA would have to consider each case on its own merits.

1

"Operational control, with respect to a flight, means the exercise of authority over initiating, conducting or
terminating a flight." 14 C.F.R. ยง 1.1.

