IRE 2015 TIPSHEET
Broadcast: How to Get People to Talk

Scott Friedman, Senior Investigative Reporter
NBC5/KXAS-TV Dallas-Fort Worth
scott.friedman@nbcuni.com
Techniques For Landing Three Types of On-Camera
Interviews We Often Need:
1. The Victim/Family/Protagonist
2. The Insider or Key Source
3. The Reluctant Official
Victim/Family/Protagonist Interviews:
-Before you pick up the phone it’s homework time: Learn
everything you can about the person, the subject matter,
previous coverage of the issue. People may take your
request more seriously if you show them you will work hard
to understand the topic not just trying to get an interview to
meet your deadline.
-Meet in person whenever possible: If you’re asking
someone to share a personal story, they are more likely to
do that if you connect with them in a personal way. Show
them you are a real person not just a reporter behind a
camera.

-Address Reluctance Head-on: Ask, “Why are you hesitant”.
Sometimes the reasons for reluctance may be different than
you assume. Provide examples of your previous work so
they can gain comfort with the quality and style of your
reporting.
-Explain Why They Should Talk to You: Psychologists have
found people are more likely to say “yes” if you give them a
reason to say yes. Explain why their story is so important for
people to hear and what it would mean to your reporting to
include them in the story.
-Be Upfront About Topics You Plan To Cover: People are
most comfortable when they have a clear understanding
about what you expect from the interview.
Insider/Key Source Interviews:
-Many of the same victim/protagonist techniques apply: But
remember an insider’s reluctance may be greater because
they could fear fallout including retaliation, legal action, or
being shunned by people around them.
-Address Risks/Concerns Directly: Ask about their worst
fears. What might happen? Pledge that you will continue to
report on any retaliation/repercussions that might occur.
-Appeal to Their Sense of Right & Wrong: Ask questions
that focus them on right and wrong: It seems like you’re in a
unique position to tell this story? It sounds like you have
information few other people have? If you don’t share it who
will? What will happen if this information is not brought to

light? Will this problem/injustice continue if you don’t speak
out?
Reluctant Officials:
(Our General Rule: public officials who work for taxpayers
have an obligation to answer questions about serious issues
of public safety or public trust.)
-Be Transparent about the Topics You Plan to Cover: The
more they know about what you expect from the interview
the more comfortable they may be. Explain that interviews
help you to gain the most information possible to make the
story fair and complete.
-Ask Nicely Even if They Are Not: Be firm but not emotional.
You are just trying to get answers on behalf of the
public/your viewers.
-Document Your Calls and E-mails: Keep records to show
your many attempts to reach/meet with them.
-If No Response – or Negative Response: Consider an email/letter that explains: 1. We have made X# of attempts to
reach you for an interview. 2. We believe public officials
have an obligation to answer questions about serious
matters of public safety/trust. 3. We will make every attempt
to meet with you to discuss the issue in-depth. 4. We want
to be fair and complete in our reporting. 5. If you are
unwilling to meet to answer these important questions be
aware we will approach you in a public setting to ask these
questions – that is not our preference – but because you

won’t respond we may need to do that to gain a response on
behalf of viewers/taxpayers.
Keli Rabon, Investigative Reporter
ABC13 Houston
Keli.rabon@abc.com
STRENGTH IN NUMBERS
• If you’ve done the research and found that what happened
to this person is not a fluke and there are many others
in their shoes, this can help build a reluctant person's
confidence. Empower them by explaining how their
experience can help other people realize they’re not
alone and could potentially help others from being
victimized too.
GET OUT OF THE OFFICE
• If you want the interview, hit the streets! Knocking on a
door (or chatting with a nosy neighbor) can yield more
leads than you’ll ever find on Nexis. Never lie, but ask
open-ended questions to people near the last-known
address of the person you’re trying to track down.
REAL TALK
• Be a human first and a reporter second. Your story is not
the most important thing in their life, so come to terms
with that right now. Show empathy and understanding,
even if their situation happened years ago. Know your
boundaries before you initiate the conversation, but
share a bit about yourself to create a comfortable
environment for them to share too. If you meet them in
person, look for something unique in their home or
office or that they’re wearing and ask about it or

compliment it. It’s a great conversation starter that can
help put them at ease.
WHEN ALL ELSE FAILS, GET CREATIVE
• Sometimes, despite your very best efforts, they still don’t
agree to an interview. Unscheduled interviews are
always my last resort, but if it comes to that, be flexible
enough to allow for a sit-down afterward. Often people
realize how unflattering that unscheduled interview
makes them look, and will agree to a traditional
interview to save face.
Scott Zamost
CNN Senior Investigative Producer
Scott.zamost@cnn.com
 Transparency is key. Be very direct about the interview
topic and explain why it’s important to the story. Make it
clear there is no hidden agenda and a sit-down
interview is an opportunity, not a confrontation. Don’t
expect an immediate answer to your interview request.
 Send the subject or whoever you are dealing with links
to previous stories where an interview was conducted.
Show them you are fair. Stress your experience and
openness to getting both sides.
 Discuss why you aren’t interested in a non-scheduled
interview because that usually doesn’t result in anything
substantial. You want to get answers that will illuminate
the investigation, not detract from it.
 It may require a series of discussions before someone
agrees to talk. Stress that the decision is entirely up to
the person, but also point out that the interview would
be the ideal way to get their message out.

 If a public official turns you down, ask for the schedule
of public events. Tell the media spokesperson that it’s
certainly not ideal for you to attempt to get a comment
at a ribbon cutting ceremony, but you will need an oncamera response for the story.

