Violation of Trust: How to investigate
what happens when sex crime victims seek justice
FACT: An estimated 60 percent of felony sex crimes are not reported to police,
according to the federal Bureau of Justice Statistics.
But what happens to the 40 percent of victims who do report that they have been raped
or sexually abused? We explored that question in our series:

VIOLATION of TRUST
February 19-22, 2015
BELLEVILLE (Illinois) NEWS-DEMOCRAT
http://media.bnd.com/static/media/VOT/index.html

ASSESSING YOUR LOCAL FELONY SEX CRIME PROSECUTION RATE*
(* A percentage derived from a comparison of all felony sex crimes reported to police to the number
prosecuted over a period of time.)
1. Obtain data listing all felony sex crimes (sexual assault and abuse) reported to police in your target
area. Our series covered nine years, 2005-2013, and 32 contiguous counties.
2. Obtain court records that show the number of felony sex crime prosecutions for this period.
3. Obtain an adequate number of felony sex crime police investigative reports. Although they may be
heavily redacted, these should provide an in-depth look at why many of these cases go nowhere and can
identify victims willing to talk. We reviewed about 1,200. Please see our series "Violation of Trust" at
bnd.com for our findings gleaned from these reports.

SOUNDS EASY. 1-2-3. RIGHT?
But it took months to accurately research the number of reported crimes, compare them to the number of
actual prosecutions and put a face on our project with detailed accounts from victims.
Our overall finding was that 70 percent of 6,744 felony sex crimes reported to police during 2005-2013
across a 32-county area of 1.2-million population were not prosecuted. The “failure to prosecute” rate
jumped to nearly 90 percent in our most populous county and in several smaller counties, including the
county where 18,000 students attend Southern Illinois University Carbondale.

YOU WILL BE DEALING WITH TWO BASIC FELONIES:
1. Criminal sexual assault, or rape. This almost always involves some type of penetration.
2. Felony sexual abuse. This can be almost any unwanted sexual contact involving an adult or any sexual
contact involving a minor short of penetration. We found sexual abuse was the hidden sex crime, not
counted by the country's largest crime data gathering system — the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting
Program, or UCR.

NUMBER OF SEXUAL ASSAULTS, OR RAPES, REPORTED TO POLICE
To find out the number of criminal sexual assaults or rapes check your state's annual crime report, which is
based on the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting program. The UCR collects crime data submitted by local
police. It also tracks arrests but does not keep any information on prosecutions. And it does not collect data
on felony sexual abuse.
WARNING: The UCR program's definition of rape was significantly rewritten in 2010 to include only
crimes between a man and a woman. This was changed in 2012 to a much more inclusive definition,
however this didn't take effect until 2014.
We noted large drops in the number of rapes reported to police in some counties for the years 2010-2013,
which we reported as outliers, due to the narrower UCR definition then in effect. These were not actual

reductions in the number of rapes reported to police, but were instead drops in the number of rapes police
reported to the UCR program.
Another problem with the UCR — the rape data includes cases involving adults and juvenile defendants.
There is no way to separate these. Here's what we did. We were careful to report that conviction rates and
dispositions pertained to adult cases only because prosecutions with juvenile defendants are sealed.
To obtain the overall "prosecution rate" (which includes the UCR mixed data) we canvassed circuit court
clerks for the number of felony sex crime prosecutions with juvenile defendants. Other details were not
available.
Most counties provided the overall juvenile prosecution numbers, if reluctantly. For the counties that
would not we sought help from a forensic researcher who came up with an accurate way to estimate these
prosecutions.
To obtain data on criminal sexual abuse you must canvas police departments. But we soon learned that
many smaller departments could not reliably separate misdemeanor sexual abuse from felony sexual abuse.
If abuse numbers provided by police were deemed unreliable we didn't use them. This is a judgment call.

LOCAL PROSECUTION RECORDS — WATCH OUT
You probably won't be able to just sit behind a computer to obtain this data. County court clerk systems
may be online, but there will likely be no way of isolating sex crimes. For that, we had to drive to all but
one of our 32 counties.
We found out that most counties were unwilling or incapable of providing yearly felony manifests
(sequential lists of all recorded felonies accepted for prosecution), which isolated felony sex crimes. So we
drove to the court clerks’ offices, requested felony manifests for all nine years of our study, and hauled
these stacks of paper back to the newsroom. Then we read them to isolate the felony sex crimes.
WARNING: Make sure the manifests are complete. Court cases are filed sequentially. However, in some
cases we unknowingly drove away with manifests that were missing hundreds of case numbers because a
clerk hit the wrong computer button.

DETERMINING VICTIM AGE
In Illinois, there are at least 56 variations of felony sex crimes with nuances based on factors such as the
age of the victim, whether the victim was mentally handicapped or if force or a weapon was involved.
This can be extremely tricky but it can be used to your advantage. For instance, if the crime is "predatory
criminal sexual assault," you can be relatively certain in Illinois that the victim was under age 13. Other sex
crime felonies are described in circuit court clerk manifests as "victim age 13-17."
Generally, the crime of "criminal sexual assault" refers to the rape of an adult. When it comes to age, be
cautious. Carefully read your state's felony sex crime statutes to be sure how the laws apply.

WATCH OUT FOR MISSING CASES
We took the precaution of faxing results for each county to the local prosecutor showing the number of
prosecutions for the time period. The Union County, Ill., prosecutor replied that we were missing about half
of his cases.
As it turned out, local judges there had adopted a practice in felony sex crimes involving child victims of
removing all records of the adjudications from any public access. There was no way to know the cases even
existed until the prosecutor told us what was happening. Our sidebar on Union County ended this practice.

ANALYZING WHAT YOU FIND
We assembled a database listing all 32 counties but linking reported felony sex crimes and prosecutions to
specific police departments in just three; the two largest and Jackson County, home to Southern Illinois
University Carbondale. Track how many defendants who were prosecuted ended up in prison.
You will likely find failure to prosecute rates ranging from very low to very high with an overall failure
percentage in the 65 to 80 percent range. Look for outliers. When we found that 80 percent of all felony sex
crimes in Saline County, pop. 34,000, were brought to court we interviewed the head prosecutor, Eva
Walker, to find out why. She told us that she takes advantages of Illinois laws that allow certain evidence
that would otherwise be ruled inadmissible as hearsay to be allowed during trial if a judge approves it.
We also tracked the size of police departments and compared them to the county’s prosecution failure
rate. We were surprised when we found that Belleville, the largest city in Southern Illinois with the largest

police department, had a prosecution failure rate of 82 percent. That discovery sent us poring through our
redacted Belleville Police Department sex crime investigative reports to find out why this rate was so high.

Good luck!

George Pawlaczyk
gpawlaczyk@bnd.com
618-560-6462 (cell)

Beth Hundsdorfer
bhundsdorfer@bnd.com
618-670-7592 (cell)

