at New York University School of Law

THE S TATE OF VOT I NG I N 2 0 1 4
By Wendy Weiser and Erik Opsal
Executive Summary
As we approach the 2014 election, America is still in the midst of
a high-pitched and often highly partisan battle over voting rights.
On one side are politicians passing laws and executive actions that
would make it harder for many citizens to vote. This started after
the 2010 midterm elections, when new state legislative majorities
pushed a wave of laws cracking down on voting. On the other
side are groups of voters and advocates pushing back — in the
legislatures, at the ballot box, and especially in the courts.
Until recently, the Voting Rights Act was a critical tool in the
fight, but the U.S. Supreme Court gutted the law’s core protection
last year. Since then, a number of states moved forward with
controversial voting changes, including those previously blocked
under the Voting Rights Act. As most state legislative sessions
wind down, the focus shifts to activity in the courts, which are
currently considering major challenges to new restrictions across
the country.
In short, many Americans face an ever-shifting voting landscape
before heading to the polls this November.

could find it harder to cast a ballot in the 2014 midterm
election than they did in 2010. The new laws range
from photo ID requirements to early voting cutbacks to
voter registration restrictions. Partisanship and race were
key factors in this movement. Most restrictions passed
through GOP-controlled legislatures and in states with
increases in minority turnout.
• In 15 states, 2014 will be the first major federal
election with these new restrictions in place. Ongoing
court cases could affect laws in six of these states.
• The courts will play a crucial role in 2014, with
ongoing suits challenging laws in seven states.
Voting advocates have filed suits in both federal
and state courts challenging new restrictions, and
those suits are ongoing in seven states — Arizona,
Arkansas, Kansas, North Carolina, Ohio, Texas, and
Wisconsin. There is also an ongoing case in Iowa over
administrative action that could restrict voting. More
cases are possible as we get closer to the election.

In advance of this crucial midterm election, this report details the
new voting restrictions put in place over the past few years, the
laws that are in place for the first time in 2014, and the major
lawsuits that could affect this year’s elections. Our key findings
include:

There has also been some positive momentum. Laws to improve
the election system and increase voting access passed in 16
states since 2012, and these laws will be in effect in 11 states
this November. The most common improvements were online
registration and other measures to modernize voter registration,
and increased early voting.

• Since the 2010 election, new voting restrictions are
slated to be in place in 22 states. Unless these restrictions
are blocked — and there are court challenges to laws in
six of those states — voters in nearly half the country

Still, this national struggle over voting rights is the greatest in
decades. Voters in nearly half the country could head to the polls
in November worse off than they were four years ago. This needs
to change.

New Laws Restricting the Vote
Election laws have long been prone to politicization, but for
decades there were no major legislative movements to restrict
voting. Indeed, the last major legislative push to cut back on
voting rights was after Reconstruction. The first stirrings of a
new movement to restrict voting came after the 2000 Florida
election debacle. Indiana and Georgia passed restrictive photo
ID laws in 2005 and 2006, respectively, and Arizona voters
approved a ballot initiative in 2004 requiring registrants to
provide documentary proof of citizenship when signing up.
But the 2010 election marked a major shift. From early 2011
until the 2012 election, state lawmakers across the country
introduced at least 180 restrictive voting bills in 41 states.
By the 2012 election, 19 states passed 27 restrictive voting
measures, many of which were overturned or weakened by
courts, citizen-led initiatives, and the Department of Justice

before the election. States continued to pass voting restrictions
in 2013 and 2014.
What is the cumulative effect of this legislative movement? As
of now, a few months before the 2014 midterm elections, new
voting restrictions are set to be in place in 22 states.1 Ongoing
court cases could affect laws in six of these states.2 Unless these
restrictions are blocked, citizens in nearly half the nation could
find it harder to vote this year than in 2010.
Partisanship played a key role. Of the 22 states with new
restrictions, 18 passed entirely through GOP-controlled bodies,4
and Mississippi’s photo ID law passed by a voter referendum.
Two of the remaining three states — Illinois and Rhode Island
— passed much less severe restrictions. According to a recent
study from the University of Massachusetts Boston, restrictions
were more likely to pass “as the proportion of Republicans in the
legislature increased or when a Republican governor was elected.”

S tates W ith N ew V oting R estric tions S inc e 2 0 1 0 E l e c tion

Click on map for interactive
version. Note: This map
includes two states — Montana
and Arizona — that do not
technically fit the title and thus
are reflected in light red. 3

1.
2.
3.

4.

Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Mississippi, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. For a detailed description of each state’s laws, see our interactive map or this list.
Arkansas, Kansas, North Carolina, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin. There is also a challenge to an Arizona law not reflected here because that law passed before 2010.
Montana lawmakers put a referendum on the November ballot to repeal Election Day registration, but that repeal will not actually be in effect this year. An Arizona law requiring documentary proof of citizenship when registering was passed in 2004, but blocked in 2012 for a voter using the federal registration form. In response, Arizona joined Kansas, which has a similar law,
in a suit to force the U.S. Election Assistance Commission (EAC) to change the federal form to allow the two states to require such documents. In March 2014, a federal judge ruled the
EAC must change the form, but the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals stayed that decision while it considers the appeal. Arizona is included here because until now, the federal form has never
been amended to allow for documentary proof of citizenship in any state.
By GOP-controlled body, we mean: (1) Both chambers of the legislature were controlled by Republicans and a Republican governor signed the bill, (2) Republicans controlled both chambers
and overrode a veto from a Democratic governor, or (3) a Republican governor took executive action without legislative involvement. States in the first category were Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Kansas, Nebraska (unicameral legislature with GOP governor), North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia (the GOP lieutenant governor broke a tie between an equally divided Senate), and Wisconsin. States in the second category were Arkansas and New Hampshire. Iowa and Florida fall into the third category.

2 | Brennan Center for Justice

Race was also a significant factor. Of the 11 states with the highest
African-American turnout in 2008, 7 have new restrictions in
place.5 Of the 12 states with the largest Hispanic population
growth between 2000 and 2010, 9 passed laws making it
harder to vote.6 And nearly two-thirds of states — or 9 out of
15 — previously covered in whole or in part by Section 5 of the
Voting Rights Act because of a history of race discrimination
in voting have new restrictions since the 2010 election.7 Social
science studies bear this out. According to the University of
Massachusetts Boston study, states with higher minority turnout
were more likely to pass restrictive voting laws. A University of
California study suggests that legislative support for voter ID laws
was motivated by racial bias.
What do these laws look like?
• Voter ID: A total of 13 states passed more restrictive
voter ID laws between 2011 and 2014, 11 of which
are slated to be in effect in 2014.8 Nine states passed
strict photo ID requirements,9 meaning a citizen cannot
cast a ballot that will count without a specific kind of
government-issued photo ID. An additional four states
passed less strict ID requirements.10 Eleven percent of
Americans do not have government-issued photo ID,
according to a Brennan Center study, which has been
confirmed by numerous independent studies. Research
shows these laws disproportionately harm minorities,
low-income individuals, seniors, students, and people
with disabilities. In Texas, for example, early data from
the state showed that between 600,000 and 800,000
registered voters did not have the kind of photo ID
required by the state’s law, and that Hispanics were 46
to 120 percent more likely to lack an ID than whites. In
North Carolina, estimates show that 318,000 registered
voters — one-third of whom are African American —
lack a DMV-issued ID.11

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

• Voter Registration: A total of nine states passed laws
making it harder for citizens to register to vote between
2011 and 2014.12 These measures took a variety of forms.
Four states13 have new restrictions on voter registration
drives. Nationally, African Americans and Hispanics
register through drives at twice the rate as whites.14 Three
states15 also passed laws requiring registrants to provide
documentary proof of citizenship, which as many as
7 percent of Americans do not have readily available.
North Carolina eliminated highly-popular same-day
registration, and Wisconsin made it harder for people
who have moved to stay registered.
• Early Voting: Eight states passed laws cutting back on
early voting days and hours.16 These restrictions could
exacerbate lines on Election Day and are particularly
likely to hurt minority voters. For example, in North
Carolina, Department of Justice data show that 7 in 10
African Americans who cast ballots in 2008 voted during
the early voting period, and 23 percent of them did so
during the week that was cut. Many states eliminated
weekend and evening hours, when minority voters are
more likely to cast a ballot. According to a study in Ohio
in 2008, 56 percent of weekend voters in Cuyahoga
County, the state’s most populous, were black.
• Restoring Voting Rights to People with Past
Convictions: Three states also made it harder to restore
voting rights for people with past criminal convictions.17
These laws disproportionately impact African Americans.
Nationwide, 7.7 percent of African Americans have lost
the right to vote, compared to 1.8 percent of the rest of
the population.

Mississippi (73.1 percent), South Carolina (72.5), Wisconsin (70.5), Ohio (70.0), Georgia (68.1), North Carolina (68.1), and Virginia (68.1). Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Voting and
Registration in the Election of November 2008 - Detailed Tables, Table 4b (Reported Voting and Registration of the Voting-Age Population, by Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin, for States: November
2008) http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/socdemo/voting/publications/p20/2008/tables.html.
South Carolina (148 percent growth), Alabama (145), Tennessee (134), Arkansas (114), North Carolina (111), Mississippi (106), South Dakota (103), Georgia (96), and Virginia (92).
Source: Pew Hispanic Center tabulations of U.S. Census Bureau Redistricting_Files-PL_94-171 for states http://www.pewhispanic.org/files/reports/140.pdf.
Alabama, Florida (partially covered), Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina (partially covered), South Carolina, South Dakota (partially covered), Texas, and Virginia.
Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Mississippi, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North Dakota, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin. The North Carolina
law will not be in effect for 2016, and the Wisconsin law was blocked by the courts in ongoing litigation. Some of these states passed more than one voting restriction and thus appear in
other categories as well.
Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin. The North Carolina law will not be in effect for 2016, and the Wisconsin law was
blocked by the courts in ongoing litigation.
A photo ID is requested in New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and South Carolina, but there is an affidavit alternative. A non-photo ID is required in North Dakota.
A study from the North Carolina Board of Elections estimates 318,643 registered voters lack a DMV-issued photo ID. Approximately one-third of that total (107,681) are African American.
Available here: http://moritzlaw.osu.edu/electionlaw/litigation/documents/League1591.pdf.
Alabama, Florida, Illinois, Kansas, North Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin. Due to an error, Nebraska was previously included in this list. It was updated and removed
on October 9, 2014.
Florida, Illinois, Texas, and Virginia.
Voting Law Changes in 2012, at 20 & 48 (2011), available at http://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/Democracy/VRE/Brennan_Voting_Law_V10.pdf; State Restrictions on Voter Registration Drives, at 3 & 9 (2012), available at http://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/publications/State%20Restrictions%20on%20Voter%20Registration%20Drives.pdf.
Alabama, Kansas, and Tennessee. The Kansas law is only in effect for the state registration form. Alabama and Tennessee election officials have yet to implement their state’s laws.
Florida, Georgia, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio, Tennessee, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.
Florida, Iowa, and South Dakota.
the state of voting in 2014 | 3

What’s New in 2014
In 15 states, 2014 will be the first major federal election
with new voting restrictions in place. Ongoing court cases
could affect laws in six of these states.19 The uncertainty over
these laws could lead to problems on Election Day, as they
18

did in 2012, when voting changes, even those not in effect,
contributed to long lines.20 We have already seen problems
with new ID requirements in low-turnout primaries, such as
in Arkansas this May, which could foreshadow more serious
problems in November.

V oting R estri c tions in P l a c e for F irst T i m e
in F e d era l E l e c tion in 2 0 1 4

*

18.
19.
20.

Alabama, Arkansas, Indiana, Kansas, Mississippi, Nebraska, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin.
Arkansas, Kansas, North Carolina, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin. There is also a challenge to an Arizona law not reflected here because that law passed before 2010.
How to Fix Long Lines, at 4 (2013), available at http://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/publications/How_to_Fix_Long_Lines.pdf.

4 | Brennan Center for Justice

Lawsuits Over Voting Restrictions
Voter advocates are fighting many of these new restrictions,
especially in court. Voting restrictions are currently being
challenged in court in seven states — Arizona, Arkansas, Kansas,
North Carolina, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin. A lawsuit over a
voter purge is also ongoing in Iowa. Most of the cases we are
watching this year will likely be decided, at least preliminarily,
in the coming months and could thus impact the 2014 election.
Challenges to restrictive voting laws have had a successful
track record to date. Before the 2012 election, 10 courts
blocked new restrictions in at least 7 states.21 Some of those
legal fights continued into this year — in Pennsylvania (where
a case challenging a strict new photo ID requirement is now
over after the governor chose not to appeal a ruling against
the law), in Texas (where a court found the state’s voter ID
law discriminatory under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act,
but then the Supreme Court effectively invalidated Section 5,
prompting a new lawsuit challenging the same voter ID law
under a different legal provision), and in Arizona (where the
Supreme Court ruled against the state’s new documentary

proof of citizenship requirement for voter registration but left
room for the state to sue again to seek a different result).
Over the past few years voters have won decisively in
Pennsylvania on voter ID; in Florida on voter registration
restrictions, early voting cutbacks, and a voter purge; in Ohio
on early voting cutbacks and provisional ballot counting; and
in a few cases challenging ballot measure language.
Voters received favorable decisions in ongoing lawsuits in
Wisconsin and Arkansas on voter ID and Iowa on voter purges.
Voters also won a lawsuit challenging Texas’s voter ID law that is
now being re-litigated under a different provision of law after the
Supreme Court gutted a key provision of the Voting Rights Act.
Voters have also experienced losses — in Tennessee on voter
ID, in Texas on voter registration drive restrictions, and in
South Carolina on voter ID (though during the course of the
litigation, the state interpreted the law in a way that was much
less restrictive). All of those laws are in place this year.

Ma j or V oting Litigation T hat Co u l d I m pa c t 2 0 1 4

*
Click on map for interactive
version. Note: An Iowa suit,
reflected in light blue, involves an
administrative action, not a law
passed by the legislature.

21.

Arizona, Florida, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin.

the state of voting in 2014 | 5

Improving Voting Access
There has also been some positive momentum to improve
voting. After long lines marred the 2012 election, dozens of
states introduced legislation in 2013 and 2014 to improve
access to the polls. Overall, laws to improve the voting process
passed in 16 states, and are set to be in effect in 11 states this
November.22 Five of these states also passed voting restrictions.23
What do these laws look like?
• Voter Registration Modernization: A total of 11 states
passed laws to modernize the voter registration system
and make it easier for eligible citizens to sign up.24 (A
number of states, like New York, implemented reforms
administratively and are not reflected here.) Research
shows these upgrades can increase registration rates,
efficiency, and accuracy, save money, and curb the
potential for fraud.
o Seven states passed laws creating or upgrading
online registration systems.25
o	Five states added same-day registration options.26
o Two states passed laws requiring motor vehicle
offices to transfer voter registrations electronically to
local election offices.27

• Early Voting: Three states expanded or created early
voting opportunities,28 which can reduce stress on
the voting system, lead to shorter lines on Election
Day, and improve poll worker performance, among
other benefits. Massachusetts’s law will not be in effect
until 2016. Missouri and Connecticut voters will also
consider ballot measures to create early voting periods.
• Pre-Registration: Three states passed laws allowing
16- and 17-year-olds to pre-register to vote before
turning 18.29
• Restoring Voting Rights to People with Past
Convictions: Delaware passed a constitutional
amendment expanding opportunities for people with
criminal convictions to regain their right to vote.
• Easing Voter ID Burdens: Oklahoma passed a law
making its existing photo ID law less restrictive.
• Access to Ballots: Colorado expanded access for
voters who speak a language other than English.
Mississippi and Oklahoma also expanded access to
absentee ballots.

S tates T hat E x pan d e d V oting in 2 0 1 3 an d 2 0 1 4

Click on map for interactive
version. Note: Laws in Hawaii,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, and
Nebraska will not be in effect in
2014. Missouri and Connecticut
voters will consider ballot
measures this year to add early
voting. These states are shown in
light green.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Laws in Colorado, Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia are slated to be in effect in 2014. Measures in Hawaii,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, and Nebraska will be in effect at a later date. Missouri voters will consider a ballot measure this November. Connecticut citizens will also vote on an early voting
ballot measure this year, but that bill passed prior to 2013 and is not included in this count. For a detailed description of each state’s laws, see our interactive map or this list.
Illinois, Nebraska, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Mexico, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Illinois, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, and Utah. Both Illinois and Utah are pilot programs.
Nebraska and New Mexico.
Illinois, Maryland, and Massachusetts. Illinois’s bill is a pilot program for 2014 only.
Colorado, Louisiana, and Massachusetts.

6 | Brennan Center for Justice

There was also movement on the national level. The bipartisan
Presidential Commission on Election Administration released
a widely-praised set of recommendations to fix many of the
problems persistently plaguing the voting system. These ideas
included modernizing voter registration and increasing early
voting opportunities. A few states — Hawaii, Illinois, Nebraska,

Massachusetts, and Minnesota — adopted some of these reforms
in 2014. And in Congress, Republicans and Democrats introduced
a bill to strengthen the Voting Rights Act. Unfortunately, that
measure appears stalled. Democrats in Congress also introduced
a host of bills to modernize the voting system, reduce long lines,
and increase access to the polls.

© 2014. This paper is covered by the Creative Commons “Attribution-No Derivs-NonCommercial” license (see http://creativecommons.org). It may be
reproduced in its entirety as long as the Brennan Center for Justice at NYU School of Law is credited, a link to the Center’s web pages is provided, and
no charge is imposed. The paper may not be reproduced in part or in altered form, or if a fee is charged, without the Center’s permisssion. Please let the
Center know if you reprint.

the state of voting in 2014 | 7

STAY CONNECTED TO THE BRENNAN CENTER
Visit our website at www.brennancenter.org.
Sign up for our electronic newsletters at www.brennancenter.org/signup.
Latest News | Up-to-the-minute info on our work, publications, events, and more.
Voting Newsletter | Latest developments, state updates, new research, and media roundup.
Justice Update | Snapshot of our justice work and latest developments in the field.
Fair Courts | Comprehensive news roundup spotlighting judges and the courts.
Twitter | www.twitter.com/BrennanCenter
Facebook | www.facebook.com/BrennanCenter

at New York University School of Law
161 Avenue of the Americas
12th Floor
New York, NY 10013
646-292-8310
www.brennancenter.org

