IRE Tips
Nancy Stancill
Author and former investigative reporter
nancy.stancill@gmail.com

USING YOUR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING IN A NOVEL
In some ways, the investigative reporter is the perfect modern-day
sleuth. Our work often centers on solving mysteries, shedding
daylight on malfeasance and trying to find a happy ending for
those who are wronged. Why not turn your story, or at least pieces
of it, into a novel?
WHY FICTION?
The core of your investigative story is interesting and significant,
but told as nonfiction, may not have wide enough appeal for the
reading public.
The targets of your investigative reporting are still angry and
would be happy to sue a deep-pockets publisher of your nonfiction.
In a novel, you can disguise the identity of bad actors by changing
genders or key characteristics.
If you’re writing fiction, you can invent an investigative reporter
protagonist with a life far different – and perhaps more exciting –
than yours! Creating unique characters is more fun than writing
about your own role in a real-life account.
You can use your investigative story as a solid base, but invent
subplots and characters that give the story richer appeal.
You can range far and wide in your setting. My investigative story
mostly involved a community college in a small town in Texas, but
1

my novel ranged all over Texas so I could write about places I
love.
You have the background to write knowledgably about life in a
newsroom at a newspaper or TV station, but you don’t have to
embarrass or incur the wrath of real-life bosses and coworkers.
THE WRITING
Plot your story carefully, especially if you have limited time each
day to work on your novel. Think of each chapter as a mini-story
in itself. Plan your writing so that you get to touch your work on
most days, even if it’s only rewriting a chapter.
Work on your style. A journalistic style can serve you well in
keeping your writing lean and focused, but you’ll need to figure
out how to write more expansively. Learn to love your characters
and setting in ways that journalism precludes.
Read as much as you can about writing novels before you begin.
Even if you’re already a good writer, it’s a new skill that needs
nurturing. One of my favorite how-to books: The Year You Write
Your Novel by Walter Mosley.
Remember that you’re not running a race. You’ll get it done
eventually if you can keep some momentum going.
PUBLICATION
If you don’t have any publishing experience or friends who will
recommend you to an agent or publishing company, start with the
Writers Market, the big book published annually that lists agents
and publishers willing to take on new clients.
If you can’t find an agent, try approaching smaller publishing
companies directly. Focus particularly on regional companies that
might have a natural interest in your work. My novel, Saving
2

Texas, was picked up by Black Rose Writing, a small Texas
publisher, to capitalize on the large market there.
I wrote simple, concise email queries to about 100 agents and
publishers, describing my book and my writing experience and
offering to send ten pages or the whole manuscript to read. I had
interest from three small publishers and an offer from one.
If you get discouraged, think twice about self-publishing. Even as
many writers elect to self-publish, it’s still harder to get attention
from news outlets. Many newspapers, for example, won’t review a
book that’s self-published.
MARKETING
If you sign with a small publisher, or often, even with a larger
publisher, you’ll be expected to do most of the marketing. Often,
that means contacting bookstores, setting up events and certainly
publicizing your work on social media. Learn what’s out there. For
instance, Facebook has a low-cost advertising program targeted to
geographical areas you can select. It can cost as little as a few
dollars a day.
Consider hiring a local publicist who will take on some of these
tasks. My publicist in North Carolina was great, getting me
interviews with reporters she knew on various papers and other
outlets and setting up events at bookstores. She charged me a low
monthly fee that I could justify for a few months.
Be shameless in using your journalist’s advantage. I contacted
friends at newspapers who often helped me land stories and
interviews. People are interested in investigative reporting – and
the stories that arise from it. Book clubs especially enjoy hearing
about reporters’ work, its real perils and what it can accomplish.

Nancy Stancill, author Saving Texas
3

4

