Tips from the audio trenches
At Pop Up Archive, we work with reporters, producers, and news organizations to make their sound
searchable with automatic timestamped transcripts and tags to help journalists and audiences do a better
job of searching, discovering, and sharing audio.
Our speech­to­text software is trained specifically for news media, enabling organizations like KQED,
HuffPost Live, and 99% Invisible to work faster and improve accessibility and search engine optimization.

Tip 1: Use transcripts to quickly provide a bird’s eye view of audio.

"At BBC Wales we are using the system as a production tool, saving our production staff countless hours in
doing manual transcriptions. It helps them navigate their rushes material quickly, enabling to focus on what
matters: identifying the golden moments to go into their programmes." —Michael Surcombe, BBC Wales
"I was looking for a story in Pop Up Archive about [Angel Island] in the Bay
Area, to pair with a new story about the same location. I'd only been working
[at KALW] for three years, and ​
I was able to find a great story that was
produced by my team way before my time working with them​
. It worked
perfectly in the episode I was producing, and it also provided me with an
interesting peek into work that I would probably have never stumbled across
had it not been for having such a wide archive, and the ability to search for
particular subjects and tags."
— Ashleyanne Krigbaum, KALW

Tip 2: Transcription tools are finally accurate enough to save you time.

"The night before a short­turnaround feature story is due, I dump my interviews in. The next morning, my
logged tape is waiting for me. It's really incredible. In the past, I would have spent seven hours logging that
tape." —Kenny Malone, WLRN­Miami Herald News
"I've had great success using Pop Up to transcribe several hours of tape, saving me god knows how many
hours of transcription." —Joe Rosenberg, Snap Judgment

Tip 3: Use auto-transcripts to help create text articles.
"It's been a huge help with our work at CBC Radio. We are able to turn radio stories into online articles for
our website with the help of the transcriptions." —Elizabeth Bowie, CBC

