Whistleblower Tip Sheet
INTRO:
The following tips are listed roughly in the order issues should be addressed, but working with
whistleblowers is as much an art as a science. The process of cultivating a confidential source should feel
natural, not forced. If the sequence of these suggestions doesn’t feel right, go with your instinct.
All reporters should know their company’s policy on dealing with whistleblowers and confidential
sources. They also should have some familiarity with the federal Whistleblower Protection Act as well as
parallel state laws.
INITIAL CONTACT:
Typically, whistleblowers reach out to reporters either out of the blue or after reading a story related to
their topic of concern. Sometimes, contact will be made upon the advice of an attorney, colleague or
mutual acquaintance. Finally, you may solicit tips on a particular subject via social media or a newsroom
hotline.
Regardless of the trigger, when someone calls with information or a tip, remember that this is not a
seduction. You owe it to your source, yourself and readers to be transparent and forthright.
Try to ascertain the source’s value and credibility as soon as possible. Ask directly about the person’s
position, basis of information, background, expertise, etc. Ask how he or she became aware of the
information being provided. Ask about documentation, additional sources and other corroboration.
Remember that many whistleblowers are unsophisticated in dealing with the media, and likely full of
anxiety. The caller (or emailer) is not just a source, but a person who may be risking career and
livelihood. You can be professional and compassionate at the same time. Ask about fears or concerns,
and whether there are questions about the process.
Ask immediately if the whistleblower wants to be on the record or confidential. Be sure to define those
terms and reach a clear agreement about what’s expected of the source and the reporter. (See the
separate tip sheet, “Off the Record Agreement,” for a step-by-step guide.)
Once you have a preliminary sense of whether the source is credible and useful, get email addresses,
phone numbers, etc.
Tell the source a little about you. Not self-promotion, but enough about your journalism experience,
previous work and life to engender confidence.
As soon as possible, learn the source’s motivations. Is he or she providing information as an act of
vengeance, to expose corruption, for political reasons, for public safety? Understand there may be
multiple motivations, and ask the source to identify all of them.
Push for a face-to-face meeting early. Human contact usually increases the whistleblower’s confidence
and ensures better communication. Consider inviting your editor or a colleague to attend. Seek a
location that is comfortable to the source, and be sure to set aside adequate time.

Before meeting the source, conduct a thorough background check. Seek lawsuits, criminal cases,
political activities, regulatory sanctions, news articles and other info on the individual’s position,
occupation, subject matter, etc. Look up the source’s Facebook and Twitter accounts.
To the extent possible, research the topic of your interview so you are familiar with the history, key
issues, events, players, acronyms, etc.
GROUND RULES:
If the source is on the record, ask whether photographs, videotaping and audio recording are OK.
If the whistleblower wants confidentiality, explain what that means. It is critical for the source to
understand you may share information with colleagues, editors and legal counsel. It is also essential for
the source to realize confidentiality does not automatically insulate him or her from being named in
prospective stories. For example, if the source turns out to be a significant figure in the controversy or
issue at hand, you may write about that role so long as you do not identify him or her as a provider of
information.
Explain that subjects of watchdog stories frequently attempt to discredit whistleblowers. Ask whether
there is any negative information that could be used against her or him in a smear campaign. Is the
source a disgruntled ex-employee or consumer? Does the source have a criminal record? Is the source a
business competitor? Has the source ever been diagnosed with a mental illness?
Be straightforward about the relationship. A reporter and whistleblower are not collaborating. They’re
not on a team. They are not friends. They may have different objectives and see the story differently.
Explain that on-the-record statements may not be retroactively withdrawn.
Ask the source if he/she has filed formal paperwork of any kind, such as a civil suit, an EEO or OIG
complaint, a whistleblower retaliation complaint, etc. Has the source formally sought or asserted
whistleblower status? How? (If not, you may want to discuss that possibility.)
Be blunt in explaining that, while state and federal laws provide legal redress for whistleblowers who are
victims of reprisal, the statutes do not effectively prevent retaliation. Sources should understand that
there may be severe repercussions for going public, and whistleblower protections do not always work.
RED FLAGS & CLOSURE:
Push for documentation without urging or encouraging any criminal act. When records are provided, do
not accept the contents at face value. Authenticity must be confirmed.
If a whistleblower refers you to other sources who provide identical information, beware of treating this
as independent confirmation. They may share a single source, or be obtaining the info from one
another.
Do not allow a source’s sensitivity, temperament or vagueness to deter you from asking necessary
questions. Respectfully challenge assertions that seem dubious. Do not allow fear of offending or losing
a source to deter you from seeking clarity.
Make it clear to that you will not simply publish what you are told or provided. You have a due-diligence
requirement to verify information, and to interview all sides -- including those who are accused.

You may work with a whistleblower for weeks or months before publication. Occasionally check his or
her comfort level. Ask if there are problems, concerns, unforeseen conflicts?
Before the article runs, let the whistleblower know the scheduled publication date (with a caveat that
stories frequently get held at the last minute). After publication, check on how the source is reacting to
the content and handling the exposure. Show human understanding: This is a huge, emotional
experience that could change the person’s life.
If the source becomes a subject of retaliation at any time, a story on that issue may be newsworthy. But
a reporter has a limited capability, as well as ethical constraints, when it comes to protecting a
whistleblower.

