OFF THE RECORD AGREEMENT
A reporter’s guide to handling “confidential” sources
The terms “off-the-record,’’ “confidential,’’ and “background’’ have
no uniform meaning among journalists or the public. Yet, when we make an
agreement with prospective sources, we become ethically and legally bound.
Because of that, it is imperative to define terms and reach a mutual
agreement before any identity protection is granted.
Push for the lowest level of insulation, the “not-for-attribution’’
interview. Explain what the phrase means. List all caveats and conditions.
Make sure the source understands and agrees.
Here are some vital points to clarify and/or negotiate:
1. I may publish the information you provide if I can verify it in other
ways. But I cannot attribute it to you, or identify you as my source to anyone
except editors, colleagues and legal counsel. They also are bound by this
agreement.
2. I may still use your name in print if you are a part of the story, so
long as I don’t attribute information to you. For example, if your name
appears in public records or is brought up by other interview subjects as a
part of the issue, I may include it in the article.
3. I may/may not quote you as an anonymous source, indicating your
position, profession or other status that would lend credibility.
4. In the event I am called as a witness and compelled by a judge to
divulge my source under a threat of jail, fines or other adverse judgment, I
may/may not reveal you as my source.
5. The terms of our agreement are nullified if you fail to divulge a
substantial involvement, motive or fact about the story, or if you knowingly
provide false or misleading information.
6. If you are a figure in the story to be published, after our interview I
may ask you to comment on the record. Assuming you refuse, I may inform
readers that you declined comment for the report.
Three more suggestions:
Make a record of the terms agreed upon.
Always exhaust efforts to get information on the record before
agreeing to any confidentiality.
Avoid a ping-pong interview where the source repeatedly shifts from
confidential comments to quotable statements. If it happens, keep careful
track of what is on the record and what is not.

