Investigating government debt collectors (and other private govt. contractors)
By Blake Ellis & Melanie Hicken, CNNMoney
Where to dig up information about the debt collectors working for your local government
City Council records: Don’t just stop at agendas and minutes; most of the dirt is often hidden in staff
reports, which you may have to request from the city or are hidden on the city’s website.
*Tip: Try searching the city’s website on Google with .pdf for the firm you’re looking for
RFPs (Requests for Proposal): Many governments require contractors to provide a whole lot of
information about their firm’s history and practices when responding to RFPs. For example, we were able
to get a list of every lawsuit filed against the firm in one RFP.
*Tip: Some are as easy to find as a Google search, but you can also file a public records request with
local government agencies for any RFP responses they get through a public bidding process.
Lobbying/campaign finance records/political disclosures: Running a search on
Followthemoney.org’s site is a good place to start. You can then gather the campaign finance and
lobbying records directly from the states where there seems to be the most activity. In rare cases, firms
may even put lawmakers on their payrolls. To track this, look up their ethics filings which are typically held
by a state agency.
*Tip: Look for key donations/lobbying around the time of contract votes or the passage of local and state
laws that help the firm’s business model. You can then look up legislative notes to see if lobbyists working
for the company spoke in favor of the bill.
Lawsuits: Pacer is always a good place to start, but Lexis Nexis also has a tab where you can search for
legal documents from a number of state and federal courts. Just type in the name of the company as a
keyword.
*Tip: This is also a good place to find contact information for attorneys who may have knowledge about
the collector. And they usually have lots of good details, so that even if you can’t get the consumer to talk
to you, you can include information from the lawsuit itself.
How to find sources
Complaints: Many states consider consumer complaints filed with Attorneys General public records. You
can request their complaint database in whole as well as the actual complaints filed about particular
companies (This is typically where the juicy stuff is, like detailed descriptions, backup documentation.)
*Tips: States that release full complaints and contact information are a good place to start. Some we had
luck with: Texas, Florida, Missouri
LinkedIn: Use the “Advanced Search” option to look up former employees (they make some of the best
sources). Select the “past company” category and type in the name of the contractor you’re researching.
*Tip: For best results, sign up for a free LinkedIn Premium Account through LinkedIn for Journalists:
https://www.linkedin.com/grp/home?gid=3753151 (typically all you need to do is attend one web-based
training session!)
Looking into the lives of the company’s owners:
Property records: Use Lexis Nexis or go to the local county tax assessor’s site, where you can typically
search by name or address.
Jet registration: Use the FAA’s website to search by a number of identifiers (including county, state,
serial number or name): http://registry.faa.gov/aircraftinquiry/
Facebook: Along with looking at individual employees’ pages (you’d be surprised by how many people
still have completely public profiles), do a search for each person’s name in the general search box. This
is how we found a great photo of one of the debt collector’s founders sitting in a Bentley next to a yacht.
Search for the company’s name as well, and you could stumble across photos other people have posted
of firm parties, etc.

