2015 IRE national conference in Philadelphia
Panel: Navigating the publishing world: From ebooks to your first novel
Daniel Connolly - The (Memphis) Commercial Appeal
901-300-0682, danieljamesconnolly@gmail.com
This tipsheet focuses on how to get a nonfiction book contract with a large
publisher.
Advantages and disadvantages of working with a big book publisher
Advantages: Reviews / attention, national distribution, payment in advance.
Disadvantages: You may face many rejections and the process may take
years. Big publishers generally want books they can sell nationally and
internationally. Your book may not match that goal. A big publisher might not try
hard to promote your book - it's just one of dozens or hundreds in their catalog.
If you want a nonfiction book deal, first write a proposal
For details on doing this, I recommend "The Essential Guide to Getting
your Book Published" by Arielle Eckstut and David Henry Sterry.
Next, identify literary agents
To get a contract with a big book publisher, you usually need a literary
agent to represent you. Small publishers usually don't require an agent.
To find an agent, use the web site publishersmarketplace.com. Buy a
subscription. Look at lists of book deals in your category (biography, et cetera.)
and look for an agent who's successfully handled books like yours.
Visit aaronline.org and see if the agent is a member of the Association of
Authors' Representatives. If so, that's good. Use the Internet and public records to
find out as much as possible about the agent's interests and background. You'll use
this info in your query.
Contacting an agent (queries)
Use the agent's web site to learn how they want you to contact them, and
follow their instructions exactly.
In your message, say why you're writing to this particular agent. ("I read
that you're interested in science journalism and that you represent Frans de Waal
and Susan Freinkel.")

Offer a quick bio, a summary of your book and examples of similar books.
Explain who will buy your book and why it will make money.
Why agents reject proposals
- "I can't sell this." The marketing and audience sections of the book
proposal are hugely important.
- "Your writing stinks." Book editors want a story with character, scene,
plot and dialogue. To learn these techniques, I recommend the book "Storycraft"
by Jack Hart and classes through creativenonfiction.org / your local university.
- "You haven't published anything on this." Getting articles published on
your topic almost always helps. Enter the articles in journalism contests, too.
- "This is an article, not a book." You must argue why the topic merits indepth book treatment.
- "I didn't love it." Every week, dozens of people contact agents with book
proposals. If they don't love your idea, they won't work with you.
Agent red flags
- If an agent asks you to pay them money up front, you may be dealing with
a con artist. Reputable agents work on commission - they don't get paid until you
get paid. 15 percent commission is standard.
- If the agent accepts you as a client, they must return your phone calls and
e-mails and tell you what they're doing on your behalf. Everyone's human and can
fail to return a call once in a while, but if they're consistently ducking you, you
should probably fire the agent.
General recommendations on book writing and a final thought
- Create a peaceful physical space to do your writing. I rented an office in
Memphis - some of you might want to simply set aside a space in your home.
- Set a schedule to do writing / research and follow it.
- Create a "mailing list" of family, friends and work colleagues for updates
about your book project and send weekly memos.
- Consider joining a local writers' group to share drafts.
- Use the computer application Scrivener to keep track of your research.
Final thought: My first of many agent rejections for the project that became
"The Book of Isaias" arrived on June 30, 2011. After years of effort and false
starts, I signed with agent Michelle Tessler on December 20, 2014 - 1,269 days
later. She quickly got me a great book deal. Moral of the story: Don't quit.

