An agent query letter that worked - a supplemental tipsheet
2015 IRE national conference in Philadelphia
Panel: Navigating the publishing world: From ebooks to your first novel
Daniel Connolly - The (Memphis) Commercial Appeal
901-300-0682, danieljamesconnolly@gmail.com
Here's how I got a representation agreement with the literary agent I work
with now, Michelle Tessler. I found her on publishersmarketplace.com and saw
that she's one of the top agents nationally in the narrative nonfiction category - my
category.
I looked at her web site and saw that she takes queries through an online
form. One section of her form asked for a bio. I wrote:
"I’ve worked as a reporter for more than a decade and I’ve covered immigration
to the U.S. South for mainstream news organizations including The Associated Press
and The (Memphis) Commercial Appeal newspaper. I took a year off
from my newspaper job to focus on this project full-time."
Her web site asked for a summary of the project. I wrote:
"Ms. Tessler,
I was researching agents online this evening and I saw that you represented A
NUCLEAR FAMILY VACATION as well as PACMAN, the Pacquiao biography.
I’m pitching an immersion journalism work and the fact that you’ve represented these
projects suggests we may be a good fit for one another. I also respect that you made
the effort to join the Association of Authors’ Representatives - that's always a good
sign!"
Note: The opening of the query shows that I've done my homework and I have a reason for
writing to her in particular. I'm not just sending spam mail to agents. Also, I put the book titles in
ALL CAPS. This is POPULAR in the BOOK INDUSTRY and shows that I'm FAMILIAR with
the BUSINESS. Next, I summarized my project quickly.
"I'm seeking agent representation for THE BOOK OF ISAIAS, a narrative
nonfiction story that follows a brilliant teenaged son of Mexican immigrants as he
decides whether to go to college or work as a house painter. His experience reflects the
stories of millions of young people like him across the country. . . "

Then I compare my book to other successful projects. I forgot the ALL CAPS for titles, but no
harm done.
"I'm modeling my book on others that tell a national story through the narrative of
one teenager: “Enrique’s Journey” by Sonia Nazario and “A Hope in the Unseen,” by
Ron Suskind. Both books won critical acclaim and commercial success."
Then I mention an article that I already wrote on this subject and an award it won.
"In December 2013, The (Memphis) Commercial Appeal published my
newspaper narrative on Isaias, along with pictures by top-tier photojournalist Karen
Pulfer Focht. Many readers stepped forward to offer Isaias money and help. One
woman even offered to adopt him. The newspaper project won a top prize in the 2013
National Awards for Education Reporting. . ."
In the final paragraphs, I describe why this book will make money.
"This is a timely story. As you probably know, President Obama is about to
announce executive action that could bring legal status to millions of undocumented
immigrants, like Isaias’ parents. . . . It’s a good environment to sell an immigrationrelated book to a publisher. The current political crisis will blow over in a few months,
but my book has the potential to remain relevant for decades, since it focuses not on
immigrants who might leave the country, but on their American-raised children, who
will almost certainly stay.
I am willing to work hard to make this book the best it possibly can be. I can send
you a full proposal if you like."
Michelle asked for more material and eventually agreed to represent me.
She's a great agent and as of this writing, May 2015, she's still open to queries.
A few more tips:
- Your query should be brief, one or two pages long.
- Before you send your query, prepare a book proposal and sample chapters
and have the material ready to send the agent immediately if they ask.
- Always keep in mind that the agents are extraordinarily busy. Don't waste
their time with trivialities you can handle yourself. From the very first interaction,
present yourself as someone who's businesslike and easy to deal with.
- Mirror their communication style. If they like to talk on the phone, talk on
the phone. If they write e-mails, write e-mails. If they like e-mails with lots of
exclamation points, write lots of exclamation points!!!!

