IRE 2015 – Philadelphia
On the Beat: Covering Criminal Justice
Cheryl W. Thompson
Investigative Reporter, The Washington Post
Associate Professor, George Washington University
Cheryl.thompson@washpost.com
Twitter @cherylwt

Tipsheet
Strategies for Covering Criminal Justice: From Finding Enterprise Stories to
Building Sources
 Have a “documents state of mind.” Regularly FOIA and obtain as many
documents as you can. Request databases on homicides. Guns. Arrests. Budgets.
Audits.
Story that came from scrutinizing records: D.C. police received nearly $5.8
million one year specifically to hire about 400 new officers. Months after the
money was earmarked, only 35 new recruits had been hired. The A1 story
examined why the District failed to hire, including why there were no phones,
computers,cars or other tools necessary for the recruiting unit to carry out the
hiring plan.
 Develop sources. Get to know the players in the department. Detectives. District
commanders. Sheriff’s deputies. People who know what’s going on and would be
willing to help you. Take them to lunch or for coffee. Call them often, even when
you don’t want anything in particular. Get out of the office and hang out with
them. Show them you’re interested in what they do. Cops appreciate that.
 Look for crime trends/patterns. Homicides. Examine the homicide closure rate
and how officials came up with that number. How many cases were closed by
arrest? How many were closed administratively? How many people charged with
murder were actually convicted of murder? Are burglaries or sexual assaults
occurring in a certain part of town at a high rate? Is the department solving them
quickly or do they take a back seat to other crimes such as homicides? Most
departments now put those statistics online.
Story that resulted from examining crime trends: Documents showed an
unusually high number of burglaries in a particular neighborhood. What elevated
the story to A1 was that the commander of that district and an assistant chief who
lived in that district both had their homes burglarized. When the commander
called police, they didn’t show up; when the assistant chief called in his burglary,
officers went to the wrong house. If police showed up when residents called,
some of the officers wouldn’t even have the necessary tools to take a complaint.

 Do ridealongs. Embed with a detective or commander once a month. You’d be
surprised at what you might see and hear. Cops can be chatty, particularly when
they’re away from the office. It’s also a great opportunity to cultivate sources. I
did a ridealong with a commander and witnessed a shooting and a drug bust inside
a crack house. I even rode along with the police chief and a top deputy.
Story that came from one ridealong: a cover feature story on the police chief for
the Sunday Washington Post Magazine.
 Get the names of all sworn officers, particularly new recruits, and payroll
records. Look at salaries and overtime. People love to know how much money
others make.
Story that came from examining payroll records: Four members of Marion
Barry’s detail collected thousands of dollars in overtime for driving to New
Jersey to carry the mayor’s luggage back from an overseas trip.
 Check criminal records of law enforcement. Are cops getting arrested? Are
cops from a particular recruiting class getting into trouble?
Story from running criminal checks on officers: An A1 story revealed that 13 D.C.
police officers were convicted of crimes that included extortion, kidnapping and
sexual abuse. The convictions occurred during one year and were a three-fold
increase over a three-year period.
 Attend public hearings. Many city councils have subcommittees that handle
judiciary matters. Some of my best stories came from those hearings, which
largely go uncovered by the media.
 Check out complaints. Most police departments have some type of civilian
complaint review board, particular after the recent deadly incidents in Ferguson,
Cleveland and Baltimore. Are there large numbers of excessive use of force
complaints? Are the same officers involved?
 Lawsuits and settlements. Look up lawsuits against the department and
individual officers. Is the department paying lots of money to settle suits? File
regular FOIAs to get the list of payouts.
 Get every blank form in the police department. It will give you an idea of the
documents they collect. Having the forms also allows you to familiarize yourself
with what information is public and what isn’t.

