IRE 2015 – Philadelphia
On the Beat: Covering Criminal Justice
Cheryl W. Thompson
Investigative Reporter, The Washington Post
Associate Professor, George Washington University
Cheryl.thompson@washpost.com
Twitter @cherylwt

Tipsheet
Strategies for Covering Criminal Justice: From Finding Enterprise Stories to
Building Sources
 Develop sources. Get to know the players in the department. Detectives. District
commanders. People who know what’s going on and would be willing to help
you. Take them to lunch or for coffee. Call them often, even when you don’t want
anything in particular. Get out of the office and hang out with them. Show them
you’re interested in what they do. Cops appreciate that.
 Look for crime trends/patterns. Homicides. Examine the homicide closure rate
and how officials came up with that number. How many cases were closed by
arrest? How many were closed administratively? How many people charged with
murder were actually convicted of murder? Are burglaries or sexual assaults
occurring in a certain part of town at a high rate? Is the department solving them
quickly or do they take a back seat to other crimes such as homicides? Most
departments now put those statistics online. I wrote a story on an unusually high
number of burglaries in a particular neighborhood. What made the story a front
pager was that the commander of that district and an assistant chief who lived in
that district both had their homes burglarized. When the commander called police,
they didn’t show up; when the assistant chief called in his burglary, officers went
to the wrong house. If police showed up when residents called, some of the
officers wouldn’t even have a pen or pad to take the complaint.
 Do ridealongs. Hang out with a detective or commander once a month. You’d be
surprised at what you might see and hear. Cops can be chatty, particularly when
they’re away from the office. It’s also a great opportunity to cultivate sources. I
did a ridealong with a commander and witnessed a shooting and a drug bust inside
a crack house. I even rode along with the police chief and a top deputy. The
culmination was a cover story for the Washington Post Magazine.

 Get the names of all sworn officers. Look at salaries and overtime. People love
to know how much money others make. Run the names of officers against
criminal court records. Are cops getting arrested? Are cops from a particular
recruiting class getting into trouble?
 Attend public hearings. Many city councils have subcommittees that handle
judiciary matters. Some of my best stories came from those hearings, which
largely go uncovered by the media.
 Check out complaints. Most police departments have some type of civilian
complaint review board, particular after the recent deadly incidents in Ferguson,
Cleveland and Baltimore. Are there large numbers of excessive use of force
complaints?
 Lawsuits and settlements. Look up lawsuits against the department and
individual officers. Is the department paying lots of money to settle suits? File
regular FOIAs to get the list of payouts.
 Budgets. Review the department’s annual budget to see where the money is
going.
 Audits. Check out audits done locally and nationally on your police department.
 Get every blank form in the police department. It will give you an idea of the
documents they collect. Having the forms also allows you to familiarize yourself
with what information is public and what isn’t.

