The Business Reporter’s Toolbox
June 2015
Public companies​
: U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (sec.gov)
-10-K: The annual report lays out all of a company’s material lawsuits and government
investigations, the taxes it pays/doesn’t pay, and generally has more detail about its profit
margins and costs than any other public filing. For foreign companies that file in the U.S., the
equivalent form is a 20-F.
-DEF 14A (proxy statement): This filing is a gold mine. It explains how much executives are paid
and why. It also includes perks, transactions with family members or financial partners,
disclosures about how much executives get paid if the company is bought, and proposals to
change bylaws to do things like issue more shares for paying executives.
-Correspondence: Search SEC’s Edgar database for file type “CORRESP.” This will show you the
company’s responses to commission staff inquiries, which shows you what regulators are
paying attention to.
-Form 4: Whenever an executive or board member or certain large shareholders sell stock, they
have to disclose it. These often over-looked filings can give you insight into an executive’s
financial situation, as well as their personal views on the stock’s potential to rise or fall.
-8-K: Companies file these for every material event. Look at the attachments, too. They include
things like executive employment agreements. Pay close attention when a company files an 8-K
on a Friday afternoon or around a holiday, which is when many companies like to disclose bad
news.
-Form 13-F: This shows what stocks institutional money managers have invested in, and is filed
quarterly. Not all professional investors are willing to talk about why they’ve investing in a
particular company, but many are, and this is a handy way to find them. When an investor owns
at least 5% of a company’s stock, they are also disclosed in Form 13-D.
-For mutual funds or exchange-traded funds, annual and semi-annual reports and the
prospectus (or main disclosure document) are available on the fund company’s website.
Another critical document, the Statement of Additional Information, contains reams of detail
about how a fund trades, charges fees and pays its managers and should be filed with the SEC.
-Text search: You can also do a keyword search in the SEC’s Edgar database, which is a good
way of seeing if a company or executive’s name surfaces in another company’s disclosures.
-Pay special attention to the footnotes, where dirt often hides in the details.

Private companies
-SEC: Some private companies file with the SEC if their debt is publicly traded. Others file
limited disclosures if they are selling securities to a small number of investors. Even the

bare-bones Form D (registering sales of stock to investors) can tell you who’s on the board of a
private company and give you insight into its financial backers.
-Check the Secretary of State’s database for business incorporation records, which will tell you
whether a business exists, who its registered to, and sometimes who owns it.
-Open Corporates (opencorporates.com) is a clearinghouse for private company data, including
directors, registered agents and addresses.
-Firms like​
www.sharespost.com​
​
and​
www.secondmarket.com​
​
facilitate limited trading in (and
provide some information about) private companies. Access is limited to “qualified” or
“accredited” investors, generally people with at least $1 million in net worth (not counting real
estate). If you don’t happen to meet that cutoff, you might be able to get access through
someone who is a member; check with your editor if this is OK.

Nonprofits
-Guidestar (guidestar.org) create a log-in for free and peruse the Form 990s that it collects.
-Look for its five highest paid employees and contractors.
-Check how much revenue goes to fundraising versus its tax-exempt programs.
-File public records requests for the applications for nonprofit status, Form 1023 for a 501(c)3,
and Form 1024 for a 501(a).
-Exempt Organizations Select Check: Quick search at ​
http://apps.irs.gov/app/eos/​
to verify that
a nonprofit is officially recognized as such by the IRS.

Federal, State and Local Government Records
-Federal contracts: Search the government’s procurement database
(​
https://www.fpds.gov/fpdsng_cms/index.php/en/​
) to see if a company has won any federal
contracts.
-Recorder of Deeds: These local records, which are often online, allow you to search purchases
and sales of land and property. They also show you if a business or individual has taken out a
mortgage on a property they own.
-Ask your local sheriff for foreclosure auction records. You can get lists of who’s buying and
selling properties.
-Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings: Lenders often require borrowers to pledge collateral
to secure the loan, and they file a public record of the collateral.

Political Activities
-Federal Election Commission: Find out whether companies or executives have contributed to
political candidates or committees (fec.gov).

-Legistorm (legistorm.com): Free resource that shows financial disclosure reports by members
of the U.S. government (including members of the Senate, U.S. House and executive branch)
and is a good way of looking for conflicts of interest if they’re investing in companies they
oversee.
-Lobbying: Check U.S. Senate and House lobbying database, which includes a text searchable
function for issues: ​
http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfields​
,
http://lobbyingdisclosure.house.gov​
). Individual states also frequently post lobbying
disclosures.
-White House visitor log: Check to see if an individual has been and who he/she has met with
(​
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/disclosures/visitor-records​
).
-Foreign company lobbying: Check the FARA database to see who foreign companies have hired
and what issues they are lobbying on (http://www.fara.gov)

Other backgrounding/corporate resources
-LinkedIn: If you sign up for a tutorial, you can get free premium access for a year that allows
you to see more of a person’s profile and send direct messages to people outside your circle of
connections. You can adjust your settings to browse profiles anonymously. Great way to find
sources among former employees.
-Google Scholar: A good way of finding knowledgeable sources who are working on topics
you’re reporting about, as well as seeing what companies and individual researchers have been
up to.
-Morningstar’s 10-K Wizard (10kwizard.com): Morningstar sometimes makes this free to
journalists. It allows you to search SEC filings more expansively than the SEC’s Edgar database
allows, and also enables you to create alerts for SEC filings on companies and search terms.
-Other third-party companies that aggregate and analyze SEC filings, like​
www.footnoted.com​
​
,
www.datalogix.com​
,​
www.lexissecuritiesmosaic.com​
​
: may provide much better organization
and easier ability to search for keywords across SEC filings than Edgar does.
-S&P’s Capital IQ (capitaliq.com): S&P sometimes makes this service free to journalists. It’s a
great repository of SEC data, allowing you to look at line items going back years without having
to dig through Edgar. It also has transcripts, financial ratios and records of mergers and
acquisitions.
-PACER: Database of federal, appellate and bankruptcy filings.Search judiciously; every search
or page costs a dime and can add up fast.
-FINRA’s BrokerCheck (brokercheck.finra.org): Search to see if an investment advisor, insurance
agent or other financial professionals have any red flags in their disciplinary records. Remember
to search by both the person’s name and the name of the brokerage or financial advisory firm.

-SEC’s Investment Adviser Public Disclosure page: Search for advisor or firm, then download
Form ADV (including Part II and the “brochure”): Extensive disclosures on fees, ownership, past
misconduct, “potential” conflicts of interest and many other details.
-State securities regulators (to find them in your state, search​
www.nasaa.org​
​
) may often be
investigating financial advisors, stockbrokers or corporate issuers that might not immediately
turn up in a search of federal sources.
-State/local courts: Governments are increasingly imaging their court documents and making
them available online.
-U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Search to see if a company or executive’s name surfaces on
patent or copyright applications (​
http://portal.uspto.gov/pair/PublicPair​
,
http://cocatalog.loc.gov/​
).
-Subscription services: TLO and LexisNexis are great for finding property and court records.
Tapestry (​
http://www.fidlar.com/tapestry.aspx​
) has property records for several Midwestern
states.

