Tip Sheet - The most significant problems in the life insurance industry occur in its marketplaces, during the sales
process when annuities, life, disability, and LTCI get sold. To document such problems, one needs to get into the
marketplace, to do more than the WSJ's 1997 book, Lifetime Guide to Money, which regarding life insurance states,
"There are lots of problems in the way it is sold." Find out how transactions/sales actually occur, what gets said.
Inadequate disclosures of financial products prevent consumers from learning about aspects of the product to which they
might have serious objections. Potentially, there can be serious objections to every aspect of a product, and there in fact
often are valid bases for multiple objections. Broadly speaking about life insurance, consumers need to be provided with
Truth-in-Life Insurance. Very briefly, consumers have always needed and deserved to be informed of the annual costs of
the handful of a policy's basic operating components: sales, administrative, premium taxes, claims, and capital charges.
For policies with investment components, consumers need information about such and their tax privileges' impacts.
Be aware: Different types of misrepresentations are made depending upon the seller's objectives (type of policy, .i.e.,
whole life vs. UL-GNL vs. Equity Indexed UL vs. 30 Yr Level Premium Term) and the buyers' situations ("knowledge"
preferences, etc.) Regarding buyers' "knowledge" please research Americans' financial, risk, and insurance literacy.
Readers and viewers need financial and risk-management education. The life insurance industry is a goldmine for an
investigative journalist who has done the necessary research. The learning will fascinate both journalist and audience. It is
vital that any journalist or journalist team covering the life insurance industry have (or develop) strong mathematical and
financial knowledge and insightful understanding (preferably extensive experience) of business transactions, that is, sales.

Useful Materials for Understanding the Life Insurance Industry's Marketplaces and Learning About My Work
1) Anderson, James C. H. , 1975, "The Universal Life Insurance Policy," Emphasis, A Towers Perrin/Tillinghast publication.
2) Ariely, Dan 2008 Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces that Shape Our Decisions Harper. 3) Armstrong, P. B. 1917 A License to
Steal: Life Insurance, The Swindle of Swindles, How Our Laws Rob Our Own People of Billions - Out of Print. Copies can be obtained
from Jack Bogle at Vanguard. 4) Babbel, David & Mark Meyer, 1996, Report on the Reform of the New York State Insurance Law
Section 4228, The Law and Economics Consulting Group, Inc. 5) Belth, Joseph M. 1985 Life Insurance: A Consumer's Handbook Second
Edition, Indiana University Press. 6) Bok, Sissela 1999, Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life Vintage. 7) de Botton, Alain
2014 The News: A User's Manual , Pantheon. 8) Fechtel, Brian 2002. "New Perspectives on Age-Old Controversies About Buying
Whole Life Or Term and Investing the Difference," Journal of Insurance Regulation, Volume 21, No. 2 Winter 2002. 9) Fechtel, Brian
2012 "Bringing Real Clarity of Cash Value Life Insurance to the Marketplace," Journal of Financial Planning September 2012. 10) Many
other published articles and relevant letters can be found on my website BreadwinnersInsurance.com Info on Fechtel v. Northwestern
et. al. is at Index Number 62837/2014 in Supreme Court of the State of New York, White Plains, NY. 11) The Federal Trade
Commission Study of Life Insurance Cost Disclosure, 1979 U.S. Gov't Printing Office. 12) Feinberg, Kenneth R. What is Life Worth? The
Unprecedented Efforts to Compensate the Victims of 9/11 13) Frank Andrews, 1991 The Art and Practice of Loving, Jeremy P Tarcher,
Inc. Los Angeles. 14) Gillers, Stephen, 1998, Regulation of Lawyers:Problems of Law and Ethics Aspen Publishers, Inc. 15) Haidt,
Jonathan, 2012 The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion, Pantheon. 16) Kahneman, Daniel, 2011
Thinking Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 17) Lieberman, Trudy, 1988, Life Insurance: How to Buy the Right Policy from the
Right Company at the Right Price - A Consumer Reports Book. 18) Keith, Kent, 2001, Anyway, The Paradoxical Commandments:
Finding Personal Meaning in a Crazy World , 19) Three articles from one issue of the Journal of the Society of Financial Services
Professionals, formerly the Journal of the American Society of CLU & ChFC, March 1995. Harold Skipper, Jr. Ph.D., CLU, "Market
Conduct Issues and the Transformation of the U.S. Life Insurance Business. Richard A. Schwartz, CLU, FSA, MAAA "Keeping Faith with
Policyholders: Guidelines for Companies and Producers." Alan Press "A Personal Perspective on Disclosure as a Future Ethical
Imperative." 20) Mann, Kenneth 1985 Defending White Collar Crime: A Portrait of Attorneys at Work Yale Univ. Press. 21)
Markopolos, Harry 2010 No One Would Listen: A True Financial Thriller 22) Mason, Alpheus Thomas, 1938 The Brandeis Way: A Case
Study in the Workings of Democracy, Princeton Univ. Press. 23) Metzenbaum, Sen. Howard 1993 "When Will Policyholders Be Given
the Truth About Life Insurance, Hearing before Subcommittee on Anti-trust, Monopolies and Business Rights ISBN 0-16-044360-1
24) Patterson, Thomas E. 2013 Informing the News: The Need for Knowledge-Based Journalism, Vintage Books, a Random House
Company. 25) Porter, Michael 1985 Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance ( 2nd book) The Free
Press. 26) Posner, Richard A. 1986 Economic Analysis of Law Little, Brown and Company. 27) Syrmopoulos, Steven T. 2013 "The
Life Insurance Selection Process Module 7 of the CFP® Certification Curriculum The College for Financial Planning," This CFP Board
material is cited because its woefully inadequate quality might be shocking to some, given that the CFP Board has recently begun to
claim that their certificants are "the highest standard" and uniquely qualified professionals who are trained to bring all of the pieces of
financial planning together. 28) Schiffrin, Anya 2011, Bad News:How America's Business Press Missed The Story of the Century, The
New Press.

