The Kitchen Sink Coverage of College Athletics
Investigative Reporters and Editors
Philadelphia, June 2015
Dan Bauman (Pioneer Press), Steve Berkowitz (USA Today)
Paula Lavigne (ESPN), Jill Riepenhoff (The Columbus Dispatch)

ON CAMPUS:
Complimentary cars. Every major college athletic department has special relationships with car
dealers. Give a car to a coach, get a bundle of tickets to the games. At Ohio State, the football coach’s wife
gets a shiny new Lexis every six months. The marching band director drives a donated a 1997 Buick
LeSabre with 94,000 miles.
Flight manifests. Travel to the biggest games typically attracts a couple plane loads of people. One will
carry the team, athletic department staff and important boosters. Another will carry the president,
dignitaries, politicians and other muckety mucks.
Occasional meal forms. NCAA allows boosters to take a team to dinner as long as they get approval
from the athletics department.
Will-call tickets. Most athletes and coaches are allowed to invite people to games. Former Ohio State
running back Maurice Clarett had a bookie on one of his lists. Current football players had car dealers and
drug-dealing tattoo artists.
Car registration forms. Most major universities require athletes to fill out forms detailing what kind of
car they are driving, how much they paid for it, who co-signed for the loan, etc. They often are works of
fiction.
Summer job forms. The NCAA requires every athlete to fill out a form telling the athletics department
what they’re doing for the summer. The most prestigious athletes get jobs arranged by coaches. Five
months after winning the national championship, Ohio State football players got jobs for $18 an hour for
what records describe as "public relations," visiting nursing-home residents. This arrangement led to an
NCAA violation.
President’s box. Who has been invited to the best seats in the house and what do they do up there
during the game? They eat a lot of expensive food.
Ticket database. Then learn of landmines like this: the largest single ticket holder at Ohio Stadium is
the publisher of The Dispatch.
NCAA violations. Schools are required to report when rules both big (boosters gave quarterback
money) and small (coach accidentally sent a text message to a recruit). There are tons of stories there.
NCAA publishes the major infractions database on its website (ncaa.org) by school with full report of what

went wrong. Be warned, all names have been removed. Most schools also keep a summary sheet of all
violations – quick way to see what’s going on. Very limited information, though.
NCAA financials. To get a complete picture of a school without pouring through a budget, request the
financial document sent to the NCAA every January. Avoid Equity in Athletics Disclosure Act data from
the U.S. Department of Education – it’s often wrong. USA Today collects and analyzes the NCAA financial
documents every year.
Athletically related outside-income forms. An NCAA rule requires all athletics department
personnel to annually disclose sources – and amounts – of income from things like sports camps;
endorsement deals and TV and radio appearances (if not already covered under a contract); instructional
books and videos. This document is not filed with the NCAA’s central office, but it is supposed to be
submitted to, and approved, by the school’s CEO or their designee. Sometimes a coach or staffer has no
such income. Sometimes, these amounts can be in the hundreds of thousands.
Records pertaining to the use of university-owned aircraft by athletics department
personnel for recruiting and other business. Not all schools have these planes, but in March 2015,
the Lawrence (Kan.) Journal-World published the results of an investigation that found that over a fiveyear span, the University of Kansas spent $3.5 million flying coaches, administrators and others on some
641 trips, mostly on university-owned aircraft but occasionally on state-owned or charter planes. About
two-thirds of the money paid for flights by KU coaches and athletic administrators.
Contracts pertaining to corporate sponsorship deals, shoe and apparel deals, namingrights deals, marketing and multi-media rights arrangements and non-conference games.
The terms for all of these transactions are committed to writing. Corporate sponsorship deals can be
difficult to get in some states, but in April 2015, after months of fencing with university officials and the
state attorney general, the San Antonio Express-News published a look at the University of Texas’ 19
corporate sponsorship deals. The Portland (Ore.) Business Journal pretty comprehensively tracks shoe
and apparel deals. Games that match theoretically lesser teams player against big-time teams – so-called
“guarantee” games – have become big-money deals, as have neutral-site games between big-time teams.
Compliance-department audits. Each D-I school is required by the NCAA to have an audit every four
years. Some schools, such as OSU, do them annually. Most recent audit at Ohio State showed problems
with athletes’ car registrations – they were driving cars that didn’t belong to them – and missing
equipment and apparel. Federal agents recovered lots of OSU equipment during a drug raid.
Emails and phone records. Who is talking to who. Coach Jim Tressel made lots of phone calls –
including two to an FBI agent – when he learned of NCAA violations. He called lots of interesting people –
just not the ones he should have called.
Academic Progress Rate and graduation rates. This is how the NCAA now measures the academic
success of college athletics. Teams that don’t make the grade risk punishment. For Division I, there are
two sets of graduation rates – one compiled by the NCAA and one compiled by the U.S. Department of
Education. Both have their pros and cons. The NCAA rate measures everyone, regardless of where they
graduate. For example, if an athlete transferred from Ohio State to Ohio University and then graduated,
Ohio State is not penalized for a drop out. The federal rate penalizes schools for drop outs even if they
graduate elsewhere.
Coaches’ contracts. Find gems like this: At 175 pounds, Ohio State football coach Jim Tressel already is
worth more than his weight in gold. The new $2.6 million contract trumped a 2003 agreement that had

guaranteed Tressel $1.6 million this season, roughly the value of his weight in gold. Now, he's platinum.
These days, many assistants at top-tier programs also have contracts.
University police blotters. Find unruly fan behavior inside stadiums and at tailgates during sporting
events.
Media guides. Examine, for example, the majors of football and basketball players to search for clusters
of majors. Most guides are online.
Personnel files. They are public records in many states. It’s a good way to find out if a coach has been
admonished for breaking NCAA rules.
Public-record requests: FOIA the FOIAs to see who is asking for what because there may be other
types of documents reporters want that you aren’t familiar with.
eBay. Who is selling what?
Plagiarism Checker. At most universities, staffers get the nice perk of subsidized or free college. Some
coaches and staff will take advantage of this, going on to get their master’s or doctorate. Check their
papers for plagiarism. It can happen, again to a senator (See: http://goo.gl/TKnt0U). I like
http://www.plagtracker.com/, but there are plenty of sites out there that check work for you. Search your
coach’s name at Google Scholar.
Resume Checker. Did your coach/director graduate with the degree they claim? Call the registrar at the
university listed on the resume to verify. In Missouri, a candidate for governor said he earned a degree in
economics from Mizzou. One quick call to the registrar office and a St. Louis Post-Dispatch reporter
learned that the candidate had actually graduated with a home economics degree (goo.gl/HLKPbL)

AT PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES (THOSE, PUBLICS, TOO):
Social Media. Let’s face it: At private universities, there aren’t a lot of open-information channels. What
we do have, though, is vanity. Peruse the Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, (etc., etc.) posts of coaches and
players, and see what they are up to. Are coaches taking lavish trips to far off locales? Are they spending
more time off campus than on it? Perhaps they are endorsing products on the platform without disclosure
or compensation to the university? Don’t forget -- It was vanity that ultimately brought down former
Senator Aaron Schock. (See: http://goo.gl/0N6C1M)
Dept. of Education - Equity in Athletics Disclosure Act. For participating sports, coaching staff
and salaries, revenues and expenses, and supplemental info. It can be fraught with errors. But for private
universities, it’s the best option. http://ope.ed.gov/athletics/index.aspx
Intellectual Property (Trademark and Copyright). What trademarks or copyrights does the
university or athletic department/foundation own? (The Chronicle of Higher Education has a run-down of
88 bizarre ones. See: http://goo.gl/brn2tQ) Who has the license agreements to produce those materials?
http://tmsearch.uspto.gov/bin/gate.exe?f=tess&state=4810:n9ma86.1.1
http://cocatalog.loc.gov/cgi-bin/Pwebrecon.cgi?DB=local&PAGE=First
Liquor Licenses and Liquor Revocations for Stadiums. No explanation necessary!
FCC Complaints for College Sports Networks, TV and Radio Broadcasts Associated with
College Games, Etc. Worst-case scenario, you have a blogpost and a laugh.

Negotiation documents and personnel files for new hires. This only applies to public
universities. Also, try to find out where else your person of interest interviewed. If they interviewed at a
public university, those documents can shed light on the deal they reached at your private institution.
Bonding. How are stadiums and other sports amenities being paid for? Sometimes it’s with bonds. Pay
attention to credit rating reports (Fitch, Moody’s, Standard & Poor's) for your university. Stadium
financials may be mentioned in connection to the bond rating. For private universities, information on
bonds can also be found in 990s and financial audits. At public universities, financial audits are an option,
but you can probably get more information via an open records request.
UCC Liens. Consider a non-profit that wants lease a product rather than by it -- for our purposes, a car
or copier. In my experience, leasing these items requires paperwork to be filed with the secretary of state.
Check these UCC liens out. The documents may show you what items are being leased for your
university’s athletic department. Personal Property Taxes In St. Louis, Webster University was paying
personal property tax on a number of vehicles used by athletic department. May be worth a look at other
universities.

OFF CAMPUS:
Court records. College athletes get a lot of traffic tickets. Track their routes home and check records in
every county along the way. Whose car were they driving? Athletes also get into other kinds of trouble –
i.e. 17 Ohio University football players were arrested in recent years but faced little, if any, discipline from
the team.
Health-code violations. ESPN’s Paula Lavigne examined food violations at several major professional
stadiums, “What’s Lurking in your Stadium Food,” July 2010. Makes you wanna think twice about that
half-time dog.
IRS form 990. Check out how the Big 10, Pac 10 and others spend and divvy up gazillions of dollars.
Check out how much the conference commissioner is paid each year. Also check out booster clubs
finances. Also, at private schools, look at the highest paid employees – it’s often the football coach. Even
the football coach at perennial Division III football powerhouse Mount Union in Ohio is among the
highest paid at that school. Check with your local campus library to see if they have an account.
www.Guidestar.org. For a detailed primer, see below.
Extra! Extra! IRE’s story database always has a wealth of ideas. Look under the sports category, see
what’s been done and tailor it to your own school. Imitation is the best form of flattery. www.ire.org
NCAA.org. Wealth of information/data on injuries, doping, academics. Some information is broken
down by school; some is aggregated. But it provides a benchmark.
Sex Offender Registries. It can happen with players and staff. (See: http://goo.gl/pqmSbd and
https://goo.gl/RAHKbf)
Tax Liens. Much like a bankruptcy filing, a tax lien can give you a lot of insight into the financial
responsibility of a coach or player. If your athletic director can’t pay his taxes or electric bill, should he be
put in charge of the department’s large checkbook?
Registered Businesses. Does your coach run a lucrative side business? You should check via your
Secretary of State’s Office.

Civil lawsuits against the athletic department. NCAA wrongdoing can be found in seemingly
unrelated civil lawsuits. It happened at Ohio State with long-ago fired basketball coach Jim O’Brien and at
the University of Miami, in which a booster used a Ponzi scheme to pay for access to the Hurricanes
football team.
Federal lawsuits against athletics/coaches involving civil rights issues. This can involved
sexual and racial discrimination.
Complaints filed with the state attorney general or secretary state. These can be everything
from ticket fraud to workers comp issues.
Building inspection reports. Can include fire safety violations, Americans with Disabilities Act
complaints, poor plumbing, etc. Good to know/have when part of a stadium collapses.
Federal grants and contracts to the athletic department or sports programs from
USASpending.gov.

OBSTACLES:
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). But more and more courts are finding that
not every piece of paper on campus is an education record. Word of warning – don’t ever request a
document by an athlete’s name. Cast a wide net. For example, ask for all violations involving the football
team in the past three years not the one related to Terrelle Pryor’s ill-gotten tattoos. Student Press Law
Center is a great resource and can help navigate through the murky ways of FERPA – www.splc.org.

A PRIMER ON FORM 990. The greatest document ever. Guidestar is one place to find Form
990s. For 10 years of documents, check out Foundation Center or the Urban Institute.
1. Let’s start with your institution’s own Form 990.
a. Make a note of the filing date on the first page. Next year, go to your university’s business dept. and
request the 990 for the next year.

b. In the top portion of the Form 990 (the portion without a schedule) – Go to Part VIII, AKA the
Statement of Revenue. At the bottom of the page, there is a portion called Miscellaneous Revenue. This
portion may include revenue related to athletics. In the case of Webster, this is true.

c. The next section, a statement of Functional Expenses (Part IX), may also list athletic-related expenses.
d. Schedule J - Compensation for Executives and Key Employees -- See if your coach was awarded
bonuses and other special perks. Definitely read the special notes that accompany the figures. There’s a lot
of good stuff in there.
d. Schedule K - Information on bonds possibly used by university to build/renovate sports facilities.
e. Schedule L, Part II – Does your university give loans to coaches? Check out this schedule to find out. At
Northwestern, Football Coach Patrick Fitzgerald has a $2.5 million loan from the university.

f. Schedule G – Part I includes fundraising activities like phonathon events and direct marketing
campaigns. Part II includes chronicles fundraising events, such charity golf tournaments. You can find out
if these events are returning a profit or not.

g. Schedule I – Perhaps your university is donating funds to an athletic foundation. Or perhaps money is
being sent to a coach’s personal charity. Schedule I can show you these things.

h. Schedule R – Chronicles the companies affiliated with your university, such as non-profit foundations
or for-profit athletic companies. Part V will tell you how money is being distributed back and forth
between the affiliated entities and your university.
2. This one goes out to my friends at private and public universities.
There are a number of athletic foundations affiliated with public and private universities. For instance:
- UNIVERSITY OF GEORGIA ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION INC
- WICHITA STATE UNIVERSITY INTERCOLLEGIATE ATHLETIC ASSOC INC
- GRAMBLING UNIVERSITY ATHLETIC FOUNDATION
- TIGER ATHLETIC FOUNDATION
- And on and on…
The documents for these foundations are rich with information. For instance, the University of Alabama
athletic foundation owns the house Nick Saban lives in (see: http://goo.gl/Zmf5Ek). Take a look. Here’s

my own primer on what to look out for (See: http://goo.gl/ofB7cF and http://goo.gl/70espd). And, of
course, consult the tip sheets at the IRE website.
3. Some college coaches may have their own charities. Check these charities out. How are they run? Are
they doing legitimate charities or just press release fodder? Use the BBB’s charity accountability standards
as your guide (See: http://www.bbb.org/new-york-city/charities-donors/standards-for-charityaccountability/)
4. Citizen Audit – What other boards does your coach sit on? Has your coach made donations to other
non-profits? Has your coach been paid in some capacity to work for other charities outside your
university? Luke Rosiak, the man behind Citizen Audit, has scanned 10 years of 990s and allowed for
quick searching of hundreds of thousands of documents. It’s a terrific resource for following the money.
https://www.citizenaudit.org/

