TIPS FOR INVESTIGATING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Doug Pardue, The Post and Courier, Charleston, SC
dpardue@postandcourier.com (843) 708-4513
Get a handle on the numbers: In doing our series, “Till death do us part” the
data made the story, but we had to compile the numbers and information
from numerous sources because no agency maintained them in a combined
manner. This is the same in many states - no single office maintains complete
data on domestic killings or violence. What data is maintained usually is just
statistical without specific cases connected.
Build a database: We gathered data and cases from numerous sources, and
built our own database, which became the factual foundation for our series.
We included in the database the numbers and names of those killed in
domestic violence, the abuser, the abuser’s criminal history, court actions,
type of weapon, time and day of week, location coordinates, summaries of
news stories, whether children were present and numerous other fields. The
database proved vital – it gave us hard proof and enabled us to write
authoritatively in a generally narrative style.
Make the numbers relevant: Make them mean something: Numbers can be
just that, numbing numbers. We sought to make the numbers stand out and
make a point. We didn’t say just that “more than 300 women were shot,
stabbed, strangled, beaten, bludgeoned or burned to death over the past
decade in South Carolina.” We said women were killed at a rate of one every
12 days. That number is three times the death toll for South Carolina soldiers
killed in the entire Iraq and Afghanistan wars combined.
Seek out advocates and women’s shelters: This is how we located most of the
victims of domestic violence who shared their stories with us. And this is
where we learned of and documented the difficulty women have in leaving
abusive relationships. We also attended domestic violence victim vigils where
we gathered more contacts and stories.
Get national data and state comparisons: Much of the data is questionable,
but it will provide you with context and comparisons. Caution: different states
use different definitions of what constitutes domestic violence. So do different
state agencies in SC. The Violence Policy Center in Washington, DC provides
national data on the rate of women killed by men. It’s been doing so for more

than a dozen years. Caution: The organization’s main purpose is stricter gun
control: http://www.vpc.org/domesticviolence.htm
Don’t reinvent the wheel: Many organizations deal with domestic violence and
ways to prevent it. The Centers for Disease Control lists domestic violence as a
major public health issue and offers data and ways to head-off domestic
violence: http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence/
The National Coalition Against Domestic Violence also has some helpful
information, sources and data. But, again, be careful of comparing apples
with oranges. http://www.ncadv.org/
Don’t neglect the abuser: Most states or localities have specialized counseling
programs designed to teach abusers not to abuse the ones they love or used to
love. Studies on the effectiveness of these efforts are limited and all over the
place in whether the programs work or not. But getting permission to sit-in on
group sessions with abusers is eye-opening and provides telling detail.
Go to court: Sit through as many cases as you can. Meet victims and abusers.
Get to know the prosecutors, victim advocates, judges and defense attorneys.
They all have stories that will help you understand the scope of the problem.
Find and use eye-opening comparisons: We didn’t just say that South
Carolina has just 18 shelters for battered women. We said every one of the
state’s 46 counties has at least one shelter for abused dogs and cats, but the
state has just 18 shelters fro abused women. We wrote that a first-time
conviction for brutalizing a wife or girlfriend carries a maximum 30 days in
jail, but cruelty to a dog carries a possible 5 years in prison.
Hold someone responsible and prove it: We emphasized that more than 300
women were killed over a decade while state legislators did nothing. And in
our second day story we showed how all but one of 12 bills to improve
domestic violence laws failed during the previous Legislative session except
for one – a bill to give the court the power to place a protective order so that
the abuser cannot abuse the victim’s dog or cat. We also pointed blame at
police, prosecutors and courts for not taking the crime seriously, generally
treating it as a marital problem for the couple to work out. With our database
we were able to show that numerous abusers committed the crime repeatedly,
with multiple first-time convictions and virtually no time in jail. Many got
their convictions expunged by the courts.

The weapon of choice: In a controversial finding our database showed that
guns were the weapon of choice in nearly 7 out of 10 domestic killings. This
helped prompt the state to adopt a strict gun ban for convicted abusers
Find the good guys in state and out: In any investigation, good guys can be
found. We sought them out to see what could work and what these people
battle. We discovered a couple of in-state police agencies that created
specialized investigative squads that worked hand-in-hand with prosecutors,
victim advocates, abuse counselors and judges. And we found some states that
effectively tackled the problem. http://mnadv.org/
Some states or communities have adopted systems tohead-off domestic
fatalities before they happen through use of “Lethality Review Teams.”
http://www.ncdsv.org/publications_danger.html
http://www.postandcourier.com/tilldeath/assets/d1-25.pdf
http://www.postandcourier.com/tilldeath/assets/d4-pdf.pdf
http://mnadv.org/
Find out what motivates and tolerates domestic abuse: Gaining an
understanding of the culture that allows domestic abuse was among our most
challenging efforts. We knew early on that in-bred discrimination against
women and religion, especially conservative Christianity, played a
contributing role from both the abuser and abused sides. We talked with
pastors and found one county that was making a community-wide effort to
curb domestic violence. We spent time there to see what was going on and
why. We also discovered what is called the South’s “culture of honor.”
Compile “Problems and Solutions:” We dedicated the last day to pointing out
what we had identified as problems and some of the workable solutions. Some
oppose this sort of journalism, but we received praise for providing a template
for change to the horrible crime we had exposed.
Give readers some help options? We provided readers with phone numbers
and places to go to seek out help.
Embed your online presentation with links: Online we showed readers where
every fact, figure and comment came from. We put our database out there for
people to see what we did and how. Our online presentation is full of links to
virtually every study, website and fact we used: postandcourier.com/tilldeath

