#IRE2015 panel: “Merchants of Mudslinging”
Tips on tracking who’s behind political ads, who’s bankrolling them and who’s
making money in the process from political reporter Michael Beckel of the
Center for Public Integrity.
Rule #1: The fine print of political ads is your friend. Disclosure rules require
group’s name to be included in the ad.
What’s in a name?
 Google the group. Search Nexus.
o What, if anything, has been written about the group before?
o Does it have a website?
o Does it have a social media presence on Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube?
 Run its website’s URL through the WHOIS database
o Sometimes useful contact info found. But sometimes a dead end, as
groups may register domain name through a proxy company.
Rule #2: Political action committees, super PACs, labor unions, trade groups,
social welfare nonprofits and ‘527 committees’ all have different reporting
requirements to different government regulators.
What kind of group is it?
 Federal PACs and super PACs
o Must file statements of organization with the FEC
o Regularly file reports with FEC that detail contributions and
expenditures, usually monthly or quarterly
o Search online at FEC.gov.
 State-level PACs
o Each state has own regulations but groups typically register and file
detailed reports about their contributions and expenditures with the
Secretary of State



‘527 committees’
o These political groups file statements of organization and regular
reports that detail their contributions and expenditures with the IRS
rather than the FEC or state-level regulators
o Search online here

 Labor unions
o File detailed annual reports with the Department of Labor
o Search online here and here
 501(c) organizations
o ‘Social welfare’ nonprofits organized under Section 501(c)(4) of the
tax code and business leagues/chambers of commerce organized
under Section 501(c)(6) file annual reports with the Internal
Revenue Service called Form 990s that detail fundraising and
expenditures. Some also file applications for tax-exempt status
called Form 1024s.
o Form 1024s can be obtained from the organization or from the IRS
 To obtain from the IRS, you must fax them (# 1-513-263-5900)
a request on letterhead, including the name, address and EIN
number of group for which you are requesting the info
 IRS will mail you the paperwork, usually within six to eight
weeks. If there are more than 100 pages, there will be a fee.
o Form 990s can be obtained from the organization itself or from
third-party groups, such as the Foundation Center, GuideStar.org
and CitizenAudit.org, which make the details more easily searched.
o Don’t know if a group is a nonprofit? The IRS exempt organizations
business master file can be helpful, as can state incorporation filings.
Bonus search tip: Some contact information, as well as details of ad buys, can be found
via filings with the Federal Communications Commission.

