National Conference - Philadelphia 2015

Broadcast Deep Dives
Vicky Nguyen
KNTV NBC Bay Area
Investigative Reporter/Anchor
vicky@nbcbayarea.com
@vickydnguyen

Liz Wagner
KNTV NBC Bay Area
Investigative Producer
elizabeth.wagner@nbcuni.com
@lizwags

Jump on the Tip: Got a great tip? Act on it! The longer it languishes, the less inclined you’ll be
to pursue the story. Stories can develop while you’re waiting to make contact. Create the
action; don’t just follow changes.
Build Trust with Sources: Meet reluctant sources in person, if possible. Explain why their voices
are important and how speaking up can lead to positive change. Address their hesitations. Tell
them you have their back and that you can continue to report on any retaliation that may
result.
Submit Records Requests ASAP: Once you have determined what records you need to request,
don’t wait! Government agencies are often slow to produce records. Ask them to provide
material as it becomes available instead of waiting for receive all of the requested material at
once.
Enlist Help: Forge connections with union stewards. They may have easy access to documents
that public agencies can’t or won’t produce quickly.
Focus and Parse: Have too many elements but not enough tape time? Define and focus your
first story. That will lead to an automatic second story, with time to let your characters and
good elements breathe.
Anticipate and Plan: Before your first piece airs, think about how many pieces may come after.
Will the story produce a reaction from another organization? Will the investigation spark some
sort of change? Plan to roll out your series based on likely developments. That will also help
focus each story.
(MORE ON THE BACK!)

Tell a Great Story: Look for an emotional arc. In the investigative world, sometimes the
reporting comes first and the storytelling comes in a distant second. Don’t forget to include
emotion among the data, documents and other investigative elements.
Harness the Power of One: Tell the story through one central character, even if the problem
you’re investigating applies to many. Audiences are more likely to make an emotional
connection with someone if they’re not distracted by too many voices.
Think Thematically: Chose a visual theme and showcase it throughout your story. For example,
in our “USPS 911 Policy Fails to Deliver” series—we chose the universal concept of time to
illustrate and focus the viewer. We used time lapse video of the sunrise/sunset, clocks, and nat
sound breaks of ticking to show the passage of time and drive home the message that time is
critical in emergency situations.
Create Powerful Visuals: Bring the contents of your records to life. Instead of just highlighting
a document, create a new visual element altogether. Using an animated graphic is an effective
way to illustrate an abstract topic, and it’s more appealing than showcasing a piece of paper.
Use Documents Sparingly: Use documents only to make critical points. Characters, voices and
emotion are more effective tools than showing off the records you were able to obtain.
Hold the Powerful Accountable: Keep asking questions until you get answers. Don’t let the
interviewee of the hook. Point out contradictions. Ask the interviewee to clarify
inconsistencies. Bring critical documents to interviews and be prepared to quote from them if
necessary.
Embrace Social Media: Twitter can be an effective way to communicate with reluctant public
agencies. If your phone calls aren’t being returned or your emails aren’t being answered, try
tweeting politicians, agencies, and companies. Include links to your reporting if you have them.
Keep Sources Informed: Let your sources know when the story will air. Send them links to the
story once it’s posted online. Keep sources up to date on policy changes prompted by your
stories, even if the developments don’t make it on television. Your contacts will appreciate
being kept in the loop.
Watch the 2014 Broadcast/Video Medium IRE Award Finalist - “How to Call 911 at the USPS”
http://bit.ly/1AJ9N2N
See more NBC Bay Area investigations at www.nbcbayarea.com/investigations

