13 Great Health Data Tips and Sites for Non-Health Reporters
Panel: Saturday, June 6, 8:30 a.m.
JoNel Aleccia, health reporter, The Seattle Times. jaleccia@seattletimes.com
At some point, even non-health reporters will be called to cover health-related stories.
Accidents, outbreaks, disasters and diseases can crop up on almost any beat. Here are tips from
a health reporter who uses investigative tools and data to report daily stories as well as larger
projects.
1. FINDING FEDERAL AGENCY CONTACTS:
Don’t get stuck in the wasteland of the CDC’s general media line. Better to ping experts directly,
which typically forces them to respond – or at least to connect you with the correct PR person.
CDAzilla.com: Search by name, subject, department. Provides email and phone numbers for
experts with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
FDAzilla.com: Search by name, subject, department. Provides email and phone numbers for
experts with the Food and Drug Administration.
USDA directory (Washington, DC, only): Better than nothing.
2. FDA INSPECTION RECORDS:
One key way to confirm problems with any company that manufactures food, drugs, devices or
cosmetics is through the FDA’s Form 483. It’s a document issued to managers of a company
after an inspection in which investigators observe conditions that may constitute violations of
the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Acts, and related acts. It will contain detailed descriptions
– sometimes, gross detail – of the problems inspectors found. Companies are encouraged to
respond to the 483s in writing, so you can often get a peek at the company’s plans for
correction.
The Form 483s are in addition to the FDA’s Establishment Inspection Reports, EIRs, which are
issued to every firm, not just those with problems, after inspection.
Form 483s are available through federal records requests, but can take a while.
One tip: If three or more people ask for the same Form 483, the FDA usually posts the
document in the ORA Reading Room.
Many historical 483s are available for purchase at FDAzilla.com.
3. CLINICAL TRIAL DATA:
Writing a story about a new medical breakthrough? Be sure to check to see who else has made
progress – or achieved the same results, earlier -- in the same field. Can provide good contacts
for outside comment on a medical study or claim.

www.clincaltrials.gov This NIH-run site is a registry and database of publicly and privately
supported clinical studies of human participants conducted around the world. Searchable
database provides information about the structure of the trials, patients involved, whether it’s
actively recruiting or has results, and contact information for the principal investigators.
4. PAYMENTS TO DOCTORS:
Doctors and hospitals often have financial ties to drug makers and other health care product
manufacturing companies. These can include support for research, speaking fees, special
“consultant” arrangements, meals or travel. Under a provision of The Social Security Act, the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services requires certain manufacturers and group
purchasing organizations to report information about such financial relationships. Such
information can add valuable context to research results.
The CMS website OpenPayments makes such payments available publically – and to you. CMS
also has to report the results to Congress.
5. DRUG SALES AND RX DATA:
When writing about a new drug or type or class of drugs, it can be crucial to understand past
sales and prescription data. Two reliable sources can provide quick answers.
IMS Health: Press officers are happy to provide detailed information on deadline.
Wolters-Kluwer: Also happy to help -- and prompt.
6. ORGAN TRANSPLANT DATABASE
More than 29,500 organs were transplanted in the U.S. last year, including nearly 24,000 from
deceased donors and nearly 6,000 from those who are still alive.
But details about who gets organs and why are in the data from the Organ Procurement and
Transplantation Network compiled by the United Network for Organ Sharing. UNOS contracts
with the federal government’s Health Resources and Services Administration, or HRSA, to
operate OPTN.
UNOS data. UNOS developed UNet to collect, store and publish all OPTN data about patient
waiting lists, organ matches and transplants. Data is available for national, regional and state
locals and includes information including the circumstance and manner of death, as well as
many other variables.
7. FOODBORNE ILLNESS OUTBREAKS
When a food-related outbreak occurs, it’s helpful to put the bug in context. One way to do that
is with the CDC’s Foodborne Outbreak Online Database, or FOOD.

The searchable database provides access to national and state information about outbreaks
from 1998 through 2013 including the pathogens responsible, the location where the food was
consumed, how many cases were confirmed or suspected, the number ill, the number
hospitalized and the number dead.
Very helpful for outbreaks in specific sites, such as jails, schools or hospitals.
There are two other helpful food poisoning databases, too:
CSPI Outbreak Alert! Database
The Center for Science in the Public Interest maintains a database on outbreaks between 1990
and 2011 in which two or more people fell ill.
Foodborne Illness Outbreak Database
Seattle food safety lawyer Bill Marler’s firm, MarlerClark, maintains an outbreak database, too.
8. NEISS INJURY DATABASE
The National Electronic Injury Surveillance System is a statistically valid injury monitoring
system operated by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. It tracks injuries treated in
nearly 100 representative hospitals across the U.S., and then extrapolates the findings to a
national estimate.
Reporters can use the NEISS Coding Manual to query the database for a host of injuries related
to common consumer products. In addition to the national estimate, the queries contain pages
of narratives that give the age, circumstance and outcome of the various injuries.
9. CUSTOM INJURY DATA
Another good source for injury data is the Injury Research and Policy Center at Nationwide
Children’s Hospital in Columbus, Ohio. Director Dr. Gary A. Smith routinely tracks injuries to kids
who fall down stairs, out of windows and off of amusement rides. But he’ll also perform custom
queries of specific injuries for interested reporters.
10. CPSC PRODUCT SAFETY COMPLAINTS
The government-run site SaferProducts.gov is a searchable trove of specific complaints about
specific consumer products. Includes consumer complaints by date with detailed descriptions
and, sometimes, photos of the offending item.
(Nearly three years after updating a story about exploding Pyrex cookware, customers are still
reporting problems. http://www.saferproducts.gov/Search/Result.aspx?dm=0&q=pyrex&srt=0)
11. HOSPITAL INPATIENT DISCHARGE DATA

At least 14 states provide access to a trove of records, the hospital inpatient discharge data. In
Washington state, it’s known as CHARS, the Comprehensive Hospital Abstract Reporting
System.
Unlike the aggregate data released by other states, this data includes de-identified patient-level
records of every discharge for every hospital in the state. That data, for instance, in
combination with death records, allowed Seattle Times staff to report its award-winning 2008
series on the explosion of drug-resistant MRSA infections in the state.
12. ‘SUPERBUG’ CRE REPORTS
Speaking of superbugs like MRSA, is your state one of the 17 that require reporting of
dangerous Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, which have been linked to deadly
infections, including those spread by contaminated duodenoscopes?
Here is a list of states that require reporting compiled by APIC, the Association for Professionals
in Infection Control and Epidemiology. Reports may include number of cases from each
hospital, surgery center or assisted living center.
13. WHAT ‘NEVER EVENTS’ ARE OCCURRING IN YOUR HOSPITALS?
The term “never event” was first coined in 2001 by the director of the National Quality Forum
to describe shocking medical errors – operating on the wrong site, leaving tools inside of
patients – that experts agree should never occur. The list now includes 29 events grouped into
six categories – and it provides fertile ground for stories about medical errors.
To date, 26 states and the District of Columbia require some kind of reporting of serious
adverse events or “never events.”
In Washington state, such events are reported by institution, quarterly, for example.
Information about specific incidents requires records requests.

