Get the IRE edge (from your computer)!
IRE has plenty of in-person training opportunities, but if you can’t leave your desk,
here’s a guide to the many member benefits you can access from our website
(www.ire.org)
From the homepage...
●

●

●

Blogs
○ Transparency Watch (Covering FOIA and open government issues)
○ Extra Extra (Showcasing investigative work; email extraextra@ire.org with links
to your stories)
○ IRE and CAR Conference blogs (Updates and coverage of the conferences)
○ IRE News (Organization news and “Behind the Story” articles on major
investigations)
○ IRE Radio (Short clips of conference and workshop audio, focusing on usable
tips and story ideas)
○ Uplink (computer-assisted reporting blog; additional subscription required)
Quick Hits - Sign up for our biweekly newsletter. In each issue we’ll remind you about
upcoming deadlines for scholarships, free training opportunities and more. We also
include links to recent job postings and reporting resources.
IRE Radio Podcast - Go behind some of the biggest investigations of the year on our
biweekly podcast. Listen to IRE members discuss their stories, offer reporting tips and
more. Also available on iTunes.

Events & Training
●

●

Online training - Watch recordings of our past webinars and Google+ Hangouts on
topics including coverage of sexual assault, the death penalty, campaign finance,
college sports and more.
Fellowships & Scholarships - Bookmark our list of awards. These can help you attend
a CAR Boot Camp or annual conference.

Resource Center
●
●

●

Tipsheets - Browse thousands of how-to guides and presentations developed by
journalists for journalists. You can search by keyword, author, date and more.
Audio - We record almost every session at our annual conferences and various
workshops. If you can’t make it to an event (or you can’t get to every session you want to
attend), chances are you’ll be able to download the recording. Check the tipsheets to
see if there are handouts or notes from the speakers.
Stories - Look through stories entered into the annual IRE Awards. You can download
or get a link to the article. And don’t forget to read the required questionnaire that
accompanies each story. These can provide valuable insight into how that awardwinning piece came to be.

●

●

Story packs - Looking for investigations or ideas on a specific beat? We’ve compiled
stories and tipsheets on key topics so that you don’t have to hunt around for the best
ones.
Listservs - Join one of our online communities to ask questions, share ideas and
network with other investigative journalists. NICAR-L is our most popular listserv,
catering to the computer-assisted reporting community.

NICAR Database Library
●

●

●

●

Databases - IRE and NICAR maintain dozens of databases you can use as a reporting
tool. A few are even free for IRE members. Other are available for a small fee. And
unlike some government agencies, if you have a question about the data, we’ll do our
best to troubleshoot and help.
Practice data sets - Learning Excel or Access and need some more practice? Check
out our practice data sets and exercises. Download the materials to practice on your
own time, from your own computer.
Help with analysis - Contact us if you need help importing, analyzing, mapping or
scraping data. If you are stuck, or don’t have the time or the resources to get it done, we
can help.
NICAR talk - Read the latest NICAR news.

Publications
●
●

The IRE Journal - Read the current issue online or browse back issues.
Book list - Looking for a non-fiction, investigative book? Browse this extensive list by
keyword, author publisher and year.

IRE Store
Beat books, data journalism manuals and other reporting resources are available for sale online.
IRE members get discounts on some items.

Job Center
Looking for a new job? Check to see which companies have contacted us about advertising a
position.
Need to hire a new employee? We have instructions on how to post a position on our site.

Social media
Twitter: @IRE_NICAR
Facebook: www.facebook.com/IRE.NICAR
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/IREandNICAR

