THE ETHICS OF SOURCING
Investigative Reporters and Editors
David Boardman, Dean, School of Communication, Temple University
Margaret Sullivan, Public Editor, The New York Times
Aidan White, Director, Ethical Journalism Network
Wendy Ruderman, Reporter, Philadelphia Daily News
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF AND EACH OTHER:
PROTECTION AND HANDLING OF SOURCES
n Have I been clear with the source about the nature of my reporting and of our
relationship?
n If the source has potential vulnerability, does he/she understand the potential
consequences?
n Am I confident the source fully understands the conditions of our interview, and
what I mean by off-the-record, on background, not-for-attribution, or other labels?
n If a source asks for conditions before agreeing to an interview, what are my
limits?
n Would I pay for a source’s expenses related to an interview? What might be
legitimate costs that could be paid?
n Was the source in the right frame of mind to give informed consent (e.g., minors,
bedside hospital interviews, etc., stories that touch on drug use and abuse)? Does
the condition of the source give me any pause about his/her credibility?
n Am I considering doing, or have I done, anything for this source – meals,
entertainment, gifts – that I might regret or should reveal?
ANONYMOUS SOURCES
n Is there no other way to get and publish this information? Have I exhausted all
other methods and potential sources?
n Can I get documents that could possibly enable me to write the story without
using an unnamed source?
n Do I or my colleagues have history with this source that speaks to his/her
credibility?
n Have I maximized the level of identification that can be published without
revealing the source’s personal identity?
n What is the likely motivation of the source for demanding anonymity? Does that
motivation potentially compromise me and my newsroom?
n Are there other methods I can employ to increase credibility while granting
anonymity?
n Have I done my due diligence in learning everything I can about the source
without compromising his or her identity?

PRE-PUBLICATION REVIEW OF CONTENT
n Are there potential benefits to the accuracy of the story in allowing a source to
review portions or all of it in advance of publication?
n Are there potential pitfalls in doing so? Might the source respond in a manner
harmful to the story or to others involved?
n If the source wants to change something in the story, how will I respond? How
about if he/she wants to revise a quote?
n What if the source wants to take back part or all of an interview?
n Should a different standard apply when dealing with sources who have no prior
experience with media, versus a media-savvy source?
SOURCING IN BREAKING-NEWS SITUATIONS
n Before I report or retweet a development reported elsewhere, how confident am I
in its accuracy?
n Would I potentially cause harm if I reported something before I am 100 percent
sure it is accurate? Is there harm in not reporting it?
n Have I questioned firsthand accounts that can be inaccurate, manipulative or
shaped by emotion, faulty memory, and limited perspective?
n Have I triangulated the information with other credible sources?
n Can I publish information but indicate that the information is preliminary in a
fluid situation?
n Do I use information from on-the-ground law enforcement sources who don’t
want to be named?
ATTRIBUTION/SOCIAL MEDIA/USER-GENERATED CONTENT
n Am I comfortable repeating what other news outlets/original authors are reporting,
even if I properly attribute?
n Have I corroborated the origin, including location, date and time, of images and
content that I am using from social media?
n Have I obtained permission to use original material? Have I given credit to the
author and source?
n Are there copyright or legal issues around using the content?
n Have I verified the social media profiles of accounts I am using?
n Is the account holder known to me? Has he/she been a reliable source in the past?
n Can I directly question the content provider before using the material?
n Have I looked for the same or similar content elsewhere online?
n Am I confident that there have been no reality-offering alterations (e.g.,
Photoshop) used?

