Covering	  Corrections	  Officers	  and	  Prisons	  
By	  Julie	  K.	  Brown,	  Investigative	  Reporter	  	  
jbrown@miamiherald.com	  
The	  Miami	  Herald	  
Covering	  prisons	  is	  a	  particular	  challenge	  because	  by	  their	  very	  nature,	  prisons,	  jails	  and	  penitentiaries	  
are	  very	  closed	  to	  the	  public	  eye,	  and	  even	  those	  on	  the	  inside	  are	  afraid	  to	  expose	  corruption	  because	  
they	  fear	  retaliation	  and	  losing	  their	  jobs.	  Corrections	  officials	  are	  also	  often	  able	  to	  hide	  behind	  policies	  
that	  prohibit	  the	  release	  of	  information	  under	  that	  guise	  that	  it	  will	  “endanger	  the	  security”	  of	  the	  
institution,	  its	  employees	  and	  inmates.	  	  
There	  are	  some	  tricky	  ways	  to	  get	  around	  the	  security	  issue,	  as	  well	  as	  health	  privacy	  laws,	  which	  jail	  
authorities	  also	  use	  to	  prevent	  reporters	  from	  obtaining	  information.	  
1. One	  of	  the	  easiest	  ways	  to	  get	  a	  handle	  on	  what	  is	  happening	  in	  your	  prisons	  is	  to	  do	  a	  PACER	  
search	  of	  lawsuits	  filed	  by	  “jailhouse	  lawyers”	  or	  other	  inmates.	  Inmates	  have	  nothing	  but	  time	  
on	  their	  hands,	  and	  they	  often	  spend	  it	  by	  filing	  lawsuits	  that	  contend	  that	  they	  are	  being	  
subjected	  to	  “cruel	  and	  unusual”	  punishment.	  If	  you	  search	  for	  the	  name	  of	  the	  prison,	  the	  
department	  	  (i.e.	  “Florida	  Department	  of	  Corrections”)	  the	  secretary’s	  name	  or	  the	  warden,	  
mayor’s	  name(s),	  lawsuits	  may	  come	  up.	  An	  analysis	  of	  those	  lawsuits	  often	  generate	  a	  pattern,	  
whether	  it’s	  of	  abuse,	  medical	  neglect	  or	  other	  forms	  of	  corruption.	  
2. Develop	  sources	  with	  the	  corrections	  officers’	  union	  who	  will	  tell	  you	  how	  the	  prison	  system	  
keeps	  their	  records.	  For	  example,	  do	  the	  officers’	  personnel	  files	  contain	  their	  discipline	  history,	  
or	  do	  you	  have	  to	  ask	  for	  another	  document	  that	  lists	  their	  disciplinary	  history?	  When	  a	  
complaint	  from	  an	  inmate	  or	  his/her	  family	  comes	  up,	  what	  kinds	  of	  forms	  does	  the	  agency	  
generate?	  The	  union,	  while	  supporting	  its	  members,	  will	  usually	  direct	  you	  to	  the	  correct	  
documents,	  especially	  if	  they	  feel	  it	  will	  help	  exonerate	  wrongly	  accused	  officers.	  
3. Ask	  for	  a	  list	  of	  all	  employees	  (officers,	  wardens,	  nurses,	  doctors)	  who	  have	  left	  their	  jobs	  over	  
the	  past	  year.	  Reach	  out	  to	  them,	  but	  remember	  to	  also	  background	  them	  to	  verify	  whether	  
they	  themselves	  are	  credible.	  Corrupt	  prisons	  usually	  fire	  good	  corrections	  officers	  or	  
whistleblowers.	  
4. Ask	  for	  emails/letters	  that	  the	  corrections’	  secretary	  has	  received	  over	  a	  certain	  period	  of	  time.	  
In	  most	  states	  these	  are	  public	  record	  and	  they	  will	  provide	  a	  window	  into	  the	  issues	  the	  agency	  
is	  facing.	  
5. Ask	  for	  records	  on	  officer	  misconduct,	  whether	  it’s	  physical,	  sexual	  or	  actions	  unbecoming	  an	  
officer	  for	  that	  prison,	  over	  a	  year.	  You	  will	  likely	  see	  common	  themes	  and	  names	  emerge.	  
Reach	  out	  to	  the	  inmates	  who	  seem	  to	  be	  file	  the	  most	  grievances,	  find	  out	  the	  prison’s	  policy	  
for	  visitation.	  Err	  on	  the	  side	  of	  going	  to	  visit	  people.	  Contact	  their	  families,	  ask	  the	  inmates	  to	  
sign	  medical	  waivers	  giving	  you	  permission	  to	  see	  their	  unredacted	  classification	  files,	  which	  is	  
essentially	  their	  entire	  record.	  Corrections	  officials	  will	  try	  to	  use	  medical	  privacy	  laws	  to	  remove	  
whole	  sections	  of	  their	  file,	  claiming,	  for	  example,	  that	  anything	  involving	  their	  “mental	  health”	  
is	  protected.	  	  
6. Check	  the	  blogs	  that	  serve	  the	  prisoner/ex-­‐prisoner	  universe	  to	  see	  what	  people	  are	  talking	  
about.	  Also	  Facebook	  is	  a	  great	  resource.	  Believe	  it	  or	  not,	  corrections	  officers	  say	  some	  crazy	  
things	  on	  their	  FB	  pages.	  Also	  some	  prison	  inmates	  form	  Facebook	  pages,	  i.e.	  (Lowell	  
Correctional	  Institution	  for	  women).	  

7. Other	  records:	  Use-­‐of-­‐force	  reports,	  drug/weapon	  seizures,	  audits	  (health	  dept/medical)	  
8. Examine	  the	  prison	  or	  agency’s	  mortality	  rate,	  analyze	  the	  cause	  and	  manner	  of	  death;	  ask	  for	  
autopsy	  reports,	  police	  reports,	  fire/medical	  calls	  at	  the	  prison.	  (Outside	  agencies,	  such	  as	  police	  
departments	  and	  fire	  departments	  that	  respond	  to	  the	  prison)	  
9. Don’t	  forget	  to	  ask	  for	  records	  in	  digital	  format.	  They	  will	  make	  you	  pay	  for	  copies.	  In	  fact,	  they	  
will	  do	  their	  best	  to	  charge	  you	  the	  most	  money	  they	  can	  to	  deter	  you.	  Negotiate.	  Do	  not	  be	  
afraid	  to	  ask	  why	  they	  are	  charging	  $100	  an	  hour	  to	  redact	  a	  report.	  Make	  sure	  they	  give	  you	  
reasons	  for	  the	  redactions	  (or	  reasons	  they	  won’t	  give	  you	  the	  document)	  in	  writing.	  	  
10. Look	  at	  prison	  contracts,	  follow	  the	  money	  trail,	  remember	  that	  prisons	  are	  BIG	  BUSINESS	  and	  
the	  vendors	  donate	  tons	  of	  money	  to	  people	  in	  power.	  Private	  prisons	  may	  not	  have	  to	  provide	  
information	  to	  the	  media	  directly,	  but	  they	  do	  have	  to	  give	  it	  to	  the	  public	  agency	  that	  
hires/contracts	  with	  them.	  

