Tipsheet:	  Social	  media	  
	  
Covering	  threats	  against	  journalists	  overseas	  without	  leaving	  town	  
By	  Courtney	  Mabeus	  
	  
	  
• Initial	  research	  matters:	  	  
Follow	  the	  people	  and	  organizations	  that	  relate	  to	  the	  story	  you’re	  covering.	  
This	  is	  particularly	  important	  when	  you	  don’t	  have	  direct	  access	  to	  your	  
source.	  
• Friends	  lists/	  followers:	  USE	  THEM!	  
Even	  if	  you	  can’t	  reach	  your	  subject	  through	  social	  media,	  it	  doesn’t	  mean	  
they’re	  not	  there.	  The	  people	  they	  are	  connected	  to	  on	  Facebook,	  Twitter,	  
LinkedIn,	  can	  lead	  to	  those	  close	  to	  them.	  Who’s	  Tweeting	  to	  them/about	  
them	  or	  posting	  on	  their	  Facebook	  wall?	  Who	  is	  in	  photos	  with	  them?	  Use	  
your	  intuition.	  	  	  
• #Hashtags	  are	  your	  friend:	  
Use	  them	  to	  narrow	  your	  search.	  
• Don’t	  fear	  language	  barriers:	  
They’re	  surmountable.	  	  
• Use	  social	  media	  to	  start	  conversations:	  
Social	  media	  is	  a	  great	  way	  to	  find	  sources	  and	  information,	  but	  it	  shouldn’t	  
take	  the	  place	  of	  real	  conversation,	  where	  possible.	  	  
	  
Challenges	  to	  consider	  
	  
• Social	  media	  in	  some	  countries,	  like	  Azerbaijan,	  where	  news	  sources	  are	  
limited,	  may	  play	  a	  larger	  role	  in	  disseminating	  news	  as	  a	  result.	  That	  may	  
mean	  people	  use	  it	  in	  ways	  you	  are	  not	  used	  to.	  Be	  open	  to	  hearing	  from	  
multiple	  people.	  Some	  may	  help,	  some	  not.	  
• Learn	  about	  the	  media	  situation	  before	  reaching	  out.	  Social	  media	  in	  some	  
places	  is	  monitored.	  Consider	  limiting	  your	  interaction	  in	  the	  beginning	  and	  
moving	  to	  encrypted	  methods	  to	  communicate.	  Check	  with	  sources	  or	  
organizations	  like	  the	  Committee	  to	  Protect	  Journalists	  first	  for	  advice	  if	  
uncertain.	  	  
• Not	  everyone	  is	  on	  Facebook,	  Twitter,	  LinkedIn,	  etc.	  Some	  accounts	  may	  be	  
private.	  Sources	  still	  exist.	  Mine	  friends	  lists,	  where	  possible,	  or	  look	  through	  
more	  public	  accounts,	  like	  a	  source’s	  employer	  or	  a	  local	  think	  tank,	  to	  see	  
who	  else	  might	  help.	  
	  
	  

