	  
	  
	  
Tipsheet,	  IRE	  2015,	  Philadelphia	  
	  
The	  Anatomy	  of	  a	  Crisis:	  Tracking	  the	  Records	  Trail	  (Auto	  Safety	  Edition)	  
Danielle	  Ivory,	  The	  New	  York	  Times	  
danielle.ivory@nytimes.com,	  @danielle_ivory	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Investigating	  auto	  safety	  on	  deadline:	  If	  an	  automaker	  announces	  a	  recall,	  there	  
are	  several	  places	  you	  may	  be	  able	  to	  find	  records	  quickly.	  	  
	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  The	  automaker’s	  website.	  Most	  major	  automakers	  post	  announcements	  about	  
each	  recall	  with	  basic	  information,	  such	  as	  the	  number	  of	  cars	  covered	  by	  the	  action,	  
which	  makes	  and	  models	  are	  covered	  and	  a	  description	  of	  the	  defect.	  	  
	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  The	  regulator’s	  website.	  Automakers	  are	  required	  to	  file	  a	  defect	  notice,	  called	  a	  
part	  573,	  with	  a	  chronology	  of	  the	  problem	  to	  regulators	  at	  the	  National	  Highway	  
Traffic	  Safety	  Administration.	  	  You	  can	  search	  for	  those	  documents,	  by	  make,	  model	  
and	  model	  year,	  here:	  http://www-­‐odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/owners/SearchSafetyIssues.	  
Look	  under	  “recalls.”	  If	  there	  are	  any	  regulatory	  investigations	  associated	  with	  the	  
defect,	  a	  link	  generally	  will	  also	  appear	  with	  the	  recall	  information.	  
	  	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  Also	  on	  the	  regulator’s	  website	  at	  the	  same	  link,	  you	  can	  find	  consumer	  
complaints	  filed	  with	  regulators,	  other	  N.H.T.S.A.	  investigations	  and	  recalls	  on	  
the	  same	  models	  and	  so-­‐called	  technical	  service	  bulletins,	  which	  are	  technical	  
notices	  that	  automakers	  send	  to	  dealers	  to	  alter	  them	  to	  problems	  (these	  are	  not	  
supposed	  to	  be	  used	  to	  fix	  safety	  defects,	  but	  they	  have	  been	  used	  that	  way	  in	  the	  
past.)	  The	  complaints,	  recalls	  and	  investigations	  often	  have	  associated	  online	  
dockets	  containing	  rich	  documentation.	  You	  can	  also	  download	  raw	  data	  for	  recalls,	  
TSBs,	  complaints	  and	  investigations,	  here:	  http://www-­‐
odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/downloads/flatfiles.cfm.	  
	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  Early	  Warning	  Reports.	  Under	  the	  law,	  automakers	  are	  required	  to	  file	  reports	  
to	  regulators	  at	  N.H.T.S.A.	  anytime	  someone	  blames	  a	  potential	  defect	  for	  an	  injury	  
or	  death.	  These	  are	  called	  Early	  Warning	  Reports	  and	  are	  available,	  here:	  
http://www-­‐odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/ewr/qb/.	  You	  can	  only	  download	  these	  files,	  by	  
manufacturer,	  in	  text	  format	  and	  by	  quarter.	  Very	  little	  information	  is	  reported	  to	  
regulators	  at	  this	  stage,	  including	  the	  state	  where	  the	  accident	  occurred,	  the	  date	  of	  
the	  incident,	  how	  many	  deaths	  or	  injuries	  resulted,	  which	  part	  was	  blamed	  for	  the	  
incident,	  and	  the	  make,	  model	  and	  model	  year	  of	  the	  vehicle	  involved.	  Regulators	  
can	  request	  more	  information	  about	  these	  reports.	  Those	  requests	  are	  called	  Death	  

Inquiries	  and	  generally	  must	  be	  obtained	  under	  the	  Freedom	  of	  Information	  
Act.	  	  
	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  Fatalities	  on	  U.S.	  Roads.	  All	  vehicles	  fatalities	  on	  U.S.	  roads	  are	  collected	  by	  
N.H.T.S.A.	  in	  a	  database	  called	  the	  Fatality	  Analysis	  Reporting	  System.	  It	  can	  be	  
found	  here:	  http://www.nhtsa.gov/FARS.	  Most	  of	  the	  data	  comes	  from	  accident	  
reports	  from	  local	  or	  state	  police.	  Tip:	  These	  records	  can	  be	  cross-­‐referenced	  with	  
the	  EWR	  database,	  to	  provide	  more	  identifying	  information	  about	  an	  accident	  –	  for	  
example,	  gender	  and	  age	  of	  accident	  victims,	  the	  county	  in	  which	  the	  accident	  
occurred,	  how	  many	  cars	  were	  involved,	  alcohol	  use,	  whether	  airbags	  deployed.	  
This	  additional	  information	  can	  often	  be	  enough	  to	  help	  find	  newspaper	  clippings	  or	  
request	  police	  reports	  that	  identify	  the	  victims’	  names	  and	  the	  details	  of	  the	  
accidents.	  
	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  Technical	  Service	  Bulletins.	  	  Automakers	  are	  not	  supposed	  to	  use	  TSBs	  to	  fix	  
safety	  defects,	  instead	  of	  issuing	  recalls,	  but	  there	  is	  evidence	  that	  it	  has	  happened	  in	  
the	  past.	  TSB	  summaries	  are	  available	  on	  the	  regulator’s	  website,	  but	  they	  are	  often	  
too	  short	  or	  vague	  to	  be	  of	  much	  help.	  You	  can	  purchase	  the	  full	  bulletins	  from	  a	  
third-­‐party	  website	  called	  Alldata,	  here:	  http://www.alldatadiy.com/.	  
	  
	  -­‐-­‐	  Foreign	  Recalls.	  Under	  the	  law,	  automakers	  are	  required	  to	  report	  to	  federal	  
regulators	  when	  they	  recall	  cars	  abroad,	  but	  do	  not	  issue	  recalls	  for	  similar	  models	  
in	  the	  U.S.	  They	  must	  give	  a	  reason	  why	  a	  U.S.	  recall	  was	  not	  issued	  and	  often	  the	  
reason	  is	  legitimate.	  Sometimes,	  it	  is	  more	  questionable.	  You	  can	  search	  for	  foreign	  
recalls	  here:	  http://www-­‐odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/frecalls/.	  
	  

