Tipsheet,	  IRE	  2015,	  Philadelphia	  
	  
Finding	  the	  Story:	  Contracts	  
Danielle	  Ivory,	  The	  New	  York	  Times	  
danielle.ivory@nytimes.com,	  @danielle_ivory	  
	  
	  
	  
The	  Basics	  of	  Federal	  Contracting	  
	  
The	  government	  uses	  contracts	  to	  buy	  almost	  everything.	  Agencies	  buy	  goods,	  like	  
guns	  or	  helicopters	  or	  computers	  or	  pencils.	  Agencies	  also	  outsource	  services.	  Those	  
could	  include	  private	  security	  in	  Afghanistan,	  food	  service	  on	  military	  bases,	  
environmental	  consulting,	  entertainment	  costs	  (for	  instance,	  at	  a	  conference),	  PR	  
and	  advertising,	  or	  even	  FOIA	  processing.	  The	  next	  time	  you	  submit	  a	  Freedom	  of	  
Information	  Act	  request,	  you	  may	  find	  yourself	  talking	  with	  a	  government	  
contractor.	  
	  
By	  law,	  federal	  contractors	  are	  not	  allowed	  to	  do	  anything	  that	  is	  considered	  
“inherently	  governmental,”	  but	  they	  arguably	  tiptoe	  up	  to	  the	  line.	  Take,	  for	  
example,	  FOIA	  processing.	  Contractors	  are	  not	  allowed	  to	  sign	  off	  on	  the	  final	  
decisions	  about	  FOIA	  responses	  or	  denials,	  but	  they	  are	  allowed	  to	  do	  much,	  if	  not	  
all	  of	  the	  work	  leading	  up	  to	  making	  that	  decision.	  
	  
U.S.	  government	  contract	  spending	  ballooned	  from	  about	  $215	  billion	  in	  fiscal	  year	  
2001,	  which	  ended	  about	  a	  month	  after	  the	  September	  11th	  terrorist	  attacks,	  to	  
about	  $541	  billion	  in	  2008.	  Spending	  stayed	  relatively	  flat	  for	  a	  couple	  of	  years	  and	  
then	  started	  to	  dip.	  In	  2014,	  the	  last	  complete	  fiscal	  year,	  the	  federal	  government	  
spent	  about	  $445	  billion,	  quite	  a	  plunge.	  The	  dip	  in	  spending	  is	  generally	  attributed	  
to	  a	  decrease	  in	  wartime	  spending	  and	  the	  effort	  to	  reduce	  the	  budget	  through	  
voluntary	  and	  broad	  reductions	  known	  as	  sequestration.	  	  
	  
About	  70	  percent	  of	  federal	  contracts	  are	  defense	  contracts.	  	  
	  
There	  are	  prime	  contracts	  and	  subcontracts.	  Prime	  contracts	  are	  awarded	  to	  
businesses	  directly	  by	  the	  government.	  Subcontracts	  are	  awarded	  by	  prime	  
contractors.	  Unfortunately,	  there	  is	  no	  comprehensive	  database	  of	  federal	  
subcontracts.	  
	  
	  
What	  Happens	  Before	  a	  Contract	  is	  Awarded?	  
	  
When	  the	  government	  wants	  to	  buy	  something,	  a	  contracting	  officer	  generally	  puts	  
out	  a	  Request	  For	  Proposals	  (an	  RFP),	  a	  Request	  For	  Quote	  (an	  RFQ)	  or	  some	  other	  
kind	  of	  solicitation	  document.	  Then,	  companies	  compete	  with	  one	  another	  for	  the	  
work	  by	  submitting	  bids.	  

You	  can	  track	  the	  pre-­‐award	  process,	  almost	  in	  real-­‐time,	  at	  Federal	  Business	  
Opportunities:	  https://www.fbo.gov,	  which	  looks	  like	  this:	  
	  

	  
Use	  the	  advanced	  search	  and	  make	  sure	  you	  click	  the	  button	  (shown	  in	  the	  bottom	  
right	  corner	  of	  the	  screenshot,	  below)	  to	  search	  both	  recent	  and	  archived	  
documents.	  	  
	  

	  
From	  this	  screen,	  you	  can	  search	  the	  records	  by	  the	  state	  where	  the	  work	  will	  be	  
performed,	  by	  the	  agency	  awarding	  the	  work	  and	  by	  the	  industry	  code	  that	  has	  been	  
assigned	  to	  the	  work.	  You	  can	  also	  search	  for	  contracts	  that	  will	  be	  set	  aside	  for	  
small	  businesses	  or	  subsets	  of	  small	  businesses,	  like	  women-­‐owned	  firms,	  veterans-­‐
owned	  firms,	  businesses	  that	  qualify	  for	  special	  minority	  programs,	  like	  the	  8(a)	  
program	  for	  socially	  and	  economically	  disadvantaged	  small	  businesses,	  or	  the	  

HUBZone	  program,	  which	  helps	  businesses	  in	  historically	  disadvantaged	  
neighborhoods.	  The	  set-­‐aside	  programs	  can	  be	  vulnerable	  to	  fraud,	  perhaps	  because	  
they	  allow	  access	  to	  non-­‐competitive	  contracts	  and	  because	  the	  under-­‐resourced	  
Small	  Business	  Administration	  may	  not	  be	  able	  to	  closely	  oversee	  every	  firm	  that	  
qualifies	  for	  a	  program.	  	  	  
	  
Small	  Businesses	  
	  
A	  note	  about	  small	  businesses.	  The	  government	  is	  supposed	  to	  award	  23	  percent	  of	  
prime	  contracts	  to	  small	  businesses.	  After	  failing	  to	  meet	  the	  goal	  for	  more	  than	  a	  
decade,	  it	  looks	  like	  it	  may	  have	  met	  the	  goal	  for	  fiscal	  year	  2013.	  Generally,	  a	  small	  
business	  is	  defined	  as	  having	  less	  than	  $7	  million	  in	  annual	  revenue	  or	  fewer	  than	  
500	  employees,	  but	  strict	  definitions	  vary	  from	  industry	  to	  industry.	  
	  
This	  is	  a	  great	  resource	  if	  you	  are	  trying	  to	  look	  up	  small	  business	  contractors	  in	  
certain	  states	  or	  in	  particular	  industry	  areas:	  
	  
http://dsbs.sba.gov/dsbs/search/dsp_dsbs.cfm	  
	  
	  
Non-­‐competitive	  contracts	  
	  
Before	  awarding	  a	  contract,	  the	  government	  might	  decide	  that	  a	  contract	  needs	  to	  
be	  sole	  sourced	  to	  one	  vendor,	  meaning	  that	  it	  would	  be	  awarded	  without	  
competition.	  	  
	  
It	  may	  be	  that	  only	  one	  company	  can	  provide	  the	  service.	  Or	  it	  may	  be	  that	  the	  
government	  needs	  the	  product	  urgently	  and	  doesn’t	  have	  time	  to	  hold	  a	  
competition.	  These	  are	  considered	  legitimate	  reasons	  for	  bypassing	  the	  competitive	  
process.	  	  
	  
Here	  is	  where	  you	  can	  find	  other	  justifications	  for	  non-­‐competitive	  contracting,	  
according	  to	  the	  Federal	  Acquisition	  Regulations	  (the	  FAR),	  which	  govern	  federal	  
contracting:	  http://www.acquisition.gov/far/html/Subpart%206_3.html.	  
	  
Even	  with	  a	  justification,	  the	  government	  must	  prove	  its	  case.	  Generally,	  agencies	  
must	  publicly	  release	  a	  justification	  document,	  called	  a	  J&A,	  which	  stands	  for	  
Justification	  and	  Approval	  (and	  sometimes,	  Justification	  and	  Authorization).	  	  In	  it,	  
the	  contracting	  agency	  explains	  the	  justification	  and	  what	  sort	  of	  market	  research	  
was	  performed.	  You	  can	  find	  those	  documents	  at	  FBO.gov	  as	  well.	  	  
	  
Here’s	  a	  trick	  for	  finding	  J&As.	  If	  you	  use	  the	  advanced	  search	  function	  on	  FBO.gov,	  
you’ll	  find	  some	  J&As,	  but	  I	  generally	  have	  more	  luck	  when	  I	  google	  “justification,,”	  
“FBO.gov”	  and	  whatever	  I’m	  looking	  for	  in	  particular.	  	  
	  
Another	  note	  about	  J&As.	  They	  are	  often	  used	  to	  extend	  a	  contract	  or	  raise	  the	  

ceiling	  of	  a	  contract.	  If	  a	  contract	  award	  is	  delayed	  for	  some	  reason	  (see	  the	  section	  
on	  government	  protests),	  you	  may	  want	  to	  search	  for	  J&As,	  extending	  the	  life	  of	  the	  
previous	  contract	  for	  that	  work.	  	  
	  
Guessing	  the	  Winner	  
	  
Trying	  to	  predict	  the	  eventual	  winner	  of	  a	  contract	  is	  hard	  work.	  There	  is	  no	  public	  
database	  that	  contains	  this	  information	  and,	  by	  law,	  the	  contracting	  officers	  who	  
make	  these	  decisions,	  are	  not	  supposed	  to	  tell	  reporters	  or	  members	  of	  the	  general	  
public	  in	  advance.	  In	  some	  cases,	  agencies	  will	  inform	  members	  of	  Congress	  in	  
advance	  if	  the	  award	  is	  going	  to	  affect	  their	  districts.	  Also,	  sometimes	  the	  competing	  
contractors	  will	  be	  tipped	  off	  slightly	  in	  advance.	  
	  
However,	  by	  law,	  agencies	  are	  required	  to	  announce	  publicly	  any	  contract	  awards	  of	  
more	  than	  $4	  million	  by	  5	  p.m.	  Washington,	  D.C.,	  time	  on	  the	  day	  that	  it	  is	  awarded.	  
They	  generally	  do	  this	  at	  FBO.gov.	  	  
	  
The	  Pentagon	  awards	  about	  70	  percent	  of	  contracts	  and	  is	  required	  to	  follow	  the	  
same	  standard,	  but	  for	  awards	  of	  more	  than	  $6.5	  million.	  These	  announcements	  can	  
be	  found	  here:	  
	  
http://www.defense.gov/contracts/	  	  
	  
Note:	  Do	  not	  use	  this	  website	  to	  calculate	  what	  the	  government	  has	  paid	  to	  
contractors.	  These	  are	  simply	  estimates.	  Sometimes	  the	  government	  raises	  or	  
lowers	  the	  ceiling	  on	  a	  contract	  after	  it	  is	  awarded.	  
	  
	  
After	  the	  government	  awards	  a	  contract..	  
	  
When	  the	  government	  awards	  a	  contract,	  a	  lot	  of	  information	  becomes	  publicly	  
available	  –	  most	  notably,	  the	  name	  of	  the	  winner.	  	  
Though	  FBO.gov	  has	  some	  information	  about	  contracts	  that	  have	  been	  awarded,	  it	  
would	  be	  best	  to	  familiarize	  yourself	  with	  two	  more	  websites,	  the	  Federal	  
Procurement	  Database	  System	  (FPDS)	  and	  USAspending.gov.	  	  
	  
Both	  track	  government	  spending.	  FPDS	  tracks	  prime	  contracts	  only.	  USAspending	  
tracks	  prime	  contracts	  and	  grants	  and	  some	  subcontracting	  data	  (caution:	  it	  is	  
incomplete	  data	  and	  only	  for	  first-­‐tier	  subcontractors	  –	  ie.	  Not	  sub-­‐subcontractors	  
or	  sub-­‐sub-­‐subcontractors	  and	  so	  forth.)	  
	  
The	  websites	  have	  pros	  and	  cons.	  You	  can	  see	  overall	  spending	  charted	  by	  year	  at	  
USAspending	  and	  you	  can	  search	  on	  the	  website	  by	  socio-­‐economic	  data	  (ie.	  You	  can	  
search	  any	  contract	  marked	  as	  having	  gone	  to	  a	  small	  women-­‐owned	  business)	  or	  
by	  multiple	  industry	  codes.	  On	  the	  flip	  side,	  very	  small	  contracts	  are	  not	  always	  
included	  in	  the	  database,	  for	  some	  reason.	  FPDS	  allows	  you	  to	  drill	  down	  on	  

agencies	  and	  companies,	  but	  you	  can	  only	  download	  about	  60,000	  records	  at	  a	  time	  
from	  the	  main	  website	  (you	  will	  not	  be	  warned	  about	  this	  when	  you	  download	  
records,	  so	  pay	  attention).	  USAspending	  is	  relatively	  user-­‐friendly.	  FPDS	  is	  not.	  I	  
generally	  use	  one	  website	  to	  check	  the	  other.	  	  
	  
Note:	  There	  is	  usually	  a	  bit	  of	  lag	  time	  between	  when	  a	  contract	  is	  announced	  and	  
when	  it	  ends	  up	  in	  either	  database.	  Military	  contracts	  generally	  lag	  by	  about	  90	  days	  
–	  which	  is	  why	  it	  is	  a	  good	  rule	  of	  thumb	  not	  to	  try	  to	  sum	  up	  all	  of	  the	  contracts	  
awards	  in	  the	  previous	  week,	  month,	  quarter	  or	  year	  until	  at	  least	  three	  months	  
have	  passed.	  	  
	  
FPDS	  can	  be	  found	  here:	  https://www.fpds.gov/fpdsng_cms/.	  This	  is	  the	  homepage:	  
	  

	  
You	  can	  get	  into	  the	  site	  by	  clicking	  into	  the	  ezSearch	  bar	  and	  pressing	  the	  return	  
key.	  Then	  you’ll	  see	  this:	  
	  

	  
You	  can	  search	  the	  contracting	  database	  just	  like	  you’d	  search	  Google,	  or	  you	  can	  
use	  the	  advanced	  search.	  Here’s	  what	  happens	  when	  you	  type	  “Lockheed”	  into	  the	  
search	  bar.	  Lockheed	  Martin	  happens	  to	  be	  the	  No.	  1	  U.S.	  contractor.	  
	  

	  
These	  are	  called	  contract	  actions.	  They	  are	  not	  individual	  contracts,	  but	  are,	  instead,	  
parts	  of	  contracts.	  You	  can	  think	  of	  them	  as	  snapshots	  of	  contracts	  that	  get	  taken	  
every	  time	  the	  awards	  are	  modified	  (ie.	  If	  the	  government	  obligates	  money,	  changes	  
the	  time	  period,	  cancels	  a	  contract	  altogether,	  etc.)	  
	  
You	  can	  download	  this	  information	  as	  a	  CSV	  file	  (see	  the	  top	  right	  corner).	  Beware	  
that	  FPDS	  only	  lets	  you	  download	  a	  small	  amount	  of	  information	  at	  a	  time,	  so	  make	  
sure	  the	  number	  of	  “results”	  (more	  than	  372,000	  in	  the	  case	  above)	  matches	  the	  
number	  of	  rows	  you	  get	  in	  Excel.	  You	  can	  also	  scrape	  the	  website.	  
	  
Here	  is	  a	  resource	  if	  you	  want	  to	  download	  large	  amounts	  of	  data	  from	  FPDS:	  
https://www.fpds.gov/wiki/index2.php/ATOM_Feed_FAQ.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
Let’s	  go	  through	  one	  contract	  action	  on	  FPDS..	  
	  
I’ll	  take	  you	  through	  one	  contract	  action	  piece-­‐by-­‐piece,	  so	  you	  can	  see	  what	  
information	  is	  available	  online	  before	  you	  even	  pick	  up	  the	  phone	  to	  start	  calling	  
sources.	  	  
	  
Here	  is	  the	  top	  part	  of	  a	  contract	  action.	  This	  happens	  to	  be	  an	  Army	  contract,	  
awarded	  to	  McCann	  World	  Group,	  a	  public	  relations	  firm.	  
	  

	  
	  
You	  can	  see	  the	  email	  of	  the	  last	  person	  who	  modified	  the	  contract	  (someone	  named	  
Rodney,	  in	  this	  case),	  the	  contract	  award	  number	  (a	  unique	  identifier),	  and	  the	  
amount	  of	  money	  obligated	  on	  the	  contract	  (and	  next	  to	  that,	  when	  it	  was	  signed	  
and	  when	  it’s	  supposed	  to	  be	  completed.)	  
	  
If	  you	  scroll	  down	  on	  this	  contract	  action,	  you’ll	  see	  this:	  
	  

	  
	  
You	  can	  see	  the	  contracting	  agency	  and	  awarding	  agency	  (sometimes,	  these	  are	  
different),	  the	  name	  of	  the	  contractor	  (usually	  not	  the	  parent	  company),	  and	  any	  
socio-­‐economic	  information	  about	  the	  company.	  If	  McCann	  were	  a	  small	  business,	  
there	  would	  be	  a	  lot	  of	  data,	  such	  as	  whether	  it	  was	  women	  or	  minority-­‐owned,	  etc.	  
Note	  that	  the	  “annual	  revenue”	  and	  “number	  of	  employees”	  are	  listed	  here	  as	  well.	  
Don’t	  trust	  this	  information	  without	  checking	  it.	  It’s	  often	  inaccurate.	  
	  
If	  you	  scroll	  a	  bit	  further	  in	  the	  contract	  action,	  this	  is	  what	  you’ll	  see:	  

	  

	  
You	  can	  see	  where	  the	  work	  was	  performed,	  including	  the	  congressional	  district.	  
Local	  and	  regional	  reporters:	  you	  can	  look	  up	  contracts	  in	  your	  area.	  
	  
You	  can	  also	  find	  clues	  about	  what	  the	  contractor	  has	  been	  hired	  to	  do.	  Note	  the	  two	  
industry	  codes,	  the	  produce	  service	  code	  and	  the	  North	  American	  Industry	  
Classification	  System	  (NAICS)	  code.	  Triangulate	  these	  codes	  with	  the	  “description	  of	  
requirement”	  to	  pinpoint	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  contract.	  Beware:	  The	  “description”	  is	  
sometimes	  gibberish.	  You	  can	  also	  use	  the	  solicitation	  number	  to	  find	  more	  pre-­‐
award	  information	  about	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  work	  at	  FBO.gov.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
If	  you	  scroll	  to	  the	  bottom	  of	  the	  contract	  action,	  here’s	  what’s	  you’ll	  see.	  
	  

	  
You	  can	  see	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  the	  contract	  was	  competed.	  In	  this	  case,	  the	  contract	  
was	  awarded	  using	  “full	  and	  open	  competition.”	  Had	  it	  been	  sole	  sourced,	  it	  would	  
be	  marked	  “not	  competed.”	  There	  is	  a	  lot	  of	  room	  between	  full	  and	  open	  
competition	  and	  non-­‐competitive	  contracts	  –	  some	  contracts	  are	  set	  aside	  for	  
certain	  minority	  groups,	  for	  example.	  
	  
This	  part	  of	  the	  contract	  action	  will	  also	  tell	  you	  how	  many	  individuals	  or	  companies	  
bid	  on	  the	  award.	  There	  were	  four	  in	  this	  case:	  McCann	  won,	  and	  three	  companies	  
lost.	  If	  you	  want	  to	  know	  the	  names	  of	  the	  companies	  that	  lost,	  you	  can	  try	  
requesting	  the	  information	  through	  FOIA,	  but	  you’ll	  probably	  have	  better	  luck	  if	  you	  
talk	  to	  sources	  from	  the	  winning	  company,	  within	  the	  government,	  or	  in	  Congress.	  
Keep	  an	  eye	  out	  for	  contracts	  that	  are	  marked	  with	  “full	  and	  open	  competition,”	  but	  
only	  have	  one	  bidder.	  That	  can	  be	  a	  red	  flag.	  	  
	  
At	  the	  bottom	  of	  the	  page,	  you	  can	  see	  whether	  the	  business	  that	  won	  the	  contract	  
was	  categorized	  as	  a	  small	  business	  or	  not.	  	  
	  
	  
A	  Note	  on	  Subcontracts..	  
	  
There	  isn’t	  a	  good	  database	  for	  subcontracts.	  Some	  subcontracts	  show	  up	  at	  
USAspending.gov,	  but	  the	  information	  is	  very	  inconsistent	  (or	  non-­‐existent).	  This	  
area	  could	  use	  more	  sunlight.	  This	  is	  rich	  territory	  for	  stories.	  	  

	  

	  
	  
The	  Losers	  
	  
When	  a	  company	  wins	  a	  contract,	  that	  means	  someone	  probably	  lost.	  If	  the	  losers	  
feel	  they	  were	  treated	  unfairly,	  they	  can	  protest	  the	  award.	  
	  
There	  are	  three	  ways	  to	  protest	  a	  contract.	  	  
	  
(1)	  The	  losing	  contractors	  can	  protest	  directly	  to	  the	  agency	  that	  awarded	  the	  
contract.	  
	  
(2)	  Or	  they	  can	  protest	  to	  the	  Government	  Accountability	  Office.	  
	  
(3)	  Or	  they	  can	  protest	  at	  the	  Court	  of	  Federal	  Claims	  in	  Washington,	  D.C.	  
	  
Protesting	  directly	  to	  the	  agency	  is	  the	  least	  transparent	  of	  these	  three	  processes.	  
The	  protest	  documents	  are	  public	  record,	  but	  generally	  you	  have	  to	  request	  them	  
via	  a	  FOIA.	  
	  
Protesting	  to	  the	  GAO	  is	  probably	  the	  most	  common	  way	  to	  protest	  a	  contract,	  
possibly	  because	  it	  is	  cheaper	  than	  going	  to	  court	  and	  because	  a	  protest	  at	  the	  GAO	  
triggers	  an	  automatic	  100-­‐day	  stay	  of	  the	  contract	  (ie.	  No	  one	  can	  work	  on	  the	  new	  
contract).	  Companies	  that	  want	  to	  file	  protests	  with	  the	  GAO	  must	  do	  so	  within	  10	  
calendar	  days	  of	  learning	  of	  the	  reason	  for	  the	  protest,	  in	  order	  to	  get	  the	  automatic	  
stay.	  
	  
You	  can	  find	  the	  archive	  of	  recent	  bid	  protest	  decisions	  here:	  
http://www.gao.gov/legal/bids/browserecent.html	  
	  
You	  can	  also	  search	  recently	  filed	  protests	  (without	  decisions)	  here:	  
http://www.gao.gov/legal/bids/docket.html?openclosed=All&agency=All&snumbe
r=&protestor=&filenum=&o=0&searched=1&now_sort=docdate+desc%2Cissue_dat
e_dt+desc&Submit=Search	  
	  
Here	  are	  the	  contacts	  for	  the	  attorneys	  who	  work	  on	  these	  bid	  protest	  decisions:	  
	  
http://www.gao.gov/legal/bids/attycontacts.html	  
	  
Protest	  decision	  can	  be	  rich	  with	  information.	  Generally,	  it	  is	  difficult	  to	  find	  out	  
what	  a	  losing	  company	  bid	  on	  a	  project.	  But,	  if	  someone	  protests	  the	  contract,	  
sometimes	  the	  bids	  will	  be	  listed	  in	  the	  protest	  decision.	  Sometimes	  other	  bidders,	  
who	  did	  not	  win	  or	  protest,	  will	  be	  listed	  as	  well.	  If	  the	  government	  made	  mistakes	  
during	  the	  solicitation	  period,	  sometimes	  those	  will	  be	  spelled	  out	  in	  the	  protest	  
decision.	  
	  

	  
Suspension	  and	  Debarment	  
	  
Contractors	  can	  be	  suspended	  or	  debarred	  from	  doing	  business	  with	  the	  
government	  if	  an	  agency	  decides	  that	  it	  is	  not	  responsible.	  Suspension	  is	  generally	  
shorter	  than	  debarred	  and	  considered	  slightly	  less	  serious,	  but	  in	  practicality,	  both	  
have	  the	  same	  result.	  Companies	  that	  are	  suspended	  or	  debarred	  cannot	  win	  new	  
contracts,	  unless	  the	  government	  issues	  a	  waiver.	  	  
	  
You	  can	  search	  the	  suspension	  and	  debarment	  records	  here:	  
	  
https://www.sam.gov/portal/SAM/?portal:componentId=290e7118-­‐9386-­‐4239-­‐
a33d-­‐
8a3a1439207c&interactionstate=JBPNS_rO0ABXc0ABBfanNmQnJpZGdlVmlld0lkAA
AAAQATL2pzZi9uYXZpZ2F0aW9uLmpzcAAHX19FT0ZfXw**&portal:type=action##
11	  
	  
Suspension	  and	  debarment	  are	  not	  supposed	  to	  be	  used	  punitively.	  There	  must	  be	  
evidence	  of	  an	  ongoing	  problem.	  	  
	  
	  
State	  and	  Local	  Contracts	  
	  
There	  is	  no	  comprehensive,	  centralized	  state	  or	  local	  contracting	  database.	  If	  you	  
are	  digging	  into	  state	  or	  local	  contracts,	  generally	  it	  helps	  to	  apply	  the	  lessons	  from	  
the	  federal	  government.	  Many	  of	  the	  same	  rules	  are	  in	  place	  at	  the	  state	  and	  local	  
level.	  For	  example,	  each	  state	  can	  suspend	  or	  debar	  contractors.	  Some	  have	  online	  
records;	  some	  must	  be	  obtained	  through	  public	  records	  requests.	  	  
	  
The	  most	  comprehensive	  database	  of	  state	  and	  local	  records	  is	  maintained	  by	  
SmartProcure,	  a	  company	  that	  makes	  its	  contracting	  records	  free	  to	  journalists.	  
	  
The	  website	  is	  at:	  https://smartprocure.us/	  	  
	  
If	  you	  are	  interested	  in	  signing	  up	  for	  a	  SmartProcure	  account,	  you	  can	  email	  the	  
company’s	  chief	  executive	  officer,	  Jeff	  Rubenstein,	  at	  jeff@smartprocure.us.	  	  
	  
The	  website	  collects	  records	  at	  the	  federal,	  state	  and	  local	  level	  –	  from	  any	  
government	  entity	  willing	  to	  share	  it.	  Its	  database	  includes	  purchase	  orders	  from	  
public	  schools,	  state	  universities,	  public	  hospitals,	  correctional	  facilities	  and	  other	  
entities.	  It	  is	  not	  comprehensive,	  but	  it	  is	  the	  closest	  thing	  out	  there.	  
	  
	  

