BUSTING CRIMINALS TIPS:
DOCUMENTS YOU MUST HAVE BEFORE LAUNCH
1. Victim’s police reports to prove victim’s tried to alert law enforcement
2. Other proof of victim’s stories: receipts, emails, photos any interaction with criminal including
social media contact (to verify their stories).
3. Recorded calls or voicemails between criminals and victim
CONVERSATION SHOULD MUST HAVE BEFORE LAUNCH
1. Are you prepared for the end result: prison time for suspect and scrutiny by police that you did
THEIR work and you being forced to testify
2. Talk everything over with your attorney and bosses before hand
3. Prepare for worst case scenario (such as your hidden cameras being stolen by criminal!)
4. Be cautious in contacting law enforcement first. Trying to get your documents through victims,
because cops may try to either stop you or rush to bust the criminals first so they don’t look
bad.
5. Realize you are about to make real enemies with real criminals and to take safety precautions
to protect yourself
6. Don’t promise anything to victims – they may want revenge and you can’t get involved in that.
USING INMATES AS SOURCES
1. Remember, many will lie and try to fool you to get you to believe them – THEREFORE – insist on
documents to back up what they’re saying.
2. Remember, they’re in prison for a reason
3. They may share information with you about crimes that are about to be committed, and that
can get you prosecuted.
4. They may be contacting you on contraband phones, another criminal violation
5. Remember, they have an agenda, don’t ever forget it
TO CATCH THE CRIMINAL
1.
2.
3.
4.

Know your state’s laws about hidden cameras and consent recording
Roll every time you get out of the car when you must do an unscheduled interview.
Never, ever be alone during surveillance
If you have captured something that is criminal activity, you have to alert police. You don’t
have to hand over your stuff, but you have to alert them.

INTERVIEW/CONFRONTATION
1. Stay calm and treat them like you would public officials – request an interview.
2. BUT!!!!! Criminals will disappear, so act fast. When you’ve caught them, go up rolling and say,
“We’ve caught you doing this. We can talk about it now or we can go sit down and talk about it.”

3. Show them your video and the documents.
4. Show the video of your confrontation to the victims.

