June 6, 2015

IRE Tipsheet: Avoiding Prying Eyes
Note: This tipsheet was prepared by Julia Angwin for the 2015 Investigative Reporters
& Editors conference in Philadelphia (June 3-6).
For journalists, keeping secrets is arguably far more difficult in today’s world, where
nearly every form of communication - from e-mails, phone calls, text messages and
even face-to-face meetings – can leave a digital trace that can and likely will be
analyzed for clues in a leak investigation. Here are some tips and strategies for ways
to protect sources.
First decide if you are trying to hide WHO you are talking to (metadata) and WHAT
you are talking about (content) — and from WHOM.
If you are trying to mask WHO you are talking to, consider three strategic options
that I call ACE — which stands for “Add Noise, Cloak or Evade.”




Add noise means fuzzing the metadata by adding false connections or false
content to the communications.
Cloak means using alternate identities.
Evade means avoiding metadata collection by meeting in person, leaving
your phone behind, and not using digital forms of communication to arrange
the meeting.

If you are trying to mask WHAT you are talking about, I suggest three options that I
call HEM — which stands for “Hide, Encrypt or Mask.”




Hide means hiding the existence of the content, by placing it in a secret
compartment either physically or digitally.
Encrypt means to make the content unreadable to outsiders using
cryptographic techniques.
Mask means disguising the content as an innocuous other type of content.

Flip the page for a list of handy tools…

Some good tools to use are:
GPG – Gnu Privacy Guard is software that enables e-mail encryption. Most people
access it through the Mac version, GPGTools, or the Windows version, GPG4Win. I
will use GPG as shorthand for all e-mail encryption tools that use this protocol.
OTR – Off-The-Record messaging is a protocol for sending and receiving encrypted
instant messages. Most people use it through the Mac version, Adium, or the
Windows version, Pidgin.
Tor – Tor is a Web browser that provides anonymity by bouncing user’s Internet
traffic to various servers around the world so that the user appears to be in a
different location.
Tor Bridges – Tor Bridges are private connections to Tor that are not listed in the
public Tor directory. They are often used in places like China that attempt to block
Tor traffic. For even more extreme situations, Tor offers an even more secret
hookup called Tor pluggable transports.
OTR + Tor – Off-the-record messaging used over the Tor system offers the best of
both worlds: anonymity and encryption. However, it requires some tech savvy to
configure OTR programs to work with Tor. (E-mail provider Riseup.net offers a
decent tutorial.)
Tails – Tails is a computer operating system that is set up with privacy defaults.
Tails routes user Internet traffic automatically through Tor and is set up for default
use of encrypted email and instant messaging. Users must boot up their computer
using a USB drive or CD installed with Tails.
SecureDrop – SecureDrop is an encrypted drop box that newsrooms can install to
allow sources to send documents in an encrypted and anonymous fashion. Sources
must download Tor and follow a few simple instructions to send documents through
SecureDrop.
OnionShare – OnionShare is software that allows people to share large files
anonymously over the Internet.
Signal—Signal is a private messaging app that allows you to make encrypted voice
calls worldwide from your mobile phone. (Free download; available for iPhone and
Android).
Silent Circle—Silent Circle describes itself as “the world’s first enterprise privacy
platform.” The company offers a whole suite of services (texting, voice, video,
contacts management) that offer end-to-end secure communications between
subscribers, including encrypted conference calls.
Burner Phones – Burner phones are prepaid cellphones that are bought with cash at
a location far from your usual commute, so as not to be tied to your identity.
Disposable e-mail address – A disposable e-mail address is an e-mail account that is
not tied to your identity. Best practice is to set up the account while using Tor
anonymizing software, because most e-mail providers store the location from which
an account was set up. However, not all e-mail providers allow Tor users to set up
an account.
Air-gapped computer – A computer that is not – and has never been – connected to
an insecure network, such as the Internet. It is used for the most sensitive
journalistic operations, such as storing the Snowden documents.

