Reporting on Diverse Communities That Are Not our Own
Tip sheet
Sabrina Vourvoulias (on twitter: @followthelede)
AL DÍA News Media (website: aldianews.com; on twitter: @aldianews)
Coverage
Advantages of multilingual, multicultural newsrooms
According to stats released by ASNE: for the past number of years only 13
percent of journalists in newsrooms across the nation are journos of color. The
demographic composition of the majority of newsrooms doesn’t reflect the city or
town they propose to cover, no less the nation.
In Philadelphia, for example, by 2010 Census categories: 44 percent of the
population is Black; 36 percent is white; 13 percent is Latino; 7 percent is Asian
and Pacific Islander; 0.8 percent is American Indian and Alaska Native.12
percent is foreign-born, 21 percent speak a second language at home.
None of our newsrooms represent those percentages.
At the moment, at AL DÍA, 63 percent of our staff is Latino; 26 percent white; 11
percent Black; and 0 percent are Asian and Native American. 47 percent of us
are foreign-born; 84 percent of our staff is bilingual (the languages we speak are
English, Spanish, Arabic, French).
Because of our relative demographic diversity we do pretty well covering stories
across most of Philadelphia; because of our demographic shortcomings we’ve
become very proactive about collaborating with our colleagues from community
and ethnic media to ensure that our coverage isn’t plagued by erasure or
flattening, and to enable us to interview in more languages than we speak.
An example of this was a collaboration between AL DÍA reporter Ana Gamboa
and Metro Chinese Weekly editor Steve Yuan, focused on Chinese restaurant
owners who hire Latino kitchen workers. Interviews were conducted in
Cantonese and Spanish. Steve brought years of experience in covering the
Chinese business community, Ana brought years of experience covering
Mexican and Central American immigrants. Both brought a very nuanced
understanding of what otherwise would generically be labeled Asian and Latino
in our city, and were well-versed in specific distinctions in language, regional
custom and more — all of which contributed to a story that could not have been
written by either media organization alone. The resulting story was published on
both websites in English and Spanish and English and Chinese, and published in
print in Spanish and Chinese.
Protip: Hire bilingual or polyglot reporters, and reporters from the communities
your media organization should be covering better. In the interim or in addition,

work collaboratively with the ethnic media in ways that will inform and engage
both readerships and benefit both media organizations.
Collegial collaboration
Beware of thinking that just having work translated — or engaging a translator for
interviews for a particular story —is enough. We’d like to assume that cultural
affinity and an understanding of the history and complexity of the particular
community being covered would be part of any translator’s bag of tricks, but it’s
not necessarily so. Particularly if it is an academic translator who lives outside of
the community and has little awareness of the dynamics of the community.
Collaboration with an ethnic news organization that has a history of covering the
community is a far wiser move.
Collegiality is one of the sticking points in the relationship between mainstream
media and ethnic media. We are often asked by our mainstream colleagues to
share our sources, or to be sources, or to function as translators for what will be
a single-byline, single-media organization story.
Worse, our own investigative work of years is ruthlessly mined, without credit or
even so much as a cursory hat tip to the reporter or media organization involved.
Because ethnic media is, consciously or unconsciously, not viewed by
mainstream media as a peer.
An example of this happened for us a few years ago when we conducted an
hour-long video conversation with then Governor Tom Corbett. We always ask
public officials about the number of Latinos on their administrations, and Corbett
responded that he couldn’t find any Latinos for his staff. We immediately put that
segment of the interview on our website and someone at Think Progress found it.
They used the video in a piece that pointed out Corbett’s cluelessness and his
erasure of the growing Latino population of PA — which was fair. But despite the
fact that Corbett and I (who conducted the interview) were seated in front of an
AL DÍA News Media drop, the only mention of us in the Think Progress piece
was to say that the video clip was part of a longer interview conducted by “a
Spanish-language newspaper in Philadelphia.” Can you imagine the parallel
attribution of “an English-language newspaper in Philadelphia” if the video had
been pulled off the Philadelphia Inquirer, the Daily News or even Philadelphia
Magazine’s website? I can’t.
By the next day, Salon, Huffington Post, and a dozen other news media
organizations had picked up Think Progress’ story and replicated the lack of
attribution and lack of link. While Think Progress did — after prodding — change
“a Spanish-language newspaper” to AL DÍA News Media and inserted a link, I’ll
never forget the conversation I had with one of their editors. He told me I
shouldn’t be annoyed by the lack of attribution but glad that they picked up the
video since it garnered far more attention than we would have gotten otherwise. I
had to point out that the very reason they picked it up is that no other news

organization had, at that point, bothered to ask the governor about his Latino
hires, and that their lack of attribution betrayed a fundamental disrespect for us
as a journalistic entity, representing a parallel to Corbett’s erasure of Latinos —
which was, after all, what they were decrying and ridiculing.
Pro-tip: Attribute. With at least the same level of respect accorded to
mainstream news organizations. Treat ethnic media journalists as your peers —
because they are. If some ethnic media organization’s investigation prompted
yours, a hat tip is in order. Don’t anticipate silence on our part when we see what
you did — because, hey, we can call you out in at least two languages.
Let’s talk about writing and editing
Code words, stereotypes and the political choice to break style
Protip: Language matters.
It will come as no surprise to any of you that AL DÍA doesn’t use the terms “illegal
immigrant” or “illegal alien” which we believe are — at best — a wholly inaccurate
representation of people who are out of status in our nation, and — at worse —
an intentional criminalization and way to slur Latinos and Asians, regardless of
documentation status.
In 2013, AP changed its stylebook, and many news organizations changed
usage with it. But not only are we now seeing a resurgence in the use of these
terms by big media organizations, but there have always been organizations and
individual journalists who choose to use these terms. Sometimes, the editors or
copyeditors at an otherwise AP-style news organizations are, by inattention or
intention, complicit in this choice.
We don’t have nearly enough time to argue the rationale behind the use of these
terms, but many defend them as a description of an actual aspect of a group of
people, and therefore not a slur. We don’t see it that way. For example, it is true
that some people who speak English with a Spanish accent pronounce the word
“speak” as “spic”. So that word, could be defended as a description of an actual
aspect of a group of people. But of course we know it is not. In dealing with any
ethnic community ignoring what those who are part of the community say about
“code words” is not a laudable defense — nor a wise long-term strategy for the
news organization’s well-being.
Protip: Beware of adjectives
In the coverage of the recent mayoral primary in Philadelphia, I tracked a lot of
stereotype plied in headlines and adjectives used to describe the one Latino
candidate who made it to primary day. He was described as “loud,” “outlandish”
and headlines had him “flipping out.” He was also, with some frequency, left out
of composite photos used to promote stories about the candidates as a whole. I
know, beyond a doubt, that I irritated colleagues I esteem in the mainstream by

pointing this out every time I noticed it. The thing is, it kept happening. The ethnic
media doesn’t expect mainstream to be as attentive to the stereotypes about our
communities as we are, but we do expect that, if we point them out, there will be
care paid to keeping them from becoming the leit motif of coverage.
Again, collaborations can be an effective way to dispel misunderstanding or
misreading when certain terms are used. In the aforementioned collaboration
between AL DÍA and Metro Chinese Weekly, for example, the use of the word
“Amigos” is key. Now, if we were working the story alone, the fact that Chinese
restaurant owners used that word to refer to their Latino kitchen employees,
would most likely be interpreted as a little iffy and paternalistic. After all, “amigo”
is most frequently used by non-Latinos not for its actual meaning (friend) but as
punctuation (to draw attention to our ethnicity and “otherness”) in sentences that
often purport to tell us things “as they really are,” not as we imagine them to be.
There is, of course, ethnicity and otherness pointed out in the use of the word
amigo by the Chinese restaurateurs as well, but because we were collaborating
with a Chinese journalist we were able to understand that there is no collective
term for “Latinos” in the Chinese vernacular spoken in Philly’s Chinatown. And
that in this case “Amigos” was the chosen collective term. It makes its use
throughout the story quite a different thing, and something we would never had
known had we not been working a collaborative story.
Default audiences, single stories, and according credibility and authority
None of us, no matter how large or small our news media organization, can
afford to write to whatever was once our default audience. Demographic changes
in our cities and towns demand that we reexamine if we are speaking only — or
even primarily — to one portion of the population. At AL DÍA, for example, after
20 years of publishing only in Spanish, we know have a website that is about 75
percent bilingual (we are working toward 100 percent). Many second- and thirdgeneration Latinos prefer to read in English. Likewise, you don’t have to be
Latino to be interested in a Latino perspective on what is happening in our city
and nation, or to find stories about the Latino communities intriguing and
engaging.
Protip: Write for people who aren’t you.
I think it is fair to say most media organizations would like to reach millennials,
even when we aren’t millennial ourselves. But ... what about Latino millennials?
Broadening the default means really broadening the default.
Protip: Be aware of the specific heritage composition of the ethnic communities
in your city.
The Puerto Rican community has shared challenges with the Mexican immigrant
community or the Dominican community in Philadelphia, but also many distinct
ones. A journalist at a mainstream news organization and I play this little game
where we point out to each other the number of times Puerto Ricans are called

immigrants in stories. Puerto Ricans aren’t immigrants, of course, but Americans
no matter whether they were born on the mainland or on the island.
The asylum or refugee application outcomes are quite different for Venezuelans
than they are for Mexicans or Central Americans. Latinos with indigenous
heritages may have access to quite different levels of services — so a Mam
speaker from Mexico cannot be served by the same city-provided interpreter a
Mam speaker from Guatemala would be.
Likewise the Asian community — some challenges are shared by the Korean,
Vietnamese, Cambodian, Indian and Indonesian communities here, but many are
specific to the particular neighborhood or community.
Communities are complex, and deserve real legwork on your part before you
think of filing your story.
Protip: Honor everybody.
Too often the single story leads to stories without the particular community’s
voice in them, or the same story written over and over (stories about police
brutality in communities tend to be particularly bad about this). And way too
often, credibility and authority are assigned only to those outside of the
community.
Again, using the mayoral primary race here as an example, a story about low
Latino voter turnout and the Latino candidate’s chances of getting any sort of
vote count was trotted out early. With its fundamental flaw of not citing nor
including any Latino voices, this piece felt — to a number of us in the community
— as more anthropological treatise than journalism.
No community wants to be the subject of an anthropological study. We have to
move out of our own feelings of authority as journalists — even long-term and
acclaimed journalists — to get a full story. For us, that has meant collaborating
with Solomon Jones, a journalist from WURD (an independent African American
radio station) to do stories about African American and Latino relations in North
Philly, and upcoming (hopefully) in South Philly as well.
Protip: Look at and revise your go-to list.
We need to acknowledge that our contact lists and sources are sometimes as
segregated as our neighborhoods, and then we need to make sure we do
something about it — with every story we file, not just the ones we understand to
have an ethnic component.
Responding to criticism about coverage
None of us like to know we got it wrong. Or that we didn’t consider a hugely
important aspect of a story. For us, that happened with the story about African
American and Latino in North Philly, which I just mentioned. We were called out
by Afro-Latinos — and rightfully so — for the very structure of our story which
centered on two “separate” demographics and their interaction. We effected,

without intending to, a further erasure of those who are already usually erased
from Latino, and to lesser extent, African American, discourse in the city.
It is incredibly important to hear this sort of criticism. Which is one of the reasons
I don’t agree with removing comment sections on stories. While it is true that
comments can become toxic very quickly, it is also true that this section does
away with intentional or unintentional gatekeeping. It is in the comment section
where these sort of omissions and erasures are most usually pointed out to us.
Protip: Read the comments on your stories. Be willing to admit that your story
may have flattened, done damage, reinforced stereotype in ways you had no
idea it did.
Protip: Cultivate a collegial enough relationship with your peers at ethnic
community media organizations who, when you still don’t see it, they can help
you understand it.

