#IRE2015 tipsheet for panel
“How to Buy a Candidate”
Compiled by panelists Michael Beckel of the Center for Public Integrity, Russ Choma of the Center for Responsive
Politics, Eve Byron of the National Institute on Money in State Politics and Bill Allison of the Sunlight Foundation.

The Center for Responsive Politics, which operates the website OpenSecrets.org, is the nation's
premier research group tracking money in U.S. politics and its effect on elections and public policy.
Nonpartisan, independent and nonprofit, the organization aims to create a more educated voter, an
involved citizenry and a more transparent and responsive government.
The Center for Responsive Politics has collected federal lobbying data, federal lawmakers’ personal
financial disclosures and federal campaign finance data, including filings from the Federal Election
Commission and Internal Revenue Service.
The Center for Responsive Politics profiles individual lawmakers, as well as specific industries and
politically active groups that collectively spend hundreds of millions of dollars on ads to influence
federal elections.
So-called “outside spending” is one of the most fascinating parts of the money-in-politics story today,
but it is also a broad category of groups and ways of spending. Some useful resources for tracking
outside spending — both on the Center’s website and elsewhere — include:
OpenSecrets.org outside spending database: http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/



Will shortly be updated with 2016 cycle, and totals update on a 48-hour basis.
Breakouts of spending by:
o Type of group: http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?disp=O
o Race: http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?disp=R
o Candidate: http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?disp=C

Via the Sunlight Foundation, which seeks to make government more transparent and accountable
through data, tools, policy and journalism:
 Influence Explorer’s Super PAC tracker: http://realtime.influenceexplorer.com/newestfilings/#?ordering=-filing_number&committee_class=UO&time_range=cycle
o A great resources for quickly finding latest filings
 Political Ad Sleuth http://politicaladsleuth.com/
o Can search by name of candidate, ad-buyer, etc.
o Quick access to otherwise difficult to use FCC data.
 Ad Hawk http://adhawk.sunlightfoundation.com/
o a free mobile app that allows you to identify political ads as they air and immediately
learn about who is behind them.
Via CitizenAudit.org: https://www.citizenaudit.org/
 Great resource for searching 990 tax filings: Uses OCR to make info more searchable

The National Institute on Money in State Politics (NIMSP) compiles campaign finance data and
lobbyist lists in all 50 states and makes it available at www.followthemoney.org.
More recently, NIMSP has collected state lobbying spending data, federal campaign finance data and
local campaign finance data in certain jurisdictions. Work is currently underway to expand into IRS
527 data as well. The Institute’s data is robustly searchable, and downloads or APIs of virtually any
dataset can be created in matter of clicks.
The Institute categorizes people and organizations through economic interest codes, and through its
new “entity resolution” system, the public can view any and all political activities by one individual or
group (such as campaign contributions, lobbying efforts, independent political spending, etc.). The
system also allows for searches by industries as far ranging as agriculture to oil and gas to beer
distributors.
In 2015, the Institute launched the My Legislature tool at http://www.followthemoney.org/legislativeoverview, tying campaign finance and legislative data together. Campaign finance analysis for
legislators or for legislative committees is readily available, along with data about sponsors of all bills
introduced in every state through an API with LegiScan. As with all Institute data, analysis by industry
can be easily run on bill sponsors or specific legislative committees.
The My District tool at http://www.followthemoney.org/ provides campaign finance information for
legislative districts, again with many ways to parse the data.
NIMSP is a recipient of the 2015 MacArthur Award for Creative and Effective Institutions. Look for
new data visualizations as NIMSP continues to enhance its re-launched website.
The Federal Election Commission, FEC.gov, is the original source for almost all data on
contributions given to federal campaign committees, political action committees and national political
parties (the RNC, the DNC, the DCCC, etc.). The political parties and most political action committees
file on the 20th of each month, and the candidates and some PACs will next file on July 15.
The House, the national parties, and the House Republican and Democratic fundraising committees file
electronically; the Senate and the Senate Democratic and Republican fundraising arms still file on
paper. Those paper filings are scanned into the FEC’s website, though often lag behind the due date.
Here are some things to look for in the next campaign filings:
1. Cash on hand. How much does each candidate have to spend? This is the key indicator of how
viable the candidate is.
2. PAC receipts. Political action committees bet on winners. Most of their donations to go
incumbents. If a challenger is getting a lot of PAC money, or if one of the two candidates in an
open-seat race is raking in PAC dough, that is a sign of how strong that candidate is.
3. Party support. Check the party committees' filings to see what races they are playing in.
They're not going to spend much money on behalf of candidates they don't think are viable.
The Sunlight Foundation’s Political Party Time site, online at http://politicalpartytime.org,
publishes invitations to fundraisers that are collected from lobbyists and others. There are upcoming
events as well as an archive going back to 2007. The site publishes the actual invitations in a PDF-like
format, and also digitizes some information so one can search for the host of an event (these are often
lobbyists), the location, the beneficiary and other members in attendance.

