Doing Investigations with Students
IRE 2015
David Armstrong
The Georgia News Lab
Georgia State University
david.armstrong@georgianewslab.org
Collaborative Investigations: Tips for Student-Professional Partnerships
Take the concept of partnership seriously: For collaborations to succeed, all the partners must
contribute in their own way. Each member should have a distinct role and must be committed to
fulfilling it. Think about what each partner brings to the table and how the pieces fit together.
Look for ways the partners can strengthen each other and make the whole greater than the sum of
its parts.
Pick great students: Make sure students are up to the task. Recruit heavily. Talk to instructors,
editors, internship supervisors and student media advisors. Interview extensively. Look for
students who show real passion. Make sure they understand what they’re getting into.
Start early: To help ensure a good start, before the semester begins provide students with
opportunities to become grounded in the concepts of investigative reporting. This can include
background readings, research tasks, and online training.
Make sure students are prepared: Before students take on full-fledged investigations, be sure
they have the skills they need to do the work. Teach them the basics of records access, data
journalism, interviewing, conceptualizing investigations, media law and ethics. Much of the
training can be built around real-world exercises that feed into subsequent investigations.
Plan projects carefully: Particularly in the early stages, select investigations that are likely to
yield stories. Are the records students need reasonably available? Are the costs affordable? Are
the sources they’ll need to talk to relatively accessible? Can the project be completed in the time
available? Set students up to succeed. As they gain more experience, the degree of difficulty
can go up.
Ensure good communication: For partnerships to work, everyone must know what’s going on.
Instructors need to let students know what is expected of them. Students must keep instructors
informed of their progress. Professional partners need to know the status of projects.
Establishing effective, reliable lines of communication is essential.
Engage students’ strengths: Look for ways to incorporate students’ interests and talents in
projects. If students have co-majors in health, law, business or political science, for example,
consider assigning them stories in which that knowledge can be put to use. If there are
photographers, videographers, coders or data jockeys among the students, look for ways to draw
on those skills.

1

Emphasize responsibility: Good students will quickly understand that they are working on real
stories about real people and institutions and that they must take extra care in their reporting.
Still, it is our responsibility to remind them regularly that they must be meticulous about keeping
records and fact checking. Most will take that responsibility seriously. But we are ultimately
responsible for their actions. We must ensure that their reporting meets the highest standards.
Examples of recent collaborations:
“Thousands vanished from official’s campaign report,” AJC, March 22, 2015, A1:
http://TinyURL.com/EdwardsAJC
“Longtime Fulton Co. official corrects campaign filings,” WSB-TV, March 23, 2015:
http://2wsb.tv/1BcjMs0
“DeKalb commissioners spend public money on outside lawyers,” AJC, May 6, 2015, A1:
https://shar.es/1pVfFk

2

