IRE 2015: CONSUMER INVESTIGATIONS
Jim Donovan
3 On Your Side Reporter
KYW-TV/Philadelphia
Donovan@kyw.com
@jimdonovancbs3

Cindy Galli
Investigative Producer
ABC News/New York
Cynthia.K.Galli@abc.com
@mustangalli

Randy Mac
Consumer Investigator
KNBC/Los Angeles
Randy.Mcilwain@nbc.com
@randynbcla

Tips for finding – and keeping – a good consumer story:

Don’t discount your tip line. Chances are you have one, so be sure to check it often. Yes, you’ll sift
through some loony stuff – but many viewers feel that you are their best option – and all it takes is one
great lead.
Go to consumer advocate gatherings. At the risk of now bumping into all of you at the same
conferences … this is actually a great tool for source-building and story ideas. These are people who are
hearing from disgruntled consumers directly and have the power to link you with them. Get them
comfortable with you – investing the time to cultivate the relationships will only help you long-term.
Get to know who runs the big complaint websites. Most sites don’t include the identity or contact
information for a complainant. If you’re friendly with the site administrators, many times they’ll pass
along information to you when asked – or will reach out to a complainant on your behalf.

If you MUST post on a public message board looking for complaints, watch what you write! I’m not a
fan of doing this but yes, sometimes it’s the only way to find victims. Just keep in mind that not only is
your competition likely reading those same message boards, but the company may be monitoring it as
well. Keep it simple so you don’t get yourself into a legal pinch.
Be friends with plaintiff’s attorneys. Some of the best cases (victims) come from them, so familiarize
yourself with those who specialize in various industries (ie. debt collection, mortgage fraud, cruise lines).
Check in with them periodically as you would with other sources. Yes, they have an agenda – but so do
you, right?
Background, background, background! We always remember to background individuals, right? So
don’t forget to put together a full picture of the company you’re investigating. Liens, judgments,
licensing, pending court cases, bankruptcies, SEC filings … they’re all vital in putting together a complete
picture. Plus, you might come up with some interesting documents to help your story. (see below for
tips on backgrounding a business)
Find insiders. Past or present, that is. Websites such as GlassDoor and Jobitorial can give you an idea of
what employees are saying about the company. Also, a Pacer search of the company will turn up
employment complaints (read: disgruntled employee who might spill the beans). Hint on Pacer: look for
“nature-of-suit” code 442.
Don’t forget to look at the regulating agency. Is the office charged with overseeing the business you’re
investigating doing all it can? Has it looked the other way? Is there a cozy relationship that needs
further scrutiny? If you can’t fit it all in one piece, that’s a great follow-up.

When backgrounding a business:

Uh, visit the website? I know, sounds stupid – but sometimes we forget to do it. Look through
EVERYTHING on it – which includes press releases, employee profiles, etc. You never know what you’ll
find.
My favorite starting points include Accurint and SearchSystems.net. They’ll give you a thumbnail sketch
of where the company is located and who the principals are.
Use Edgar. Search the database at the Securities and Exchange Commission for any and all financial
filings on the company.
Pacer, Pacer, Pacer. If you don’t have a subscription, get it today. Lawsuits are great – but you’ll also
have access to bankruptcy filings, which can be very telling.

State and local offices: do a full records search at the county level – not just for lawsuits but for
anything that may be kept at the recorder’s office – liens, judgments, mortgages, etc.
Check with the attorney general in the state where the company is located to see if there are any past or
present investigations. And search the secretary of state’s website to see who incorporated the
business and if all required paperwork is up to date (note: some states, like Florida, give you access to
annual reports in PDF, where you can see changes in company management, etc., over the years).
And check to make sure professional licenses are up to date. Check with state medical boards, state
bars, etc. Some states (ie. California) will include documents from any disciplinary actions taken, so
make sure you cover this base.
Whois can tell you who has registered the company’s website and where, etc.
Search the individuals. If you know the CEO of the company is involved in the scam firsthand, be sure to
do a full workup on him as well – that includes lawsuits he’s named in, etc.

So. Where do I find good sources?
Go where the knowledgeable people gather! (other than at IRE)
A quick Google search turned up just a few (some obscure, yes) examples of consumer expert
conventions/meetings/etc. in the next few months. You can find them in ALL coverage areas and
chances are … you’ll be the only reporter there. (Until now, that is, since you all know the secret):
Consumer Rights Litigation Conference – San Antonio, TX – November 2015:
http://www.nclc.org/conferences-training/consumer-rights-litigation-conference.html
FTC Debt Collection Dialogue – Buffalo, NY – June 2015:
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/events-calendar/2015/06/debt-collection-dialogue-conversationbetween-government
The National Odometer & Title Fraud Enforcement Assn. Conference – Nashville, TN – Aug 2015:
http://notfea.org/events/national-odometer-title-fraud-enforcement-association-conference/
New Jersey Society for Healthcare Advocacy Annual Retreat – June 2015
http://njshca.org/2015/05/08/2015-annual-retreat/
Consumer Product Safety Commission’s Public Calendar (check this for interesting meetings – and
they’re not all in DC!)
http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Newsroom/Public-Calendar/?week=0

