Using Fusion Tables
(with apologies to Daniel Lathrop)

Joe Yerardi, ​
inewsource
IRE 2015
Philadelphia, PA
http://tinyurl.com/ouopnxx

Question: What is Google Fusion Tables?
Answer: Google Fusion Tables is a free
service from Google that offers journalists a
point­and­click interface for quickly and
easily building interactive maps that can be
embedded on almost any webpage, ​
no
coding knowledge required​
(yay!).

Part A
Preparing the data
1. Think ahead: what do I want the data to tell me?
2. In this case, unemployment rate by ZIP code in Philadelphia.
3. We’ve got numbers but we need percentages.
4. So, in Excel, divide the number of unemployed by the total population.
5. And pull down.

6. And then save as .csv.

Part B
Uploading the data
1. In Google Drive, select “New”, “More”, “Google Fusion Tables.”
2. Select “From this computer” and click “Browse.”

3. Make sure your data looks right and hit next a few times.

Part C
Mapping the data
1. Whoops! Looks like we left in the row for the whole city. Right­click on the row
and click the little trash can.

2. OK. Now, how can we turn this spreadsheet into a map? First, we need to specify
which column is our location column. That is, which column has our ZIP codes in it?

3. It’s the “name” column. So, click the down arrow next to it and select “Change.”

4. Change the column name to “ZIP” and the type to “Location.” Click save.

5. You’ll notice that the ZIP column is now highlighted in yellow. This means that Fusion
Tables recognizes that column a location column.

6. Click the red plus button and select “Add map.”

Part D
Styling the map
1. Cool map, bro!

2. But it’s telling us nothing. So, time to style it!

3. Select “Change feature styles…,” then “Marker icon,” then “Buckets.”

4. Choose the number of buckets you want, the column to use (in this case, our
“PctUnemp” column), the ranges and the icons/colors.

5. Click save and admire your map that now actually tells you something.

6. But our popup windows are a mess. :­(

7. But fixing them is easy! :­)

8. Select “Change info window…” and uncheck the columns you don’t want to appear in
your popup window.

9. If you know just a little bit of HTML, you can muck around in the “Custom” window
and create customized popup windows.

10. So you get popup windows that read more naturally.

11. But that unemployment rate is UGLY. So go back to the spreadsheet view, click the
down arrow next to the “PctUnemp” column and select “Change.”

12. And change the format to the percentage format.

13. You can also go to the total population and unemployment number column and
change the format to include the comma.

14. Ah, much better!

Part E
Merging Fusion Tables
1. Points to represent ZIP codes are OK. Getting the actual shapes of the ZIP
codes on the map is even better. So, let’s do it!
2. So, go back to Google Drive.
3. Just like before, select “New”, “More”, “Google Fusion Tables.”
4. Select “From this computer” and click “Browse.”
5. Select the .kml file and hit next a few times.

6. Looks pretty similar, right? The big difference is that “geometry” column on the far
right. That column holds all the geometric data that plots the shapes of the ZIP codes on
the map.

7. Notice that pesky “Philadelphia” row is back at the top? Yeah, delete that again.
8. Now, click on the “Map of geometry” button and check it out.

9. Now, wouldn’t it be great if we could join this map of the ZIP codes with the data on
unemployment by ZIP code? Yes. Yes, it would. Luckily for us, Fusion Tables lets us do
this using a “merge.”
10. Select “File” and then “Merge…”

11. Select the first table we uploaded and hit “Next” and then select the columns from
each table that match. In this case, it’s the “geoid” column. Hit “Next.”

12. Select the columns you want to keep in this new, merged table and hit “Merge.”
Then click “View table.”

13. We’ve got all the data together now, including the geometry. It’s now time to (again)
style the map.

14. Click on “Change feature styles,” “Fill color” and then “Buckets.” Choose the number
of buckets you want, the column to use (in this case, again, our “PctUnemp” column),
the ranges and the icons/colors.

15. Hit “Save” and check it out!

16. We style the popup windows for these shapes in the exact same way we styled the
popup windows for the points.

17. You can also add a legend to your map. Select “Change feature styles…,”
“Automatic legend” and then check the box for “Show polygon fill legend.”

18. And now your readers know exactly what the map is showing.

Part F
Embedding Your Fusion Table on Your
News Organization’s Website
(this one’s easy)
1. Click the blue “Share” button in the upper right part of the screen and under “Who
has access,” click “Change.”

2. Select “Anyone with the link.” This allows you to embed the Fusion Table on your
website.

3. In the upper left part of the screen, click “Tools” and then “Publish.”

4. Select the width and the height you want for your map, copy the html and then paste
it into your CMS.

5. And that’s it!

Questions? Problems? Complaints about
the service?
Get at me.
joe.yerardi@gmail.com
210.363.4865
@JoeYerardi

