Power Couple: Data-driven reporting and people-driven
When transforming data analysis into storytelling, start with one premise: You’re writing a story
with all the dimension of a narrative, including plot, emotion and characters. You can scale back
as you write, but it’s important that you approach your piece with a story in mind -- not a
government report.
Databases, spreadsheets, and statistics are tools. They enable reporters to determine whether
hunches are correct, and measure the breadth of a problem. But journalism is about people.
And statistics, without any discussion of the people they represent, are bones without muscle,
skin, and connective tissue.
Pointers:
There is data that helps pinpoint compelling case studies and there is data that allows the
reporter to see overarching themes.
Let’s look at the latter. When taking on a government agency for failing to protect children, did
the number of deaths rise over time? Did the number of reports about abuse and neglect
increase? Did the changes you found reflect the actions -- or inaction -- of government leaders,
and why? Let that information help you develop your larger storyline while you look for ways to
weave that trend in and out of the story.
The data may be the breadcrumbs that lead to a failed government agency: Lower fines. Fewer
disciplinary actions. Use that data to develop “subplots” within the larger framework.
Look at each set of data as another layer. You are building your story subtly with an arc, with
compelling writing as the key that holds it all together.
You may have a major arc built on the larger, systemic failure, and then the smaller ones that
follow.
Then there are the case examples in data ---- like hidden gems that are easily missed in the
more traditional reporting. These are the building blocks.
Let the data help you find your most compelling examples. First, try to find the leading traits that
best demonstrate why you are choosing these people to highlight. For example, for people who
lost their cash to hyped-up cops during roadside stops, you may find your best examples in four
different markers:
-- driver with no criminal history;
-- no traces of drugs in their car;
-- no (or very minor) driving violations at the time;
-- no search warrant issued.
And lastly, the cops took the money anyway.

In The Miami Herald’s Innocents Lost, the reporters mined government death review cases,
looking for the criteria on which to cull their most compelling cases:
-- How many times had the Department of Children & Families been involved with the deceased
child’s family?
-- What indicators existed to show the family was in trouble, such as drug addiction, mental
illness or domestic violence?
-- Had other children in the family been killed or abused? When all of the problems aligned, the
reporters dug into each case to find out more.

Chances are, once you pull your “bucket” of examples, you will find some rich material among
these people. The data and the criteria for picking your subjects already helped you eliminate
many of the weaker cases.
Now you can dive in to pick out the details.
The main ingredient in the narrative is invariably the characters -- the individual case studies
that help the reporter illustrate the trends that are unfolding.
In Innocents Lost, the Day One lede involved the death of a little girl whose body was stuffed in
a suitcase before being carried to another county to be buried in a shallow grave. The suitcase
was a leopard skin pattern, and all that was visible atop the grave was a pink-and-white shoe.
The details enabled readers to place themselves at the scene of the tragedy.
All along, the reporter and the data specialist are collaborating. At times the data is driving the
reporting and other times, the shoe-leather reporting is driving the data into new areas. Work
together. Get on the same page as much as possible. You will start to anticipate where the
other reporter is going even before they get there.
In some cases, data reporters stumble onto smaller pods of information that become the smaller
layers or sub-themes in the narrative. As conditions worsen, a new kind of victim emerges, one
that had not been visible before.
You find the problems that are actually by-products of the larger, bigger problems.
In Innocents Lost, reporters discovered that more than 80 children with either disabilities or
severe medical conditions were among the casualties of the state's misguided effort to save
money. The numbers were stunning.
The paper decided to wrap those numbers inside a narrative about one little boy, Deondray
"Dooley" Ashe, who was beaten to death by his stepfather after enduring months of savage
abuse. Dooley suffered from several disabilities, and was fed through a tube connected to his
stomach. To tell Dooley's story as part of Innocents Lost, the paper travelled to a women's
prison in the Panhandle, where Dooley's mom sat for a long interview. Though she refused to
take responsibility for her role in the boy's death -- prosecutors said she had protected her
husband, but failed her child -- the story that Dooley's mom told was far more compelling than
the numbers.
The newspaper also wrote extensively about a little boy named Joshua Jenkins, who also was
killed by his stepfather following years of physical abuse. The Herald approached Joshua’s story

as it would any strong news feature. Reporters obtained hundreds of pages of records from the
child welfare agency, police and the court file. Then they searched for the people who knew
Joshua best: the teachers who had complained repeatedly -- and futilely -- that he was being
abused. The teachers who loved and tried to save Joshua proved to be pivotal to telling his
story. They provided the details of his life, not just his death, that made the case a dramatic
story.

Some other pointers:
Do NOT drown your reader in data, If you keep to the premise that you are telling a story, often
in chronology, often with an arc, you will better honor the very data that you are compiling to tell
your story.
To check on the quality of your drafts, especially when you’re reporting reams of data, show
your ongoing piece to a colleague who is not connected. You can get so close to the data that
you begin to internalize it and after awhile, it looks “normal.” Let someone with fresh eyes see it.
There may be a better way to simplify it -- and usually there is.
Data professionals often have the math brain, non-data reporters represent the other half.
Respect each other’s point of view. It can often help you sharpen that wording to crystal clear
and powerful prose. The data person is usually precision oriented, often at the risk of not being
able to tell a compelling story. The pure writer is usually the risk taker. Combined, they can be a
formidable duo.
By Carol Marbin Miller, Michael Sallah, Audra Burch of The Miami Herald and Steven Rich of
The Washington Post

