Tips for Finding Hidden Datasets
IRE 2015, Philadelphia
Sarah Cohen, Brad Heath & Janet Roberts
Moderator: John Hillkirk
Slides
What's the story?
The best data­driven stories come from a tip, a hunch from a beat or a question, not from a
database. A story that begins with one case can often benefit from broadening using public
record databases. Those that begin with statistical analysis done elsewhere might benefit
from the details a public records database will provide. Try to avoid stories that depend on
"the worst", "the most" or another superlative. First, it might not end up being true in the end.
Second, you'll have trouble getting data that is clean enough to be sure.
Find your "compared to what?"
This reporting focuses on what is supposed to happen and how you would know it if it were
going wrong. For example, perhaps no one should die of a hospital­acquired infection, or
everyone should be considered equally for a contract. This can come from a lot of places:
legislation, regulations implementing laws, standards published by professional associations
or peer groups, or just what your readers consider fair play.
Once you know the standard, you can begin looking for the data you need to measure it.
Understand the information flows
How do government officials get information on your topic? If there is no government
involvement, you have no right to any records. You might be able to get some, but your
options are limited to what you can get voluntarily or by monitoring online sources.
Try to get interviews with some agency employees who work on the ground floor as
inspectors, agents, counselors, etc. These interviews are almost always accompanied by PR
folks, but that's ok ­­ you are just asking how they do their jobs. You want them to walk you
through a typical case from beginning to end, including any form they fill out or receive, any
computer screen they enter data into, any lookups they do, etc. Understanding this will help
you understand the data on the other end.

Where are the data and how can you get them?

If you’re lucky, good reporting might point you to data that already look like data:
spreadsheets, databases, etc. If you’re especially lucky, you’ll actually be able to get the data,
too. If not, consider some alternatives for getting the data you need:
● Open records requests. If you have time, this can produce data. But do your
homework up front. Know ​exactly​ what you’re asking for. And know the parts the
government won’t want to give up. Do you need those? Can they withhold them?
● Find somebody else who has the data already.
● Scrape the data from a government website.
● Look for things that don’t look like data. Maybe the answers are locked in documents,
news clippings, or something else. Pull enough together and you have data.
● Build your own data.
Don't be afraid to vacuum
You probably won't use most of it, but you never know where document and data tips will lead
you. Try to get copies of activists' hard drives, scrape press releases and other documents
put out by the advocates, FOIA state, local and federal databases, and scrape court dockets
in localities affected by the topic. You don't have to analyze it all, but often one set of data
suggests another, and each might have a different level of detail. The answer to your puzzle
might be spread across multiple data sets. If you're working on a national or international
story, you can pick and choose your places based on where you can get records.
Who is harmed?
Some stories have obvious victims but you need to focus on the government agencies that
are responsible rather than just the sad stories. Others are less clear. In money and politics
in particular make sure you can find harm.
Keep the payoff in mind
At each stage, consider the difficulty of what you are trying to do versus its impact. Some of
the most difficult data reporting leads to very little, either in terms of elevating the story or in
terms of the importance of the story overall. Jump on easy analyses and records that have
high impact, and avoid the difficult ones that will likely get cut. Make sure you have buy­in for
very difficult work, such as creating your own data, or coding thousands of documents, based
on what you might get out of the effort.
Sarah Cohen
Janet Roberts
Brad Heath
John Hillkirk

sarah.cohen@nytimes.com
janet.roberts@thomsonreuters.com
bheath@usatoday.com
jhillkirk@usatoday.com

@sarahnyt
@jersey_janet
@bradheath
@johnhillkirk

