Ten suggestions for writing
memorable investigative stories
(even with data)
By Bill Dedman, Newsday, bill@PowerReporting.com, @BillDedman, #IRE15

SLIDE 1: COVER PAGE

Learning to drive a stick
Trying to write an engaging investigative story, seems to me like learning to drive a stick shift
and you're at a stop sign going up a hill, and another car has pulled right up behind you. More
bad things can happen than good. It's a balance between aggressiveness with the gas, and
caution on the clutch and brake. Stalling out the car is how you learn. Explaining to someone
else what to do is not easy. It's a matter of feel, and takes practice. Although we do get better at
it, we always feel like we have insufficient tools: three pedals and only two feet.
It's not all in crafting a lede and finding a character and trying to hide some of the complexity of
the data in the nerd box. The way you plan the reporting, the way you conceive of your mission,
can help you write stronger and more memorable investigative stories, even with data.

The goal
Let's assume that your goal is to tell your readers / viewers / listeners / users -- I'll call them
readers -- about something important.
You don't want a he-said-she-said story. You have data. You have records. You have talked to
all the right people. You've been to see what you're writing about.
You want to tell a story, so it grabs and holds the readers' attention.
You want to tell it with authority, so they believe it.
You want to tell it with verve, so they remember it.
Often our best work, which you see here on the reprint table at IRE, misses an opportunity for
variety. Whether stories have a straight lead or an anecdotal lead -- which is about the only
variation allowed for in that interminable newsroom debate -- you've noticed that they mostly
sound the same. In musical terms, they almost all have the same characteristics: the same pitch
(high or low), the same dynamics (loud or soft), the same tempo (fast or slow), the same
rhythm, and the same timbre or voice.
One undervalued element of getting and holding attention is being unique.
While we need unique stories, in a noisy media environment with shrinking revenues, we've
gone in the opposite direction, making our stories more of the same by chasing the clicks from
aggregation, by cutting stories down to bite size.

And no wonder: The investigative story goes through a team of reporters, layers of editors,
lawyers.
Sure, listen to your editors. We need them desperately. And care about the readers, in every
moment.
But don't try to make your stories sound like what you think an investigative story should sound
like. Don't try to sound like another reporter. Sure, copy models of meticulous reporting, but not
their voice.
Back in 1988, David Letterman was at a restaurant when a young comedian asked him for
advice on starting his own TV show.
The younger comedian was named Seinfeld.
SLIDE 2: LETTERMAN
"Just make sure, if you fail, you did what you wanted to do."

Eight suggestions
Now, with that premise in mind -- be yourself -- our job this afternoon is to tell you how you
should do it exactly the way we do.
No, I'll offer eight suggestions for telling stories that stand out, while staying true to journalism
values.
1. Cover the field.
2. Rebut the rebuttals.
3. Make your graphics as you go.
4. Start with Mad Libs.
5. Be flexible in format.
6. Find a singular voice.
7. Say what you don't know.
8. Say what you're not saying.

1. Cover the field completely
SLIDE 3: Cover the field, title
There was a horrible event just last night at Fenway Park in Boston. True story.
SLIDE 4: Boston headline

You may have heard about it. A woman in the stands was struck by a baseball bat. The player
hit the ball, the bat shattered, and a sharp piece of wood struck this woman in the head. A
policemen trying to shield a child from seeing the blood everywhere. Paramedics said her
injuries were life-threatening. We're waiting to hear how she is.
Her seat was close to the dugout, apparently in the second row, an area not protected by a net.
Foul balls are the usual concern, but bats, too.
This is an issue I've investigated at Fenway, so after last night's event I thought I'd tell you
about the unusual process on that story, as an example of turning data into something unusual.
SLIDE 5: Globe headline
I was at the Boston Globe, where we felt a special responsibility to cover this story thoroughly.
It was 2003, and the new owners of the Boston Red Sox included the then-part-owners of the
Boston Globe, The New York Times Company. Today the ties are even closer: The principal
owner of the Red Sox, John Henry, owns the Boston Globe.
The new ownership group in 2003 had just put new seats at Fenway, moving fans closer to
home plate, not protected by a net. Two new rows of seats on the field, at $275 a seat, sold out
every year. People want to be close, and the intimacy of being close in the old ballparks like
Fenway, is what the newer ballparks like Philadelphia's are trying to emulate.
How close is the closest seat? Here's the lede:
SLIDES 6-9: LEDE
If you're lucky enough to sit in the closest seat to the action at this afternoon's opener at
Fenway Park, when Pedro Martinez throws the first pitch to Baltimore's Jerry Hairston,
you're sitting 53 feet 11 inches from the plate.
That is, you're a couple of steps closer to the batter than Martinez is.

No net obscures your view, because most of the new seats on the field are not behind the
backstop. And no net protects you if Hairston swings late on a Martinez fastball and fouls
one in your direction. With the ball coming at you at about 100 miles per hour, you have
barely one-third of a second to duck -- if you don't take time to put down your hot dog
and cellphone.

SLIDE 10: Cover the field, title
One wacky part of this story:
I went out with volunteers to measure ballparks where we were allowed, 12 of the 30 ballparks.
We found that Fenway has the most unprotected seats within 90 feet of home plate -- same
distance as first base -- than any of the dozen parks. And Fenway had the shortest backstop or
net when measured from end to end. And Fenway had the shortest distance from home to the
nearest unprotected seat.
Finding data wherever we can get it. Volunteers? Yes, math teachers. Working with the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, we worked out a procedure at Fenway, then
around the country we got press credentials for teachers and sent them to Dodger Stadium and
other parks. They went in before the games, during batting practice when the seats were empty,
we worked out how to locate points in the stands 90 feet from home plate.
You want to know how we did that. The foul lines meet at a right angle. You're trying to make a
circle 90 feet around home plate. You know two points on that circle: first base and third base.
And because the base lines meet at home plate at a right angle, you can extend by sight the base
lines through home plate and into the stands. With a protractor you can find the two points
where those bases would be if you turned the field around. From those two points, you can sight
to the ends of the backstop or net, or use string to mark it off, and volunteers can count exactly
how many seats are within 90 feet of home plate, and how many of those are protected by the
net.
Are you having a 6th-grade flashback?
What else did we do?
-- We asked our online readers to help. "Have you ever been hit by a foul ball at
Fenway?" We got hundreds of good answers, talked with the people, and had 80 publishable
anecdotes with real names and verified email addresses already posted online at the moment the
story went up. Including the woman who lost an eye at the park while she was trying to buy a
hotdog.

-- I learned the law on liability, checked the court cases, and the history. Only one major
league fan has died from a foul ball, a boy at Dodger Stadium. Pitchers have lost an eye, and
they're standing 60 feet away, involved in the game, with no one in their way, and holding a
glove. We got the recent context, including a young girl killed at a hockey game from a puck
that went over the glass. And other baseball teams were adding fences to protect players in the
dugout, but not always protecting the fans next to the dugouts.
-- I interviewed the team's architect. These new seats added enough revenue to pay an allstar player. The architect said, "Why would we extend the net?" She proposed a concept called
"ducakability," suggesting that fans are safe if they keep an eye on the game and use common
sense.
-- I interviewed the medical guys at Fenway, including the EMT for 22 seasons who said
he never lets his family sit close. He said being aware is no protection, because the people who
are severely injured, usually a broken ocular bone
-- And I went to a game, which allowed me to get some of the complexity and humor of
the situation. I waited until someone got hit by a foul ball. It happens several times per game.
The VCR was on at home, so I could see who hit the ball. I interviewed the woman at the
medical station. Then, when she went to the hospital, I went and sat in her seat. A media
credential is a wonderful thing. And interviewed others sitting near her.
That was my favorite part, an attempt to pull these threads together.
SLIDES 11-13: KICKER
"She was lucky she didn't get caught flush. It would have killed her," said Paula
Chepes of Lynn, who was sitting two seats away.
"We were watching. We saw it coming. We all ducked at the last second, but there's
no way she could get out of the way. It was milliseconds. Milliseconds."
These seats are 90 feet from home, in the last row before the walkway that separates
the lower seats from the grandstand.
So, Paula, would you like to switch seats? That gentleman just across the aisle is also
90 feet from home plate, but he's protected by the net.
"No! I don't want to sit behind the net!"
And if you had the $250, how would you like to sit down in the front row -- 53 feet
11 inches from home plate?
"Oooh! How do you get one of those?"

Cover the story completely. Find any way to get the information. Arcane and troublesome
methods are the best, because they ensure you won't run into other reporters. Always be
thinking about how to tell it. Involve the readers. And rebut the rebuttals.

2. Rebut the rebuttals
SLIDE 14: Rebut the rebuttals, title
That interview with the medical man at Fenway is an example of another fundamental:
rebutting the rebuttals, of doing the work to respond to the BS that officials sometimes give you
as explanations. Just because the club won't be sued doesn't mean there's no story. Just because
deaths are unusual doesn't mean there's no story. Say those things, early in the story, to
inoculate the reader's kneejerk reactions, and then tell them stuff they don't know.
SLIDE 15: Newsday Insiders photos
Here's another example from colleagues at Newsday, wonderful work by Sandra Peddie and
Will Van Sant and the investigative team in a series called "The Insiders," on judges handing
out lucrative work to politically connected attorneys. Based on court records and data. The
characters in this paragraph are a judge and one of the attorneys. The reporters talked with the
lawyer.
SLIDES 16-19: Insiders paragraph
In an interview with Newsday, Schlesinger said Whelan appointed him because the
plaintiff had requested him. When told the court file indicated the plaintiff had asked for
Hoffman, Schlesinger said Hoffman was not on the state’s approved receiver list. When
told that Hoffman is on the approved list, Schlesinger said Hoffman was not licensed to

practice law in New York. When told that Hoffman is licensed in New York, Schlesinger
said he did not know why Whelan named him receiver.
Every lawyer on Long Island will read that paragraph out loud to someone. It's like watching
the Monty Python scene with the Black Knight losing his limbs: "It's only a flesh wound!" And
the lawyers will remember Sandra and Will, and call them with tips.
http://data.newsday.com/projects/long-island/investigative-series-insiders/

3. Make your graphics as you go
SLIDE 20: Make your graphics, title
Our task is not to ask people for comment. Our task is to ask, how does it work?
One of my favorite interviewing techniques is to take with me a big sheet of paper. You know,
like a sheet from a flip chart. In the interview, give the person a sharpie. How is fire response
time calculated? What is the Pentagon doing to identify these remains in a mass grave from
World War II?
SLIDES 21-23: MONA LISA BY NUMBERS
Start drawing out the parts you know, and get them to draw what doesn't work the way it
should, what isn't funded.
Then clean that up and take your draft of the graphic to the next interview.

4. Start with Mad Libs
One help to me is to write the story in advance. I don't mean to prejudge the conclusions. I don't
mean to cut off contrary information or serendipity.
I do mean this: As you're writing SQL queries, try to write the lede of the story you think you
will have. As you're gathering public records, write the bullet points you think you're moving
toward.
SLIDE 24: Mad Libs
Leave blanks for the figures, like a Mad Libs puzzle.
By envisioning the story up front, you realize that you need additional data, more reporting.
SLIDE 25: TWO NEIGHBORHOODS, COLOR OF MONEY
Maybe you need Census data, maybe figures from the next county over, maybe more years of
data. You might see that it's not powerful to compare the best and worst schools or
neighborhoods, the ones at the top and bottom of your spreadsheet. Their differences are not
surprising. Maybe you look at matched pairs, schools which have many attributes in common
but different outcomes. Drafting those sentences will tell you what reporting you need.
SLIDE 26: STEAK KNIVES

Here's an example from a different context, a little story about steak knives being handed out by
restaurants, after security checkpoints, at New York's Kennedy Airport, where you can see the
World Trade Center from the window. We did the story for print and online and for TV.
Here's the standup. Very simple.
SLIDES 27-28: STAND-UP
"On our way into Kennedy Airport, the TSA took away my pocketknife with a two-inch blade
like this one. And then the restaurant gave me a knife with a five-inch blade."
Of course, we had planned, bringing two identical pocketknives to the airport.
Three hours after our story appeared on TV and online, before it was in print, the New York
airports changed their policy, pulling the steak knives out of the restaurants.
I think of this planning as storyboarding, or as a Polaroid photo that comes into focus. And in
this age of Instagram and square photos, Polaroids are cool again.

5. Be flexible in format
One way your story can stand out is by being unique in format.
SLIDE 29: Be flexible, title
Even a slideshow. We may all think that slideshows are properly derided as annoying.
SLIDES 30-35: Empty Mansions, ends with cash photo
At NBCNews.com (formerly msnbc.com) I stumbled onto a little mystery about a reclusive
heiress to a copper fortune named Huguette Clark who lived in a hospital for 20 years, and
questions about the men managing her $300 million fortune. It started with a single thread, a
real estate listing for a $25 million home on 52 acres. I looked up the owner's name and didn't
recognize it. The next piece came from the zoning records, which said the home had been
unoccupied for six decades. I drove over to see this house, and the caretaker said that Mrs.
Clark was a wonderful employer, that he'd been there 20 years and had never met her.
I was planning to do a traditional feature for our website, probably about 3,000 words, a story of
scandal and political corruption, but was enjoying collecting photos of the woman at the heart
of our mystery. I showed those photos to my daughters, to my mother. At our weekly story
meeting, a photographer said, you'll never get all those photos on one story page. Why don't you
just write it as a slideshow? Not put a slideshow on the story. Make the slideshow the story.

He was right. So we tweaked the CMS to allow larger fonts for the captions -- over the
objections of the photo editor -- and there we had a 47-photo narrative with 2,788 words. It was
told in 60-word chunks.
The slideshow passed 80 million page views within a week. We got emails from 2,000 readers.
The average time on the show was 13 minutes.
The story got stranger, morphing into a traditional two-part investigative series.
Then a running competitive story as the criminal investigation and the fight over the money
began. Eventually we passed 110 million page views and were on the TODAY show 9 times.
SLIDE 36: BOOK COVER
Now it's a book, a narrative nonfiction biography, an improbable book about a woman who
hadn't been out of a hospital room in 20 years, a book based largely on public records: more
than 20,000 pages of nurses' notes, more than 20,000 pages of correspondence, much of it in
French.
-- And it's headed to Hollywood.
SLIDE 37: CRACKER JACK
I'm not too proud to write a slideshow. One of my goals is to have a story someday published on
the little books that are toy surprises in a box of Cracker Jack.
http://nbcnews.com/clark/

http://emptymansionsbook.com/

6. Find a singular voice for each story
Slide 38: Find a voice, title
Humans crave narrative. Where do you get the stories you love? For many of us, they come
from books and movies and TV. Unbroken. The Hunger Games. Mad Men.
Fiction or non-fiction, they have setting and character and plot. They have mystery, uncertainty,
discovery.
Mostly what they have is a unique voice. You can't watch an episode of Game of Thrones and
be confused, thinking perhaps it's Inside Amy Schumer.
Writer and teacher William Zinsser, who died last month -- you know him from his book "On
Writing Well" -- said:
SLIDE 39: Zinsser quote
"All writing to me is a journey. It's saying to the reader, 'Come along with me; I'll take
you on a voyage.' "
-- William Zinsser, 2011 interview, Poynter Institute
http://www.poynter.org/how-tos/writing/112132/william-zinssers-5-tips-for-becoming-abetter-writer/
You see, not just a journey, but a journey with a guide. A voice. Why yield the field to
television and film and books? Can we provide narrative, even if our stories come from public
records?

I also mean a unified voice, one voice throughout the piece. How many of you read your stories
out loud? Of course, broadcasters do. Even on a group effort, even working in print or online,
having one reporter read it out loud, after all the copying and pasting, can catch errors and help
the story have a consistent voice.

7. Say what you don't know
SLIDE 40: Say what you don't know, title
Our most ambitious stories are complex, and though I understand why we strive for clarity and
simplicity in the storytelling, it's valuable to admit to the reader that these stories are complex,
that there remains information we don't have.
If you think of information on a spectrum of verification, from certainty to uncertainty, how
does it lay out:
SLIDE 41: SPECTRUM OF VERIFICATION
1. We know this part for sure, and here's how we know it.
2. We have some info from one source but silence from others.
3. This part is disputed, with contradictory sources.
4. We have no information about these parts.
Every story has important information we don't know yet.
A reader should be able to tell where important questions they have about a story sit on that
spectrum, and storytelling is richer when we acknowledge the limits of our information.

8. Say what you're not saying.
SLIDE 42: Say what you're not saying, title
It makes a story stronger, not weaker, to admit its limits. That doesn't mean you have to yield to
those who will say, oh, if your story has limits then it means nothing.
SLIDE 43: Atlanta quote
From The Atlanta Journal-Constitution in 1989:
Loan statistics do not by themselves prove discrimination, since they reveal nothing about
the debt burdens or credit histories of applicants. But Home Loan Bank Board regulations
say statistical disparities should be examined for clues to illegal discrimination.
"On the face of it, it looks like what you have there is a great big red flag," said Jerauld C.
Kluckman, director of compliance programs for the Bank Board.
Why don't we say what we're not saying? I have two hunches:
We're taught to write around what we don't know. If we don't know if it happened in Harrisburg
or in Philadelphia, say Pennsylvania.
And we're taught to feign omniscience. If you say what you don't know, the editor may insist
you go back out and find out. It might give an edge to the competition or to critics of your story.
But if you think more like an engineer -- how does it work -- then you're obliged to explain
what you know and what you don't know.

Summary
1.Cover the field. Leave no openings for any other reporter.
2. "Just a flesh wound!": Rebut the rebuttals.
3. A big sheet of paper: Make your graphics as you report.
4. Start with Mad Libs: Sketch out your sentences.
5. Not too proud: Be flexible in format.
6. "Come along with me": Find a singular voice for each story.
7. The spectrum of verification: Say what you don't know.
8. We didn't mean: Say what you're not saying.
--Bill Dedman, bill@PowerReporting.com, @BillDedman, #IRE15

