Tell me a (data) story
IRE 2015
T. Christian Miller, ProPublica (@txtianmiller)
Dylan Purcell, The Philadelphia Inquirer (@dylancpurcell)
Bill Dedman, Newsday (@billdedman)
IRE 2015

Reporting and writing the data story
● The Number: Strive to focus the story on a single, allimportant number.
● Long Live the Nerd Box! Be transparent: describe somewhere
the sources of your data and how you analyzed them.
● Digitize: Collect all your information – data, notes, PDFs – in
digital format for analysis
● The Unicorn Join: Think creatively about combining data sets
to produce really startling insights.

“Tens of thousands of civilian contract
workers from poverty-stricken
countries [were] hired to support the
U.S. war effort in Iraq and Afghanistan.
In case of injury or death, they are
supposed to be covered by workers'
compensation insurance financed by
American taxpayers. But the program
has failed to deliver medical care and
other benefits to many foreign workers
and their survivors, a Los Angeles
Times-ProPublica investigation found.”

Reporting and writing the data story
“In the end, Firestone as a corporation, and as a collection of
men, made a deliberate decision to cooperate with a man whose
forces were publicly denounced as violent, vicious and rapacious
by the U.S. government and human rights groups.
Official data, painstakingly compiled years later by Liberia’s
Truth and Reconciliation Commission from the testimony of
thousands of Liberians, attempted to quantify the human
damage. By December 1990, Taylor’s forces alone had
committed nearly 40,000 human rights violations. The toll

Reporting and writing the data story
And in case you didn’t think that there’s always data, it came
from Liberia’s Truth and Reconciliation’s spreadsheet of
atrocities, which included such delightful columns as Killing,
Looting, Rape, Cannibalism and “Ingesting Taboo Item”

Be a listener
● To avoid fishing expeditions have clear goals.
Document steps you’ve already taken. Be realistic
about the time you can invest.
● Listening also means talking to people in my travels to
find new data opportunities.
● While gathering string for a drunk driving project a
lawyer told us about a state loophole for repeat
offenders that was just an accepted flaw.
● We knew it could be quantified using a database of
court records.

Meet Joseph Lawless, a successful lawyer who
appeared on CNN many times as a legal
commentator. He wrote a popular legal book,
and he defended drunk drivers.

Make the numbers personal
● Lawless also admitted in court that he was an alcoholic
since college.
● Our data analysis produced impressive stats but we
wanted to give a face to this harmful loophole.
● Lawless’ addiction caught up to him when he crashed
his Mercedes-Benz while three times over the legal limit
for alcohol.
● In Pennsylvania repeat drunk drivers can get a year in
jail for each conviction.
● That’s not what happened to Lawless.

Make the numbers personal
Here’s what we wrote about him:
That was one of five times in less than a year that he
was popped for drunken driving… In each of the five
cases, he was able to plead guilty to being only a firsttime offender. As a result, he never got more than 10
days in jail for any of his convictions.

Lawless was a first-time offender five times.

Make the numbers personal
● The loophole meant his open cases were bundled
together and judges had to treat each as a first-time
conviction.
● To define the universe of people getting these breaks
meant pulling several years of court data. The
programming catch was that drivers had to pile up
several DUI arrests in a short span and have them
disposed on one date.
● The data produced so many matches we had to limit
our study to people with 3 or more DUI convictions from
local counties. That was still 250 cases.

It’s always worse in Philadelphia
Find your Philadelphia - that reporter’s dream.

It’s always worse in Philadelphia
● The reporting on the statewide issue made us realize
Philadelphia was far more lenient on repeat drunk
drivers. And it wasn’t using ‘ignition interlock’ devices
that install into cars to prevent drivers from running the
engine.
● We also found almost half the people in Philadelphia
were beating their cases despite the scientific evidence
of blood alcohol testing.
● The loophole was a Pennsylvania problem but it led us
to other driving enforcement failures by the city.

Lawless never injured or killed anyone. His lawyer said he was getting treatment, using
a bicycle, and focused on an acting career.
After our story the state closed the loophole, crediting our work.

Throw nothing away: analysis you can’t
fit in print might produce another story
● Our work on DUI’s led us to write a story about Philadelphia’s backlog of
818,000 outstanding warrants for moving violations and the mayhem of
reckless drivers.
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/special_packages/inquirer/Chaos_on_the_street.html

● We ran a story on students being relocated by school closures. It was
based on data the district created to score the condition of each building.
That led to a second story on unhealthy conditions inside many city
schools. http://articles.philly.com/2013-02-11/news/37022149_1_danielle-floyd-shift-studentsduckrey-elementary
http://articles.philly.com/2013-11-11/news/43889665_1_health-hazards-philadelphia-schooldistrict-school-buildings

Throw nothing away: analysis you can’t
fit in print might produce another story
● For a story on police shootings in 2013 we analyzed financial settlements.
That became the starting point for our latest work on police shootings.
When we studied the largest payouts by the city for shootings there were
obvious systemic problems. http://articles.philly.com/2013-0603/news/39692996_1_police-shooting-shields-wounded-man

