Investigative Reporters and Editors 2015 National Conference

Investigating Medical Products
Jon Kamp, The Wall Street Journal
617-654-6728 jon.kamp@wsj.com
@jon_kamp
The FDA clears thousands of new medical devices each year, and sometimes unforeseen problems crop
up long after doctors start using them. Here are some basic tips for how you can start digging for details.

How was it approved?





Almost all medical devices in the U.S. are cleared through a system called 510(k), where the
standard is showing that they are “substantially equivalent” to something already on the market.
The devices are logged in the FDA’s 510(k) database:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfpmn/pmn.cfm
Technically, in FDA parlance, these devices are “cleared” and not “approved.” The information
online should tell you a little about the product, when it was cleared and who sent in the
paperwork.
The small minority of devices that get a more involved review, known as PMA, are here:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfpma/pma.cfm

Is there medical evidence behind this device, or studies examining its performance?







Search with key words on the government’s “pubmed” site, which is a huge repository of studies:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
There is a higher likelihood devices approved through the PMA process were supported by a
company-sponsored clinical trial to test whether they are safe and effective. But interested
researchers and doctors can investigate anything they want, and you can often find the results in
pubmed.
Tip: most often you’ll only get the abstract (a truncated version noting key results), but you want
the whole thing, plus footnotes. Almost every medical journal is happy to share with the media.
You can also look up the author (doctors with teaching positions have easily found emails) and
get the study from them.
Read those footnotes! Find the studies they reference, then read the footnotes in those. Medicine
tends to learn incrementally as researchers build on each other’s work.

Which evidence matters?




Careful judgment is key here, and the more experts you find who can explain the science in plain
English, the better. Remember to ask for disclosures to see whether they have relationships with
companies or products at issue. Ask them who they'd talk to if they wanted to learn more.
Studies come in many forms, from randomized, controlled versions designed to carefully
determine if a drug works (or not), to an analysis of raw insurance records to sniff out trends.
Talk to experts about the strengths, and weaknesses, in each type of study.
When researchers look for new information in old data—probing, say, hospital records to see
whether a medical product has an unexpectedly high failure rate—there is a potential for certain
issues to muddy their findings. Maybe they’re looking at just one hospital, and that hospital

happens to get referrals of particularly challenging patients. Critics will pounce on these
limitations, and good researchers will note them as well.
Has the device had problems?


Hospitals (aka “user facilities”) and medical-device companies are required to report serious
device problems to the FDA, once they become aware of them. The FDA collates these reports in
a system called “Maude,” which you can search here:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfmaude/search.cfm.The reports are often
messy, unspecific and unverified - everyday citizens can submit them - but you can get a feel for
what sort of issues cropped up in the field.

Did anyone see this coming?


Pubmed and Maude can offer clues. And if the device was approved through the PMA process,
and represented something relatively new, there is a decent chance it was reviewed for the FDA
before an outside panel of experts. The FDA and companies put together lengthy documents for
these panels, the panelists often ask lots of questions, and you can sometimes find transcripts on
the FDA’s website.

Who can tell me more about this product, how it came about and how it was approved?





Those 510(k) documents often have names and contact details. Find the people who submitted
them. Maybe they left the company, are consulting now and are willing to talk. The same goes for
the FDA reviewers.
The U.S patent database is another great resource: http://patft.uspto.gov/netahtml/PTO/searchadv.htm. Chances are somebody filed one or more patents on this device, or something like it, and
the names of the inventors are listed. The patents often offer lengthy explanations of how the
product was intended to work and what problem it was supposed to solve.
Also, try doctors in another field. Individual medical fields can be isolated from each other. Ask
some general surgeons, or even medical ethicists, if a particular approach or a rate of problems
seems appropriate. Expose long-held ideas to well-informed outsiders.

FOIA?





You can ask the FDA for any and all documents concerning the application and regulatory
discussions behind the product you’re interested in. The FOIA may take a long time (a year or
more) to be answered, and the parts you want to see - parts where the agency asked companies
questions, for example - may be heavily redacted.
But not all FOIA responses are the same, and there is a chance somebody else once got the same
documents without all the black ink. You can check through third parties that submit FOIA’s
anonymously for journalists, lawyers, companies, etc. Sometimes they sell the old ones.
FOI Services, at http://www.foiservices.com/, has a sizable collection of previously requested
FDA material.

