1

The other half of the story: How reporters can use data to identify 'positive deviants'
and add fresh angles to investigative stories
IRE panel Friday 9-10 a.m.
What is a solutions story?
It’s story that looks at a response to a problem, with the same degree of rigor we use to
examine the problem itself.
Solutions stories aren’t theoretical, or fluff, or opinion, or “good news.”
A solutions story:





Is about a response to a problem and how it happened
Provides available evidence of results, looking at effectiveness — not just intentions
Produces insights that can help others respond, too — not just inspiration
Discusses limitations and avoids reading like a puff piece

Get examples, tools, tips etc. on solutions reporting at www.solutionsjournalism.org
What is a positive deviant?
It’s a place, institution or person getting better results with similar resources.
Example: You’re investigating high rates of c-sections at local hospitals and how these are
done mainly for the convenience and profit of doctors. You’ll use data to find hospitals with
the highest rates of c-sections.
But your story is stronger if you also include a hospital with similar (or fewer) resources
and the lowest rates of c-sections (or near the lowest), and look at what that hospital did
differently.
Do your due diligence on whether the data is trustworthy — same as you would do for a
traditional investigation.
Focus on what the evidence says about results. If you only look at good intentions, you end
up with a hero-worship story — bad journalism.
Like all good data-driven stories, positive-deviant stories should have characters, narrative
and tension.
Use strong characters, but show the characters in action — trying something, failing, trying
again, running into obstacles etc. The real hero of a solutions story is the work.
A chronological narrative often works.

2
The tension in a positive-deviant solutions story is “this institution did something others
have not. How?” These stories are howdunnits.

WHY SHOULD I CONSIDER USING A SOLUTIONS STORY IN AN INVESTIGATION?
Including a solutions story in your investigative series, or using a solutions frame for
an investigative story can:
Sharpen the Story & Take Away Excuses
Showing someone getting it right takes away the excuse of those who are not.
It provides a model for change. You can refer to it as one example of numerous possible
models.
Inject Missing Information into the Conversation
Leaving out responses to problems omits critical information society requires in order to
change.
Every database has its negative outlier, which is what we usually focus on. But including the
positive outlier — and how it got that way — offers a fuller picture. It’s telling the whole
story.
Provide entry points for audience engagement
A solutions frame can be a way to hold groups to account for not doing better when there
are clear possibilities to improve: If you find a group or place that is getting better results
against a serious problem, the question becomes: Why aren’t others improving, too?
Investigative stories that show how it’s possible to do better against a problem are more
shareable. They can create outrage and a desire to spread knowledge about potential
solutions.
2008 AP study on how young adults consume news found that widespread “news fatigue”
brought many of the participants to a learned helplessness response and the desire to tune
out. When people believe something can be done about a problem — even something small
— they tune back in.
HOW CAN I USE A SOLUTIONS STORY IN AN INVESTIGATION?
As part of a series: Do the solutions story or stories as fully and rigorously reported as the
problem stories. Choose a place or institution that is similar to the one you’re exposing but
is getting better results. Show how. Ask: What can be learned?
Example: 2013 Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel “Deadly Delays” investigation into how delays in
getting blood test results for newborns resulted in needless deaths.
The Journal-Sentinel requested records from 50 states and received records from more
than half. Arizona was the worst performer and a major focus of the series. But another
focus was how Iowa had vastly improved its practices since 2005, becoming one of the two
states that met the deadline 99 percent of the time.

3

As a frame for a story: Tell the story of malfeasance through the narrative of a place that is
doing things right. Show the bad behaviors by showing how the positive deviant fought
against them. Include every bit of your investigation, just with a different frame.
Example: New York Times magazine 2001 investigation into how the pharmaceutical
industry, with the backing of the Clinton administration, used political pressure to force
poor countries not to make or buy generic AIDS drugs.
Traditional investigative narrative: Set story in one of the many, many countries that fell
under this pressure, resulting in widespread death from what at that point was a chronic
disease in wealthier countries.
Solutions-framed investigative narrative: set story in the one country that was fending off
that pressure to make generics and provide them for free to all its people, Brazil. Show
malfeasance and how Brazil overcame it. As part of the story, show how other nations
were not able to overcome it.
David Bornstein
Solutions Journalism Network
New York Times Fixes column
david@solutionsjournalism.org
@soljourno
@dnborstein
Tina Rosenberg
Solutions Journalism Network
New York Times Fixes column
tina@solutionsjournalism.org
@soljourno
@tirosenberg
Claudia Rowe
Seattle Times Ed Lab
crowe@seattletimes.org
@RoweReport
Greg Borowski
AME for projects and investigations, Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel
Greg.borowski@jrn.com
@gregjborowski

