MANAGING THE MULTI-NEWSROOM PROJECT
IRE TIP SHEET
6/5/2015

PUT YOUR HUMILITY ON THE TABLE
 You can’t keep asking “I know what they are getting out of this – but
what are we?” Collaborations work when everyone understands the
value of the partners – regardless of size or resources.
 If you’re the national outlet leading or coordinating the investigation,
don’t act like you’re sharing data and documents “downstream.” That’s
not what’s happening here.
 If you’re doing it right, your partners at the local or regional level or
your national partner is joining in the reporting. Done well, those
collaborators will unearth information that will become part of your
broader investigation and improve the story you would have done on
your own.
 If you’re collaborating across platforms, know at least a little about the
other platform. If you mostly work in newspapers, but now need to
partner with TV, radio or online audio, know a little about what your
broadcast partners need, how they operate. Here’s one practical
example: if you’ve not written a broadcast script, learn how. Tip: it’ll
make you a better writer on every platform. More importantly, it’ll help
you work better with broadcasters to understand what the ingredients
are in a good TV watchdog package. Plus, your interest in learning will
bring your budding team together.

PICK YOUR STORIES WISELY
 Whether you are working across the US or across the globe, the best
multi-newsroom projects cross-border have broad appeal appeal and
rich local angles. Many investigative reporters around the world – and,
increasingly, their editors – love to be part of something bigger than
themselves and their news cycle. But they need the local news peg.

FIND LIKE-MINDED PARTNERS
 You have to work with news outlets that share your values and that you
trust. Multi-newsroom collaborations can quickly become nightmares if
they’re not put together carefully.
 Pick your partners wisely, focusing not just on their editorial skills but
also on their personalities. Avoid massive-ego and high-maintenance
types – the work you are doing is already hard enough.
ESTABLISH CLEARLY DEFINED ROLES AND CEDE CONTROL
 Each partner needs the freedom to do their own work and adopt their
approaches for their medium and audience.
 Workflow variables aside, there are logistical, reporting and editorial
issues to address up front – and every partner needs one person who
fosters and facilitates communication.
 Establish clear rules of engagement in writing and get agreement
upfront on publication date/embargoes; confidentiality of the data and
the reporting; expectations for sharing/communication, issues of credit,
legal responsibilities. Journalism practices and standards vary wildly
from country to country. If, for example, hidden cameras or anonymous
sources are not an option, you need to spell this out from day one.
 Bring in all formats right from the start. If you have lots of localized
data, consider creating a searchable interface on your websites.
 Be prepared from the start to produce multiple versions of the same
story – 3000 word and 800 word version. 90 second, 2 minutes and 8
minutes, for example.
SHARE EVERYTHING
 Reporters share all information, all tips, sources, ideas – everyone
learns from each other.
 Don’t assume your partners know the story like you do. You’re
immersed in the data, records, jargon, etc., for weeks or maybe even
months prior to bringing other newsrooms or partners on board.
 If your organization is doing major data analysis that will be used by
your partners make sure that 1) the data work is thoroughly
documented so partners can reproduce any parts of it themselves 2)

Provide online or in-person training to complement any data manuals
you share with partners.
 There’s never too much you can do to make sure partners not only
interpret the data correctly but also phrase things accurately in their
stories 3) Share and/or publish as many of the original
documents/databases as possible, particularly if further analysis can be
done by other journalists before or after publication.
 If your partners don’t know the jargon, are sketchy on the data or don’t
fully understand how a broken system you’re digging into is supposed
to work, then you’ll get weak stories or worse: inaccurate stories.
 Tip: it is not possible to over-explain the data or documents that you’re
sharing with partners; it is not possible to over-explain your
methodology to your collaborators; it is not possible to over-explain the
premise of the broader story to the other newsrooms who are joining
the investigation.
ECONOMIZE AND BE GENEROUS
 Don’t do things 12 times for 12 partners. If you’re sharing data, don’t let
12 partners develop 12 versions of an online searchable data tool.
 Pick the partner with the best capabilities in that area and convince that
partner to do the work once, for everyone, and make it compatible on
every partner’s web site.
 Think about your smaller partners. If you’re the big partner, you can
afford to be more generous with your time, your talent and your
treasure. If someone needs to pay a big bill for a public records request,
and you can help, help. Smaller newspapers on your team will not have
the space to run your 150-inch epic. In the end, you’ll likely find the 50inch version is more reader friendly, but that’s a different tipsheet.
PROVIDE ONLINE COLLABORATION TOOLS
 Collaborations don’t happen over email or on the phone.
 ICIJ uses a range of open-source digital tools that allow reporters to
share information securely and efficiently.
 Software called Apache Solr makes project data searchable on the
cloud during the reporting process.

 An open-source social networking platform (Oxwall) that allows
reporters to have, in one place, threaded communications and shared
files. It’s like a private Facebook page for your investigative team.
Once they are up, these platforms don’t just work by themselves.
 Work to keep people interested in the topic and to encourage reporters
to share their findings.
 Try to lead by example, doing a lot of sharing ourselves.
 If possible train reporters (in person, through manuals and videos) on
how to use the online platforms.
 Have a go to help person.
LEADERSHIP, LIMITATIONS AND LONGER
 Collaborations will never work unless each partner has a leader that
believes in this way of working and is prepared to work through all the
potential obstacles, solve the little and big problems that always come
up and keep the focus on the story.
 Know your limitations. Always be aware of just how overtaxed people
are today in the modern newsroom. Always simplify and streamline
communications and put extra time into thinking how you’re messaging.
 It always takes longer than you think – the first time is the hardest, and
you have to build in extra time and understand the time-frame for
different mediums. And it takes longer to overcome old habits…but its
worth it!

PANELISTS
Marina Walker Guevara - mwalker@icij.org
John Kelly

jkelly@usatoday.com

Richard Pienciak

rpienciak@ap.org

Ellen Weiss ellen.weiss@scripps.com

