John Roman, PhD
Senior Fellow, Urban Institute
IRE, Philadelphia, June 5, 2015

Data, Journalism and Crime

Data Journalism and Crime

Data!
Why reporting on crime is one of the most difficult topics

Criminal Justice Data

There are two main sources of criminal justice data:
 FBI Uniform Crime Report (UCR)
 18,000 LEAs – voluntary reporting
 Aggregate (exception is SHR, NIBRS)

 National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
 Samples on arrests and sentencing

Note: if you say criminal justice, it is assumed you are talking about
the adult system

Juvenile Justice Data

There is no main source of juvenile justice data:
 No individual level data
 Under 12 excluded from National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)

Note: juvenile justice is defined differently in many states (17 or 18).
And, may hold youth into their twenties.

How can you report on crime with limited
data?
 Subject specific
 Wrongful Conviction
 Untested Sex Assault
 Police-involved shootings

 Geography specific
 Baltimore had highest monthly homicide ever

 Trends
 Or …

What’s Missing from most
CJ Stories
A denominator

Example: The Tamir Rice tragedy

 One tragic death, multiple denominators
 How many police-involved shootings?
 How many police involved homicides?
 Critical distinction between homicides and murders!

 How many homicides a year?

 How many Americans?

What does statistical
analysis mean?
Causations versus correlation

Logical fallacy: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc
Statistics are simply applied logic

 Key is to understand whether the author meant to make a causal claim
and whether you should believe their claim:
 Are they claiming causation or is it a correlation (most don’t say)
 Is it a double blind-clinical trial, RCT or something else?
 If it is something else, is it prospective (good) or retrospective (worse)?
 Is the comparison from the same place (good) or not (worse)
 Is the comparison from the same time (good) or not (worse)
 How big is the sample (250 is a good rule of thumb as a skepticism
threshold)
 Does it refute many past studies (be skeptical)

What does on average
mean?
Less than you think – variation (spread) is the real key

Same mean, totally different stories.

Always assumed, rarely happens

Income, educational attainment, etc.

Same mean, totally different stories

At any one point, confusion. Trend leads to clarity

How to present data
(data viz)
Infinite possibilities, infinite confusion

Source: http://policyvizshop.com

Data visualization: Simple is almost always
better

 Line chart
 Bar chart
 Pie charts are almost always a disaster
 Say it in the text, say it in the notes, say it in the graphic

Comments and Questions

Email: Jroman AT Urban dot org
Twitter: @JohnKRoman

