Doug Pardue
The Post and Courier
Charleston, SC
dpardue@postandcourier.com
(843) 708-4513

TIPS FOR INVESTIGATING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Get a handle on the numbers: In many states the no single state office
maintains complete data on domestic violence. And what data is maintained
usually is just statistical without specific cases connected.
Build a database: We gathered data and cases from numerous sources, and
built our own database, which became the factual basis for our series. We
included in the database, the numbers and names of those killed in domestic
violence, the abuser, the abuser’s criminal history, court actions, type of
weapon, time and day of week, location coordinates, summaries of news
stories, whether children were present and numerous other fields. The
database proved vital – it gave us hard proof.
Seek out the advocates and the women’s shelters: This is how we located most
of the victims of domestic violence who shared their stories with us. And this is
where we learned of the difficulty women/victims have in leaving abusive
relationships. We also attended periodic domestic violence victim vigils.
Get national data, and state comparisons: Much of the data is questionable,
but it will provide you with context and comparisons. Caution: different states
use different definitions of what constitutes domestic violence. The Violence
Policy Center in Washington, DC provides national data on the rate of women
killed by men. It’s been doing so for more than a dozen years. The
organization’s main purpose is stricter gun control:
http://www.vpc.org/domesticviolence.htm
Don’t reinvent the wheel: Numerous organizations deal with domestic
violence and ways to prevent it. The Centers for Disease Control considers
domestic violence to ma a major public health issue and offers data and ways
to head-off domestic violence:
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence/

Don’t neglect the abuser: Most states or localities have specialized counseling
programs designed to try to teach abusers not to abuse their loved ones.
Studies on the effectiveness of these efforts are limited and all over the place
in whether the programs work or not. But getting permission to sit in on
group sessions with abusers is eye-opening and provides telling detail.
Go to court: Sit through as many cases as you can to see how they are
handled, meet victims and abusers and get to know the prosecutors, victim
advocates, judges and defense attorneys.
Make the numbers relevant. Make them mean something: Numbers can be
just that, numbing numbers. We sought to make the numbers stand out and
make a point. We didn’t say just that “more than 300 women were shot,
stabbed, strangled, beaten, bludgeoned or burned to death over the past
decade in South Carolina.” We said that a rate of one every 12 days. We said
the number is three times that of the death toll of South Carolina soldiers
killed in the entire Iraq and Afghanistan wars combined.
Find and use eye-opening comparisons: We didn’t just say that South
Carolina has just 18 shelters for battered women. We said ever one of South
Carolina’s 46 counties has at least one shelter for lost or abused dogs or cats,
but for abused women the state has just 18 shelters. We didn’t just point out
that a first time conviction for beating a wife or girlfriend carries a maximum
30 days in jail. We pointed out that abusing a dog carries a possible 5 years
prison sentence.
Hold someone responsible and prove it: We emphasized that more then 300
women were killed while state legislators did nothing. And in out second sday
story we showed out all but one of 12 bills to improve domestic violence laws
failed during the previous Legislative session except for one – a bill to give the
court the power to place a protective order so that the abuser cannot abuse
the victim’s dog or cat. We also pointed blame at police, prosecutors and
courts for not taking the crime seriously. With our database we were able to
show that numerous abusers committed the crime repeatedly, with multiple
first time convictions and virtually no time in jail. Many got their convictions
expunged by the courts.
The weapon of choice: In a controversial finding – which helped prompt the
state to adopt a strict gun ban for convicted abusers – our database showed
that guns were the weapon of choice in nearly 7 out of 10 domestic killings.

Find out what works in state and out: In any investigation, good guys can be
found. We sought them out to see what could actually work and what these
people battle. We found a couple of in-state police agencies that create
specialized investigative squads and work hand-in-hand with prosecutors,
victim advocates, abuse counselors and judges. And pdf we found some states
http://mnadv.org/ and communities that have adopted systems to try to headoff domestic fatalities before they happen through use of “Lethality Review
Teams.” http://www.ncdsv.org/publications_danger.html
http://www.postandcourier.com/tilldeath/assets/d1-25.pdf
http://www.postandcourier.com/tilldeath/assets/d4-pdf.pdf
http://mnadv.org/
Find out what motivates and tolerates domestic abuse: Gaining an
understanding of the culture that allows for/tolerates domestic abuse was
among our most challenging efforts. We knew early on that religion especially conservative Christianity – played a big, contributing role from
both the abuser and abused sides. So we got out and talked with pastors and
found one county that was making a community-wide effort to curb domestic
violence and spent some time there. And then there is the South’s so-called
“culture of honor.”
Compile “Problems and Solutions:” After showing all of the problems and
some of the potential solutions, we dedicated a day to pointing out what we
had identified as problems and some of the working solutions we had found.
Some oppose this sort of journalism, but we received a lot of praise for
providing a template for change to the horrible crime we had exposed.
Give readers some help options? We provided readers with phone numbers
and places to go to seek out help.
Embed your online presentation with links: Online we showed reaers where
every fact, figure and comment came from. Plus we put our database out
there for people to see what and how we did it.

