Nigel Jaquiss, Reporter
Willamette Week
njaquiss@wweek.com 503-445-1539

IRE Watchdog Conference
Seattle
Conceiving & Organizing an
Investigation

Many investigative stories and series seem to come from topics, or less charitably, the desire to win awards.
Shot selection is vital. You don’t have time for dry holes.
To get started: Who are the five most powerful individuals or institutions on your beat? What about them
doesn’t make sense? Where are the points of conflict? Do actions match missions? Is the narrative correct?
1. The best investigative stories begin with tips.
a) Some come over the transom. The way you get those is to write investigative stories so that people
contact you with their great ideas. Example: Cylvia Hayes parking ticket, December 2013.
2. Tips come from sources. The quality of the stories you produce is a function of source development.
3. Here’s how you develop sources:
a) Map your beat. How does money flow? Who makes decisions? Who are the gatekeepers? Connectors.
b) Who is paying attention? Who are the unofficial sources? Who is disaffected and complaining, fired,
unhappy? Who’s interested in accountability? Auditors, lawyers, former reporters.
4. Information is a currency. Trade away everything you can’t use. Listening is always best. When you talk,
have something to say. It’s helpful to start a conversation by sharing a piece of information.
5. Some people don’t like it but “off the record” is often best. Always define terms and ask two key
questions: how do you know that? Who else should I talk to?
6. Threshold questions for a tip that may launch an investigation: If everything you think is true, what is the
story in a couple of sentences? Is it something that can be proven? Is the story in the public interest?
Now we start:
1.

What are all the public records we can gather: Statements of economic interest, property records,
voting records, drivers license, year book, court records, social media, speeches, directories,
websites, etc. Make all records requests by email and check diligently.

2.

Public records give you chronology (the most powerful tool), facts, color, sources and context.
Hayes: An inexplicable foreclosure; the evidence of a broken relationship; and a big mystery.

3.

Organization: I get a big accordian file for documents: I type a chronology into an Excel sheet;
and I keep a word document with links to web stuff and all my interviews. I compile a list of
players: who are the most interesting? Who might be the device through which I tell the story?

4.

Human sources: Why would somebody talk? In person is always best. No means “not yet!”

5.

Motivated sources: former employees, rivals, competitors, whistle-blowers.

6.

Neutral sources: people who are just doing their jobs: Guy who sold her the property.

7.

Hostile sources: you go there only when you have all the documents and earlier interviews. You
go in a concentric circle, sticking pins in your target. Ask questions when you know answers.

