Intro to CAR and the
conference
NICAR 2016
Liz Lucas and Lisa Pickoff-White

We’re here to help each other

Journalists + data = CAR

The process
Start with a question or a theory.
Gather your data through record requests, scraping and other methods.
Clean! Use common sense. Duplicates? Spelling?
Analyze your data. Act like you’re interviewing someone and come up with a list of
questions to help guide you through the analysis.
Work with an editor and talk through your methodology.
Visualize your work. Show it to someone who doesn’t know the story and see if
they can understand.

Budgets and spending
Measurement: So how much do schools really get from Powerball?
Comparisons: This remarkable chart shows how U.S. defense spending dwarfs the
rest of the world
Watchdog: The Red Cross CEO Has Been Serially Misleading About Where Donors’
Dollars Are Going
Change over time: Overtime costs soaring at Denver sheriff's department
Context: Were the Billions Brazil Spent on World Cup Stadiums Worth It?

Regulation
Regulators often have data you need.
California’s strawberry industry is hooked on dangerous pesticides
Buried in Grain
Are regulators regulating?
Five Years After Deadly San Bruno Explosion: Are We Safer?
Thousands of dams avoid state inspections in South Carolina

Form = database

Public Record Act Requests and FOIA

Best Practices
● Keep a copy of the original.
● Log everything you do.
● Interrogate data.
● Have someone edit your work.
● Explain your methodology.
● Use visualizations as appropriate.

Advice: Ask questions
Everyone has been a beginner, ask for help.

Advice: Pick something

“Choose a project - or simply a question - you're
already interested in versus trying to learn a skill
in a vacuum. Then pursue a data set that could
answer it.”

Advice: Relax

“Don't get overwhelmed. And don't be surprised
if you miss a session or two you really wanted to
attend. You can't learn everything you want in
one conference.”

Advice: Meet new people

“Introduce yourself to more people, regardless of
where they work or how many times you've seen
their name in the program as a presenter. People
are overwhelmingly helpful, nice and never
condescending.”

Get skills
Learn the lingo: What the hell is D3 and all the other questions you’re afraid to ask
(today @ 10:15)
Clean data: Tools for cracking PDFs, Excel Magic, Open Refine, regular
expressions, CAR Wash
Analyze data: Excel, SQL (SQLite, MySQL), Statistics, command line tools, Python, R
Visualize data: Fusion Tables, Tableau, CartoDB, D3, Javascript, Animated videos
for storytelling, VR interactives, Google Earth flythroughs
Map the data: ArcGIS online, CartoDB, QGIS, Fusion Tables
Learn to write code: Command line, Python, Ruby, R, Javascript

Get ideas
Finding the Story hands-on sessions (Campaign Finance, Health, Energy, Crime,
Infrastructure, Pension plans)
Cover elections: attend the Elections track
Be secure: Digital security track
Get help on FOIA: brownbag lunch with lawyers on Friday at lunch
Career roundtable: get career advice from the experts

Bonus!
Lightning Talks -- Friday at 4:45 in Colorado E-J
Philip Meyer Awards Reception -- following Lightning Talks
NICAR Conversations
Tech Room & Exhibitors

Additional tips...
Tip: Make sure and get to your favorite hands on sessions early to get a seat; these
rooms have limited capacity
If you can’t get in, don’t worry -- presenter notes and even data are available online
Panel sessions are recorded and the audio is posted online after the conf.
Talk to people! Approach presenters, chat with people in the hallways
Contact the IRE staff with any questions, concerns, or issues. We had red “staff”
ribbons on our nametags.

… and resources
NICAR Dictionary
NICAR Guides
Guidebook app

Questions and contact info
Liz Lucas
@eklucas

Lisa Pickoff-White
@pickoffwhite

