PATTERN RECOGNITION
what time, patience and a little OCD can teach you
.

For the past 4 years, I’ve been keeping a
spreadsheet of every interactive news
project I’ve come across.
That’s more than 4,600 projects
across 338 organizations.

That spreadsheet looks like this (bit.
ly/interactive-news-doc)

Actually, as of today, it looks like this (bit.
ly/newsdepot)

When I started collecting them, I didn’t
know how to code, so part of the goal
was to figure out what “interactive news”
even meant.

After a few years, “interactive news”
started to look like this...
Warning: you are about to see tooltips.
Lots of tooltips.

When this type of work began, it looked like this (pictured: one of the earliest—if
not THE earliest—interactive projects ever produced.)

Which is not all that dissimilar to what it looks like today (pictured: a map)

But now, there is also this

And also this (pictured: movement)

Naturally, I had some questions.

Stage direction: Ken Schwencke rides in
on a motorcycle.

Question 1: Where did all the interactivity go?
Modern distribution channels don’t allow for the type of
complex interactions that are being built. Your complicated
touch event code is now a 400k gif. And that seems to be
working well for people.
Does the future support interactivity?

Question 2: What is everyone even doing?
As tools begin to become a major focus for access to
nontraditional story techniques, there seems to be a clear
need to offer more than our ability to code or design.
Is there a cost/benefit analysis that needs to be done to
sharpen the focus of interactive news teams?

Question 3: Are we doing journalism correctly?
Has there been any talk about the ethical lines that separate
knowledge sharing, inspiration, and plagiarism in the
interactive news space?
In what ways has the open source movement come into
conflict with the traditional rules and practices of
journalism? What parts of a project are meant to be
proprietary? What parts should be shared?

Question 4: Sympathy for the dead link?
The most striking thing about maintaining this spreadsheet
has been the number of dead links you encounter and how
soon link rot starts to appear.
How can we give our projects a good death?

Now for our completely biased
closing statement.
New stuff has been launched.

