U​
sing ​
C​
ensus ​
D​
ata to
See t​
he ​
N​
ext ​
A​
merica
NICAR annual conference
Denver, March 9­13, 2016
Paul Overberg
poverberg2@gmail.com
@poverberg
In the fall of 2014, USA TODAY launched a project to bring analytical focus to stories about the nation’s growing
diversity. The Changing Face of America featured several multimedia reports from around the nation. But from the
beginning, it was premised on local coverage by as many of Gannett’s 100 newsrooms that wanted to participate. Most
did, some in very creative ways. Many are gathered at ​
changingface.usatoday.com​
.
This guide sets down tools and methods USA TODAY used as well as some possibilities to consider for your own use
in adapting them. It concludes with a resource list.
Tool: USA TODAY Diversity Index
The USA TODAY Diversity Index anchored not just USA TODAY reporting, but local reporting as well. The index is
based on a simple idea: the chance that two people chosen randomly from an area will be different by race and
ethnicity. In simple personal terms: “What is the chance that the next person I meet will be different from me?” The
index varies from 0 to 100.
It allows comparisons of:
­­ Similar places, such as cities or counties or states, and different types of places, such as a neighborhood, its city,
county and metro area.
­­ Different times. USA TODAY calculated the index for each census year from 1960­2010 for states and counties,
and used projections to calculate it for the same places from 2020­2060. This teases us with a hint of the future. If City
A’s projected diversity in 2040 matches City B’s current diversity, maybe City A should spend send delegations to
City B for a good look around and straight talk with the locals.
­­ Spatial patterns. Mapping the index spotlights edges of high­ and low­diversity areas. This focuses reporting and
makes us ask, “Why?”, especially if edges coincide with political boundaries.
The index was invented in 1991 by Phil Meyer of the University of North Carolina and Shawn McIntosh of USA
TODAY for use on 1990 Census results. Meyer and I revised it in 2000 to accommodate the arrival of multi­race data
with Census 2000. USA TODAY has used it frequently and shared it freely.

Methods
The index is calculated using current federal ​
standards​
for race and ethnicity, which are treated as separate concepts.
That leads to a multi­step calculation:
Step 1​
: Take the total population, subtract “Some other race” and use the result as the total for the rest of Step 1.
(Why? Census Bureau studies show that people who check it are overwhelmingly Hispanic, so that category is not
used. Hispanics' effect on diversity is calculated in the next step.)
Calculate each racial group's share of the population and square it. This is the chance that any two people will be from
the same race. Sum the results of this step for all races. That's the collective chance that any two people will be of the
same race. If a town is 75% white and 25% black, the odds of two people being similar are (0.75)²+(0.25)² ­­ about
63%. In the current federal scheme, there are five named races – white; black/African­American; American
Indian/Alaska Native; Asian; and Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander.
Step 2:​
Take the Hispanic and non­Hispanic percentages of the total population, square each and add them to get the
chance that any two people will be Hispanic or not.
Step 3:​
To calculate whether two people are the ​
same​
on both measures, multiply the results of the first two steps.
Using each group’s ​
percentages​
, the operation looks like this:
2​
2​
2​
2​
2​
2​
2​
(White​
+ Black​
+AmericanIndian​
+Asian​
+NativeHawaiian​
) x (Hisp​
+NonHisp​
)

Or, in spreadsheet notation:
=(White^2 + Black^2 +AmericanIndian^2 +Asian^2 +NativeHawaiian^2 ) x (Hisp^2 +NonHisp^2)
Step 4:​
Subtract the result of that formula from 1 to get the chance that two people are ​
different – diverse​
. For ease of
use, multiply the result by 100 to place it on a scale from 0 to 100.
Note: Since Census 2000, people have been allowed to check more than one race. Collectively, they are tallied as “two
or more races.” To adapt the index, Phil Meyer and I did ​
research​
in 2000. We found that the most faithful way to
reflect the choices of such people was also the simplest. We decided not to calculate a similarity term (Step 1) for them
as we did for individual races, since they could be many different combinations and each of them was “diverse in
themselves,” a mix of at least two races. However, we included them in the total from which those similarity terms
were calculated. This shrank the similarity terms of each individual race and conversely boosted diversity.
The index belongs to a family of measures sometimes called Simpson indexes because a version was first ​
described​
by
statistician Edward Simpson in 1949. Diversity indexes are best known in ecology, where biodiversity is a critical
measure of an ecosystem’s health. The Justice Department ​
uses​
a similar measure called the Herfindahl–Hirschman
index in antitrust enforcement. This index measures a market’s concentration and the potential effect of a merger.
Possibilities
More broadly, you can adapt this idea to measure the diversity of individuals or groups on other scales. For instance,
during this project USA TODAY used Census data on the national origins of ​
Hispanic​
and ​
Asian​
immigrants to
calculate county­level Hispanic and Asian diversity indexes for 2013. This helped reporters to understand diversity
within diversity ­­ texture within growing immigrant enclaves.

The index works for big areas or small ones, big groups or small ones. It’s most useful when the thing being measured:
­­ Is reliably counted.
­­ Has five to 10 component groups. If it has more, think of combining some.
­­ Has a fair amount of variation among whatever units are being compared (cities, counties, neighborhoods).
At least one Gannett newsroom compared the growing diversity of its public school students with the lack of diversity
among its teachers. The same approach would let you compare the diversity indexes of:
­­ A police force or entire city workforce and the community it serves.
­­ A university’s athletes, student body or faculty.
­­ A state’s legislators and voters.
­­ Oscar­nominated actors and those of widely released movies.
Those just extend the concept to comparisons of the racial diversity of related groups. Think broadly where analyzing
diversity can help your news coverage. Some possibilities:
­­ Use Census County Business Patterns ​
data​
on the size of local businesses (number of employees) to calculate a
diversity index, and then do the same for major groups like manufacturing, healthcare, etc. The greater the diversity,
the more even the mix of big, little and medium­size firms. A more diverse mix probably shows a richer, more stable
economy than one without big or small firms.
­­ Using points or wins, calculate a diversity index of success among the teams in a local high school sports
conference. In this case, diversity equates to competitiveness. Compare conferences, or look at a conference’s
historical trend.
­­ How diverse is your local restaurant scene? Calculate the diversity index by grouping and counting restaurants by
some classification that makes sense locally. Then compare with the index for some regional hotspot. Or calculate your
area’s index for 10 years ago and 20 years ago.
Sources of data:
­­ 1960 to 2010: ​
The ​
Census of Population and Housing,​
the formal name of the every­10­year headcount of everyone
in the United States. We compiled race/ethnicity breakdowns data from the censuses of 1960 through 2010. Data for
2000 and 2010 can be found on ​
American Factfinder​
. Earlier data can be found at various archives. USA TODAY used
data from the Census Bureau and the ​
National Historical Geographical Information System​
archive at the University of
Minnesota. It’s also a good source for digital files depicting boundaries of areas counted in historical censuses.
­­ 2020 to 2060: ​
The Census Bureau produces ​
projections​
, but only for the entire country. Several demographic data
firms produce such data, using models to extend current census estimates. USA TODAY purchased county­level
race/ethnicity projections from ​
ProximityOne​
in Alexandria, Va. Summarizing these gave us state projections.
ProximityOne’s summarized projections match Census projections within 1% out to 2060. Another firm that produces
county­level projections is ​
Woods and Poole​
of Washington, D.C.
Worth checking:​
Many ​
states​
produce projections for varying groups, periods and areas, typically counties. States can
use administrative data ­­ like driver’s licenses, unemployment insurance and taxation ­­ that the Census Bureau can’t
because it’s not produced uniformly by all states. Some states produce a high, middle and low series of projections to
sketch out possibilities created by different assumptions. Middle series are designed as the most likely outcome. High
and low series illustrate possibilities, as well as the uncertainty built into forecasting.

Related:​
The Census Bureau produces annual population ​
estimates​
for states, counties and cities/towns. These annual
series begin with the most recent census and continues with annual updates, based on more recent data compiled by
states and federal agencies on births, deaths and immigration (plus an estimate for emigration). This data can also be
used to calculate a diversity index with one tweak from the method described above. Annual Census estimates don’t
include “some other race,” so index calculations for racial categories are based on the total population, just like the
ethnicity (Hispanic/non­Hispanic) calculations.
­­ Public school enrollment. ​
USA TODAY used the annual survey of public school ​
enrollment​
, which has been
conducted by the National Center for Education Statistics since the early 1990s. This is part of the Common Core of
Data. NCES allows school districts to report race and Hispanic ethnicity as a unified concept. This simplifies
calculating a diversity index ­­ simply square and sum the percentages of each group, then subtract the result from 1
and multiply by 100 to place it on a scale from 0 to 100. However, the result isn’t directly comparable with an index
calculated in the manner above.

Resources:
­­ Animation explaining the USA TODAY Diversity Index:
http://www.usatoday.com/videos/news/nation/2015/03/18/17657383
­­ Changing Face of America project nerd box:
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/10/21/diversity­index­data­how­we­did­report/17432103
­­ Video reports created for the project:
http://www.usatoday.com/videos/news/2015/08/03/changing­face­of­america­video­playlist/31088553
​
­­ Calculator uses sales of firms in a market to calculate the Herfindahl­Hirschman Index:
http://www.unclaw.com/chin/teaching/antitrust/herfindahl.htm
­­ Adaptation of USA TODAY Diversity Index to Canada’s classification (Vancouver Sun):
http://www.vancouversun.com/life/there+diversity+then+there+super+diversity+burnaby+style/11482044/story.htm
­­ Agate, a Python data analysis library built by Chris Groskopf and contributors, includes a version of the index:
http://agate.readthedocs.org/en/0.11.0/cookbook/compute.html#usa­today­diversity­index

