Online resources for journalists
Jaimi Dowdell, and Mark Horvit IRE/NICAR
Updated March 9, 2016

advanced search
Search for a specific phrase with quotes
“cell phone network coverage”
Search for one thing or another
sanction OR enforcement
Search for results that don’t include a specific word with the hyphen/subtraction sign
"chocolate cake recipe" –butter
Search by site
site:ire.org
Find similar sites
related:ire.org
Search by filetype (ppt, xls, mdb, pdf, etc.)
filetype:xls
filettype:xlsx
Search by image (https://images.google.com) Help and instructions here
Searching Google Groups can also be a way to find additional information.
Google also has an advanced news search that can be helpful.

But Google isn’t the only game in town
For the best results, be sure to search more than one engine. Try the same search in a couple different
browsers for an example of how results can differ. Here are some other engines:
Instya (Multiple searches at once)
Icerocket
Duck Duck Go (won’t track your IP or search history)
Ixquick (Claims to be “the world’s most private search engine”)
Yippy (clustered results that claim to search the deep web)
Bing
Gigablast (Small company that maintains own index)
Million Short (Claims to be able to remove the top million websites from results)
©2016 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Yandex (Most popular search engine in Russia. Can search by English, Russian, German and French)
Dogpile (Aggregates from other search engines including Google and Yahoo!)

People searches
Check out “Who is John Doe” from the Reporter’s Desktop
Spokeo ($ - I like the email lookup)
Pipl (people search)
PeekYou (people search)

birthdatabase (birthdates – hit and miss)
VINELink - Track inmates in prison and jail. Get alerts if they transfer, escape or are released

Image searches
Google - Search by image (https://images.google.com) Help and instructions here
Facesaerch (Results are headshots)
EXIF photo metadata viewers
There are many options for this. Here’s a Firefox extension and the site Jeffrey’s EXIF viewer Check out
this tutorial on understanding metadata for pictures from FotoForensics.

Email
Rapportive - Who is behind an email? Results can include pictures, location and job titles.
Works with Gmail and pulls from LinkedIn.

©2016 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Use your own Gmail account to guess someone’s email address or try to find who is behind an email.
Compose a new email then enter an email address. Hit enter, or return. Move your cursor over the
address and a window should pop open. This is hit or miss but can yield results.

Combine what you find with search engines and people searches.

Social Media
Facebook graph search engine created by Henk van Ess (Use the tips on this page to find the profile id of
a person. Then you can use the profile id in conjunction with the FB graph search engine).
Facebook Member directory

Addict-o-matic
SocialMention
Whostalkin
LinkedIn (people, companies, former employees) also LinkedIn Advanced Search:
Twitter location search (enter “geocode:lat,long,distancesearched” in the search box. Example:
geocode:38.948321,-92.328231,1km
TweetTunnel - View early Twitter followers and those followed (potentially find friends/associates)
Paul Myer’s customized social network search:

Geofeedia ($ search social media geographically)
echosec ($ - free version only includes foursquare)
Banjo (mobile app – search geographically)
Snap Bird (Search Twitter)
Topsy (claims to have all Tweets since 2006)
Foller Me for interesting info on Twitter usage
Iconosquare (search Instagram)
Other useful searches
Wayback Machine (search archived versions of sites)
WolframAlpha (for facts and research)

©2016 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Similarsites (finds sites similar to the link you search)
Whois search (find out who is behind a website)
US Government Printing Office
Hurisearch (The Human Rights Search Engine - "Search over 5,000 human rights websites.")
Spy dialer (find out who is behind a phone number – requires voicemail)
Legistorm for members of Congress
Vin Place for car ownership and other information

Public records
BRB Publications
Portico
Online searches
Directory of state and county court records
Click on a state then in the next window look for "Find court resources by category." There you can look
for case searches, dockets and calendars.
http://www.courtreference.com/

Web scraping, PDFs and other data tools
Scrape data using Scraper for Chrome (example data here). Tutorial found in IRE tipsheet #4003
Import.io for scraping web pages. No coding required. Free.

RE members can get a free upgraded CometDocs account. See here for details.

Tabula for converting PDF files. Good for grabbing tables out of reports.
BatchGeo for making quick, interactive maps.

Other online tools

DocumentCloud for OCR and publishing your documents.
Download all links, or images, you see in a Web page with DownThemAll (dTa) (FireFox add-in)
Monitor a site with change detection
Quixey (A search engine for mobile apps)

©2016 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Datawrapper for quick charts
TimelineSetter: Make timelines from spreadsheets
Freze It to capture entire web pages with links intact

©2016 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

