Tracking government spending, NICAR 2016
● Moderator: Nate Carlisle, The Salt Lake Tribune, @natecarlisle
● Kate Martin, The News Tribune, @KateReports
● Colby Goodman, Director of the Center for International Policy’s Security
Assistance Monitor program, @cogoodman
● Lee Zurik, WVUE­TV in New Orleans, @leezurik
Local government
Ever wonder how your local government spends money but don’t want to sift through
individual checks? You can get that information in a database or spreadsheet. It’s called
a procurement or purchasing database​
. You can get it in Excel or a text delimited file.
Unless your government tracks spending on paper (unlikely), it should have a digital
version you can ask for.
● Request a procurement database
○ This includes what a city bought, for how much, when, how many and
from whom. A very important field in this database is the ​
purchase order
number​
.
○ Keep this file on hand and up­to­date for breaking news. You can quickly
answer “did the city buy X.”
○ Stories written with this data:
■ Documents: Tacoma police using surveillance device to sweep up
cell data
■ Fees for Tacoma’s Click cable rise quickly, analysis reveals
● Sift through the data. ​
Let curiosity be your guide.
○ Read a national story about controversial police surveillance equipment?
Look it up in your new database!
○ Did some contractor in another city screw up big time? What if your city
also did business with that company? Look it up in the database!
○ CIty doesn’t want to give up info on a program? Find out as much as you
can about it and look it up in the database.
● You found a story in the database (maybe)! Now what?
○ Time to ask for records. Ask for records based on the ​
purchase order
number​
.

■ Think about what documents are created when government buys
something: Invoices, shipping manifests, contracts, etc. Ask for all
of those “related to purchase order #TKTKTK”
○ Sample records request (includes how to request databases):
bit.ly/1WSUEqb

Federal government — Individual transactions
USAspending.gov has some basic information about where your federal money —
whether it’s contracts, grants, loans or other financial assistance — is going, and that
information is searchable. The interfaces go back to Fiscal Year 2008 and there are
instructions on the site for obtaining older data.
From the homepage, click on “WHERE IS THE MONEY GOING,” then on “Spending
Map.”

The fields allow you to narrow your search to find individual transactions, but there are a
few pitfalls. This above search in a zip code in Salt Lake City found 45 federal
transactions whose “place of performance” was in that zip.

“Place of performance” can have a broad definition. It can be where the federal
government is building a new building. It can be where a good it is buying is
manufactured, where it is purchasing a good, or just where the check is being mailed.
When we click on the “Award ID” for the Sinclair Oil transaction, a new window opens
on the browser and we learn more.

We see on Oct. 28, 2015, the Defense Department bought $450,120 worth of
aviation fuel from 550 E. South Temple. There is no Sinclair Oil station or refinery
at that location. It’s an office building. So in this case, “place of performance”
appears to be where the federal government sent the check.
There’s still much we don’t know here. For example, where did the fuel go? A
military base? Which aircraft? Did the Defense Department request proposals
from other oil companies? Answering these questions requires further reporting.
Some of the codes and reference numbers found in the transaction information
may help you track down the answers.
Bulk transactions and data
At the top of any USAspending.gov page, click on “DATA CENTER” and “Data
Download.”

The interface allows you to download bulk data for your own analysis. “Recipient
State” can differ from “Place of Performance State,” especially if the money is
being awarded to a business.

A business may have headquarters in one state, but the project may occur in
another state. In 2015, the Salt Lake Tribune used USAspending.gov to track a
concrete company that was funneling worker paychecks to the Fundamentalist
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter­Day Saints. The company’s surety bonds were
backed by the Small Business Administration. The data showed the federal
money was being sent to Utah (“Recipient State”), but the company frequently
poured concrete in Colorado, New Mexico and Oklahoma and they would be
listed as “Place of Performance State.”

Notice Fields 1 and 2. The interface does not allow you to select multiple filters in
those fields. Multiple downloads may be necessary to obtain all the data you
seek.
Also on the page is a link to the data dictionary. Read and save it! It explains
what all those data fields mean.

