Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel
NICAR 2016 Denver / Norm Lewis, University of Florida / nplewis@ufl.edu

ENSURE ANALYSIS TOOLPAK IS ENABLED ON YOUR COMPUTER
Microsoft considers Analysis
TookPak an “add-in” feature. It
comes with Excel (for Windows and
for the latest Mac version) but you
must enable it first. Check to see if it Apple
Windows
is loaded by clicking on the Data tab
on the ribbon. If yours does not look like one of these examples here, follow steps below.
For Windows: Enabling Analysis ToolPak

1. Click on the File
tab on the ribbon.
3. Click on
Add-Ins.
2. Click on Options.

5. Click box for
Analysis ToolPak.

6. Click
OK

4. Click Go …

For Macintosh: Installing Analysis ToolPak
If you have the latest version (Office 365 or Office 2016), Microsoft has reinstated the
ToolPak. For users of earlier versions, Microsoft removed it and referred Apple users to
StatPlus:mac LE from AnalystSoft for free.
1. Click on the Tools
menu above the ribbon.

2. Select
Add-Ins…

3. Click on Analysis ToolPak.

4. Click OK.
Sorry, Mac People
Hey, I’m one of you! But because the computers at the NICAR conference use Windows, the
rest of this tutorial will show screenshots from the Windows version. The concepts,
however apply equally to us Mac people. (Whew.)

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 2

PART 1: AVERAGE
The most common statistic journalists use is average. Average seeks to convey what is
typical. Contrary to Excel nomenclature, “average” comes in three flavors:
Type
Mean
Median
Mode

Excel Function
=AVERAGE(cells)
=MEDIAN(cells)
=MODE(cells)

How Calculated
Sum divided by number of items
Midpoint of list sorted low to high
Most frequent occurring number

Usage Example
Commute time, water levels
Salaries, home prices
Donut variety, shoe size

Mean is used so often it is the default. And it works for most of everyday life.
But for numbers that have a potential for outliers such as salaries and houses, the mean
overstates what is typical. In those cases, the median is better.
Mode is rarely used in journalism. (It can be used, however, to determine the most popular
pizza to order on election night.)
Calculate Mean and Median
Open the Faculty sheet. Go to the bottom. Leave a blank row.
 Write the word Mean. In the next cell, insert the formula =AVERAGE(e2:e1054)
 Write the word Median. In the next cell, insert the formula =MEDIAN(e2:e1054)
You should get the data below.
Which of these two figures should you use? The mean is higher
because it is skewed by some big salaries. Thus, median is a
better representation of a typical professor for this data set.

PART 2: STANDARD DEVIATION
But sometimes just knowing the average is not enough. Sometimes it helps to know the
dispersion of these numbers. Are most around the mean? Or are they all spread out?
An average alone won’t tell us the dispersion. What can? Analysis ToolPak to the rescue!
Mean

But first, let’s use this picture to describe
dispersion. The mean is the center point.
The dark blue shade on either side of the
mean covers 68 percent of all the
numbers. This is 1 standard deviation. Its
boundaries are set so that they always
include 68 percent of the numbers. How
are those boundaries determined?
Analysis ToolPak will tell us.

1 standard deviation

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 3

Computing Standard Deviation
We can determine the boundaries of the standard deviation through Analysis ToolPak.
1. Click on Data tab on the ribbon.

2. On the right, click on Data Analysis.

4. Click OK.

3. Click on
Descriptive
Statistics.

5. Click in Input Range box.

6. Click on the Salary column heading.

11. Click OK.

7. Click in the
box for Labels
in First Row.

8. Click in the box
beside Summary
statistics.

9. Activate Output
Range button.

10. In the Output
Range box, type G3
or click on the cell
where you want the
stats inserted.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 4

12. Adjust the
columns for
readability and
to line up the
decimal points.

Let us now glean some key statistics from this output.

All three
averages
are
provided.

The min and max
give us the range,
which is another
way to think
about dispersion.

The salaries are
summed and
counted.
For this data, 1 standard deviation is $43,140. It
is applied to both sides of the mean, like so:
$101,367 + $43,140 = $144,507
$101,367 - $43,140 = $58,227
Thus, 68 percent of the salaries are between
$58,277 and $144,507.
Interpretation
That is a large range, which means the salaries
are widely dispersed. It means that average alone
is insufficient to convey a “typical” salary.
Standard deviation is a relative measure, so the
interpretation depends on the underlying data.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 5

PART 3: CORRELATION
Correlation measures whether two things are related: whether
they rise and fall together or in opposite directions.
Consider height and weight as in the chart to the right. As
people grow taller, they tend to weigh more. Shorter people
tend to weigh less. Thus, height and weight are correlated.
Further, this is a positive correlation: they rise together.

Or think about the relationship between drinking
alcohol and dexterity as shown in the chart to the
left. As the number of drinks consumed increases,
dexterity decreases. As one goes up, the other goes
down. This is a negative correlation.
Correlations vary between -1 and +1, like this:
+1
0
-1

Perfect positive correlation
No correlation
Perfect negative correlation

Two measures rise or fall together
The two measures have nothing in common
As one measure increases, the other measure decreases

In the physical world, perfect correlations are not uncommon.
But when it comes to people, few things are correlated beyond -0.7 or +0.7. That’s because
rarely is any one thing solely correlated with something else. Usually more than one factor
is involved. Consider heredity and height.
Heredity and Height
Click on the Height sheet in the Excel data set.
You’ll see two columns of data from 100 pairs
of fathers and sons measuring their height in
inches. The scatter chart of blue dots
illustrates a messy relationship between the
two. As dads get taller, sons do, too. Sort of.
The chart shows the correlation coefficient is
0.527803, or 0.53. There’s no negative mark,
so the number is positive by default.
Interpretation
This 0.53 means that for each inch of height a father gains, the son gains about half an inch.
That means other factors account for the other 0.47, such as the mother’s height and
nutrition during childhood.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 6

Calculating Correlation
(Hat tip to Professor Steve Doig of Arizona State University, who used a similar data set in a
handout a few years ago.)
Open the NFL sheet for the 2015 regular season, according to ESPN statistics. Click on the
Data tab, and then on Data Analysis on the right-hand side.

1. Click on
Correlation.

2. Click OK.

3. With cursor inside Input Range box,
select all the columns with numbers.
(Exclude Team because it is text.)
4. Click in Labels
in first row box.

6. Click
OK.

5. In the Output Range
box, type J3 or click in
the cell where you want
the stats to appear.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 7

The resulting data look like a triangle. The results are enlarged below.

These are 1 because they
are perfect correlations:
yards gained = yards gained.

This area is
blank because it
would repeat
what is below
the string of 1’s.

For this data,
we care most
about
correlations
with wins.
Points scored has a strong
correlation with wins: 0.77.
It is positive. So the more
points scored, the more wins.

The strongest correlation is
between wins and points allowed:
0.79. It is negative. So the more
points allowed, the fewer wins.

Interpretation
The data here confirm what a sports fan knows: More points scored = more wins. And more
points allowed = fewer wins. But the data also reveal other insights:
 Taking the ball away from the other team has a strong correlation with wins.
 Giving the ball away (fumbles, interceptions) is less damaging than takeaways.
 Yards gained don’t mean much. On offense, efficiency matters.
Terminology
Correlation does not always mean causation. Points scored do not “cause” wins. Instead,
the two are associated. Here is an example of how you could write about this data:
For NFL teams, the defensive statistic that is most closely associated with wins is
not yards given up but takeaways – interceptions or recovering fumbles.
But we can do an even better job of evaluating correlations with the next part, regression.
Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 8

PART 4: LINEAR REGRESSION AND STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE
While social scientists use linear regression to predict, journalists use linear regression to
determine the amount of change that can be attributed to one factor over others.
Warning! Regression is a more complicated statistic than can be addressed here. It
is powerful when used correctly. It is misleading when used incorrectly. If you
really want to do linear regression, use something more powerful than Excel,
such as SAS, SPSS, PSPP or R. Or, ask a statistician to help.
The purpose here in explaining regression in Excel is to introduce two important concepts:
statistical significance and variables.
Statistical Significance
Most of life is a combination of performance and chance. Statistics help differentiate the
two – to tell us when something probably wasn’t just the luck of the draw.
Note the weasel word probably. Certainty is illusive. It’s tough to know
whether that cancer cluster has an environmental cause or is just bad
luck, or whether the team improved because of a new coach or good luck.
That uncertainty is why a common benchmark in evaluating differences is 5 percent. If the
chance that luck was the cause is less than 5 percent, something else may be involved. This
probability of less than 5 percent in often shown in statistical shorthand as p < .05.
How it works can be a bit complicated, so let’s apply it to an example: school test scores.
Pretend that Elm School used a new curriculum while Oak School kept the old one. At the
end of the school year, test scores for the two are compared. The logic works like this:
1. First, presume that nothing happened. This is the null hypothesis.
2. Test scores are compared using a statistical measure such as a t-test or ANOVA.
3. If p < .05, the null hypothesis is rejected and the alternative hypothesis, that the new
curriculum is associated with higher scores, is said to be supported.
In other words, statistical significance determines if something is going on beyond chance.
Variables
A variable is, well, something that varies. That can be test scores, incidences of cancer, team
wins, caffeine ingested on deadline – or just about anything that can change.
Variables come in several flavors. All that matters at this point is to know that regression
requires continuous variables such as temperature, weight and money. It does not work
with categorical variables such as religion, ethnicity or birthplace.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 9

Click on the NFL data sheet. Consider the column headers as variables. Yards gained, points,
takeways, etc., all can vary.

Dependent and Independent Variables
The dependent variable is the variable we care most about. That could be school test scores,
cancer rates or income. In this data set, Wins is the dependent variable, or DV for short.
The independent variable is something that could influence or be associated with the DV. In
this data set, everything besides Wins is an independent variable, or IV for short.
Here’s a visual way to remember the difference between an independent variable (IV) and
the dependent variable (DV), drawing from the medical shorthand for intravenous: IV.
The IV:
Something that
influences the patient
(to get better, we hope!)

The DV:
The thing we care
about – in this
case, the patient

Further, this picture gives us the order. The IV comes first. It goes into the patient to deliver
medicine and fluids. And if the IV works, the result is the patient gets better.
Just as the medical IV comes first, so does X come first in the alphabet before Y. Thus, we
will put the IVs in the X box for Excel. And the DV will go in the Y box.
Variable
Independent Variable
Dependent Variable

Abb
IV
DV

Excel
X
Y

Role
Thing(s) that change the DV
The thing that changes

Alternate name
Predictor Variable
Criterion Variable

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 10

Linear Regression in Excel
On the NFL sheet, click on the Data tab. On the far right, choose the Data Analysis option.
When you do, you trigger this box. Scroll down until you get to regression.
1. Scroll down until
you see Regression.

5. In the Input X Range box, use the
mouse to select all the other data
columns (exclude Team) as IVs.

2. Select Regression.

3. Click OK.

4. In the Input Y Range box, use
the mouse to select Wins, the DV.

6. Click in the
box for Labels.

8. Click
OK.
7. The statistics
can take up
space, so retain
the default of a
new worksheet.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 11

Column widths were stretched to make the contents more readable.
Regression statistics speak to how well the
regression model does in predicting the DV.
ANOVA is Analysis of Variance.
The relatively large F statistic
says there is a pattern in this
data beyond luck, or noise.

This is scientific
notation. The E11 means: move
11 decimal
points to the left.
Suffice to say
that p < .05 has
been met.

We care most about these P-values, so let’s focus on this column and evaluate.
Ignore Intercept, which has to do
with building a regression equation.

Interpretation
Only points scored and points allowed
were statistically significant. No other
variable had a p-value of less than 0.05.
One journalistic approach would be to
remove the two points columns (they
are, after all, rather obvious) and retest for the remaining variables. Then
we could write a story that reveals
whether factors beyond points are
associated with wins.

When these factors were entered
into a regression equation, only
two variables achieved statistical
significance at p < .05.

Further, this regression equation is just
for the variables selected. We might
want to add in other variables such as
the average team quarterback rating
and the portion of the season starters
missed due to injuries.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 16, Norm Lewis / Page 12

