Investigating Inequality
NICAR 2016 Burt Hubbard Rocky Mountain PBS

Researching inequities and gaps
EDUCATION K thru 12th: Many of these may be on the state
web page, others will require data requests.
1. Data pipeline – States have developed data bases tracking
students from kindergarten through the end of college with
identities masked. Mixed results in getting the complete
data based through a public records request.
2. Pupil membership with breakdown by school and district
for race/ethnicity, gender and low income.
3. Gifted programs – Breakdown by race/ethnicity and gender.
4. AP class enrollment by race/ethnicity
5. Student discipline by race/ethnicity and gender.
6. Student mobility by race/ethnicity and gender
7. Special education enrollment by race/ethnicity and gender
8. English language learners
9. Teacher turnover by school and district
10.Teacher demographics by race/ethnicity and gender
11.Dropout and graduation statistics by gender and
race/ethnicity
12. Student achievement by district by race, gender and
income

Potential stories:
1. Race/ethnicity differences in AP class enrollment and gifted and talented programs. Calculate
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

what percentage of high school students are enrolled in AP classes by race and gender
Student discipline by race as a percentage of all students by race. Combine enrollment data with
discipline data
Compare teacher demographics to student demographics. Combine student enrollment data
with teacher demographic data
What districts have the highest percent of teacher turnover and how does it impact student
achievement
Track a high school graduation class on how many enrolled in college and how those that did
enroll fared in the first years. Track by income, race and gender.
Compare districts by number and percent of homeless children.
Calculate the percent of special education students by race/ethnicity.
Find which schools with high low income and/or high minority populations are doing the best in
student achievement.
Track the achievement gaps by income and race by school district to find which districts have the
narrowest gaps and which districts have shrunk the gaps over the past 10 years.

