Structured Journalism Tip Sheet
What is structured journalism?
Structured journalism is an emerging form of journalism in which news is reported directly into a
database as highly structured and interconnected data ­ often referred to as ‘atoms of news’.
That network of structured news data can then be reconstructed as needed into novel and
adaptable digital news products, enabling news consumers to experience and explore
journalism in entirely new ways. Structured journalism therefore provides an alternative to the
traditional text article as a mechanism for gathering, aggregating and distributing journalism.
Structured journalism is different from data journalism in that it involves reporting news ​
into​
a
database, whereas data journalism typically involves reporting news o
​ut of​
a database, usually
an existing database and usually for publication as a text article. In computer science terms,
structured journalism is about applying the techniques of knowledge representation to
journalism.
Why is structured journalism important?
Structured journalism potentially offers an entirely new paradigm for news and journalism ­ one
that is radically different from the traditional article­centric paradigm and is much better suited to
the digital age. Just as the television era required that news be visual, so too does the Internet
era require that news be structured.
Structured journalism offers the potential to rebundle news as networks of structured
knowledge, which cannot be copied and which can therefore serve as a new economic basis for
newsrooms. It can offer news consumers complete control over the news that they consume, by
formatting news at the time of consumption rather than at the time of production, thereby
accommodating a wide variety of current and future consumer behaviors and contexts.
Structured journalism can enable professional journalists, citizen journalists and robot journalists
to coordinate in producing more and better journalism than each could produce alone, all under
the editorial supervision of newsrooms. And structured journalism might also eventually enable
the seamless integration of daily news and archives, filling in the ‘memory hole’ and making
historical news as accessible and understandable as today’s headlines.
What are some examples of structured journalism?
A list of structured journalism projects is maintained by the Duke Reporter’s Lab, here:
Structured journalism sites

Where can I learn more about structured journalism?
CJR: ​
‘Structured journalism’ offers readers a different kind of story experience
BBC News Lab: ​
A manifesto for structured journalism
New York Times R&D: ​
The future of news is not an article
The Washington Post: ​
The Washington Post tests new ‘Knowledge Map’ feature
Nieman Labs: ​
"Learning to write again"
Duke Reporter’s Lab: ​
Structured journalism site
Poynter Institute: ​
Structured journalism articles
Reynolds Journalism Institute: ​
Structured journalism articles
Reg Chua’s ​
Restructuring Journalism blog
Laura Wojcik’s ​
Structured journalism : the next revolution in storytelling?
NewsNext ​
The age of structured journalism?
Dave Cohn’s ​
What is possible with “Structured Journalism”?
European Journalism Observatory: ​
Is structured journalism smarter journalism?
ONA 2014: ​
2014 Structured journalism session
ONA 2015: ​
2015 Structured journalism session
Structured Stories: ​
Structured Stories prototype
Structured journalism Google group: S
​tructured journalism Google Group
How can I contact the speakers?
Reg Chua ( @reginaldchua ) ­ reginald.chua@gmail.com
Jacqui Maher ( @jacqui ) ­
David Caswell ( @StructStories ) ­ david@structuredstories.com

