Lightning­fast data analysis with Tableau
Sarah Ryley
sarahryley@gmail.com
@MissRyley
About the data:
We have three datasets: A spreadsheet on information that was entered from nuisance
abatement cases, a spreadsheet on census tract demographics, and a spreadsheet on
precinct demographics. Nuisance abatement cases are civil actions that the NYPD files
against businesses and residences it claims are being used for illegal activity. They can
use these actions to shut down the location for up to a year, but generally the tenant
agrees to settle either by giving up their lease or excluding certain people. The data has
information on the case, the target of the case and some of the settlement terms.
Loading data:
­ On the lefthand side of the screen, under “Connect,” select the file type. In this case,
we are using an Excel file
­ Select “cases_nicar”
­ Now you see a dashboard that gives you some options on how you want to move
forward with your data. First you select the type of connection in the top center — For
our purposes, since this is a static data source that we’ll ultimately want to save as a
packaged workbook, choose “Extract.”
­ On the lefthand side, you can select the sheet you want to upload from the Excel
workbook. Our Excel file only has one sheet, so it’s already been selected for us. If you
have multiple sheets, you’d just drag the sheet you want into the white rectangle in the
center.
­ Now you’ll notice symbols over each of your columns for the data type. The # means
the data being read as a number. But in the case of Precincts, we actually want to
convert this to a string, because for our purposes it’s actually a category (or in Tableau,
a “dimension”) and also because it’s one of the fields we could to use to join with
another dataset. It’s not something we’d use for calculations (same with zip codes,
phone numbers, social security numbers) so in data land this is not a number. So just

click on the # and a drop­down menu will appear allowing you to change it to a string.
The globe sign means it’s a geographic indicator, Abc means string. For the “Year”
column, although this is a date, in Tableau you can’t convert just a year to a date. We
have more specific dates in other parts of the spreadsheet.
­ Now convert Arrestdate to a date, and Cityid to a string (again because this is
something we would categorize by — the census tract — and because we’ll be using
this to join with another dataset).
­ Now click “Go to worksheet” in the lower left of the screen, and it’s going to prompt you
to save the extract. I always save them in a separate folder inside my project folder so
they don’t get lost but also don’t crowd up my folder.
Sheets:
­ On the lefthand side, you’ll now see that your fields have been divided into dimension
and measures. Dimensions are qualitative or categorical fields, such as the precinct or
date. These would also be the fields that you would join with other datasets. Measure
are quantitative fields that you would use for calculations.
­ Along the top center, you will see a place to drag fields to be used as columns or rows,
a place to drag fields to be used as filters, and a floating window where you can choose
how you want to view your results. These are the main things we’re going to focus on
for this short session.
­ In the center, you will see what looks like a blank chart. You can also drag and drop
your fields into this section to structure your chart.
Simple queries:
­ First you want to check your total number of records to make sure you’ve correctly
imported your data. Down in the Measures window, you will see a field called “Number
of Records” — this is a field that Tableau always has the simply counts the number of
records. Drag it into the center of the chart. It shows you have 1,161 records. You’ll also
see this displayed at the very bottom of the screen. If you run a query and a certain
number of records are excluded, you’ll see this at the bottom of the screen as well. It’s
important to note this in order to check your work for accuracy.

­ Now we want to see how many actions were filed against residences versus
businesses. Drag the dimension “Partytype” into the columns section. We now see
there were 645 actions filed against businesses and 516 filed against residences.
­ Now we want to see what types of alleged offenses prompted these actions. Drag
“Offense Type” into the rows section. To sort, you can simply click on business or
residence and you’ll see a sort icon.
­ If you want to then total these, click on “Analysis” in the menu bar, then “Show Row
Grand Totals,” then “Show Column Grand Totals”
­ If you want to view these as a percent of total, click on “Analysis” in the menu bar, and
select “Percentage of —> Column”
­ If you want to go back, you can just click the backward arrow in the top lefthand corner
of the dashboard. To redo, just hit the forward arrow.
­ Say you want to simplify your results by grouping the less common offense types into
an “Other” category. You can just hold the shift key, then click on “Other” “Counterfeit
Goods” “Unlicensed Security Guard” and “Unkown” THEN right­click, select “Group.” To
change the name of the category, just right click on the row and select “Edit Alias” and
change the name to “Other.” You’ll now notice that you have a new dimension with your
group. That means you can continually re­use it on new formulas in new sheets without
having to re­create the formula. You can rename it by right­clicking on the dimension
and selecting “Rename.” I’ll call this “Offense Type (<20=Other)” so I remember what it
means two weeks from now.
­ We want to see how many actions were filed each year. Drag “PDevictdate” into rows
— this is the date the action was filed. (We only have data for half of 2014). You can
chose the structure of the chart by dragging the field before or after “Offense Type.” In
this case we want it to come second. You could change it to any type of date part that
you want. In this case, I want to look at the day of the week the action was filed. Bars
complain the NYPD files them on Thursdays and Fridays to extend the number of days
the businesses are closed down before their first court date, which must come within
three business days. So right­click on the date pill, then go down to “more,” then choose
“Weekday.”
­ Now under analysis, choose Percentage Of ­> Column in Pane, and it will calculate the
percent of actions that were filed on each day of the week.

Calculation using date:
­ Now we’ll add a new sheet and run a calculation on two dates. On the bottom left, next
to where it says “Sheet 1” click on the icon that looks like a graph. That will create a new
sheet. You can name your sheets the same way you would in Excel, by right clicking on
the tab and selecting “Rename Sheet.”
­ For this calculation we want to see how many weeks on average the NYPD took to file
the nuisance abatement action after the last offense (which is “Arrestdate”). This is
interesting because they begin every action with an ex parte temporary closing order
before the defendant has had the opportunity to come into court, in part by arguing that
it’s urgent the place be closed immediately.
­ In Measures, right­click and select “create calculated field.” We’ll call this
“Arrest­Evict”.
­ Click the arrow on the right and it will give you a selection of different formula types.
Sometimes I browse through these to get ideas for queries. Double­click “DATEDIFF”
which will calculate the difference between two dates. In the window it gives you a cheat
sheet on how to write the formula:
DATEDIFF('week',[Arrestdate],[Pdevictdate],'Sunday')
­ Type in ‘week’, then drag the “Arrestdate” pill, then add a comma, then drag the
“Pdevictdate” pill, then add another comma, and type ‘Sunday’). You can also just type
these out manually, putting brackets [] around your field. Just make sure it’s typed
exactly the way it appears!
­ Now click okay and drag that pill into the center of the chart. It’s automatically going to
SUM all the weeks between every action, but you actually want an average. So in the
“Marks” window, right click on the pill, select “Measure (SUM)” and change it to
average. You see that it took the NYPD 23 weeks to file these actions after the last
arrest.
­ If you want to view this by party type, just drag “Partytype” into columns, and you can
see that the NYPD actually filed these actions a little faster against businesses than
residences.
Blending tables:

­ Now we’re going to blend this dataset with another one on census data.
­ Select “data” in your menu bar, then “New data source,” then “Excel,” then choose
“demographics_nicar.” Load it as an “extract” and then create a new sheet.
­ You’ll notice in the lefthand pane you now have two datasets under the data section.
­ Now we’re going to create a relationship between the two datasets, joining on the
cityid.
­ Go to Data in your menu bar, and click “Edit relationships.”
­ Click “custom” and then “city id” in both windows.
Calculation with blended tables:
­ Now we want to see the distribution of actions in census tracts based on the percent of
the population that identifies as minorities, compared to the overall distribution of these
census tracts in the city.
­ Select your demographic data from the data section in the menu pane (it’s called
cityid_race_poverty_nabe because these are all the things I joined together for this
table)
­ Right­click on “Pct Non White” (I’ve already calculated this in the underlying data) in
the measures window, and select “Create” and then “Bins.” We’ll create bins in
increments of .20.
­ Now your bins have been added to the Dimensions window. Drag that pill into the rows
field.
­ Now we’re going to go back to the case data. In the lefthand bar, at the top, select the
cases_nicar data. Make sure the link next to the “Cityid” field is not broken. If it is, just
click on it. Now drag “Number of Records” into the data sheet window and it will show
you the distribution of the cases by the demographic makeup of the census tracts.
­ To compare it to the distribution of the census tracts citywide, select the demographic
data, and drag “Number of Records” into the data sheet window. Now you can view by

percentage of column by selecting “Analysis” from the menu bar, then “Percentage of ­>
Column”
Calculation with numbers:
­ First we’ll just look at demographics by neighborhood. Create a new sheet. Using the
demographics data, drag “Neighborhood Name” into rows and “Total Races Tallied” into
the data sheet window. This will just add up the population in each neighborhood (the
city census tract data also attaches neighborhood names to the census tract). You can
then drag “Black” and “Hispanic” into the data window.
­ Now we’ll calculate the percent of the population in each neighborhood that is black
and Hispanic. Create a calculated field by right­clicking in the measures window, and
call it Pct Black and Hispanic. This is the calculation: ([Black]+[Hispanic])/[Total races
tallied:]
­ Drag that pill into the data window as well. Format it to a percentage by right­clicking
the pill in the Measures Values, then clicking format, then changing to a percentage.
Now it’s simply adding up the percentage of every census tract, so you’ll want to
right­click the field again and change the measure to an average.
Correlation:
­ Now we want to see if there’s a relationship between the percent black and Hispanic
and the number of nuisance abatement actions in the neighborhood. Create a new
sheet.
­ We have two datasets — the census data and the nuisance abatement data. Not
every census tract has a nuisance abatement case, but we’ll still want to factor those
tracts into our results because it’s important for us to know if certain tracts had no
actions and the characteristics of those tracts. What if there were a lot of tracts that had
a high concentration of minorities that had no actions whatsoever? That means that
there’s something else at work besides just demographics of an area that factors into
the NYPD’s targets. So you’ll want to start this formula with the demographics data,
since we want all of those tracts, not just the ones that match with the nuisance
abatement data. This is the equivalent of a left join.
­ Select your cityid_race_poverty_name dataset, and drag the “Neighborhood Names”
field into rows. You see at the bottom left of the screen that there are 196

neighborhoods. Remember that number — this is how you’ll check to make sure your
query is behaving properly.
­ Now select your cases dataset, and drag # Number of Records into the chart. You’ll
see that it just says 1161 ­ that means the link is broken. So click the little broken link
icon next to the “Cityid” field
­ We still have 196 rows, but you’ll notice that there’s no numbers in the rows where
there were no actions in those neighborhoods. In order to do this accurately, we’ll need
a zero value where there are no records, so we need to do an “IFNULL” formula. This
will put a zero where there are null values. Create a calculated field from the
demographics dataset that tells Tableau to count the UniqueIDs from the cases dataset,
and if there are none, put a 0 in there:
IFNULL((COUNT([cases_nicar.csv (cases_nicar)].[Uniqueid])),0)
­ Drag that formula into the data window. Now drag the Pct Non White field into the data
window, then right click on the field in the Measures Values window and change it to an
average. And right click on the number of records column and click exclude because we
don’t want that one for our scatter plot.
­ Now under “Show Me” select “Scatter Plot”
­ You’ll actually want to swap the view so your Number of Records (dependent variable)
is on the “Y axis” and your demographics is on the “X axis.” There’s an icon for that in
the middle of the top ribbon.
­ You’ll see in the bottom that you only have 194 neighborhoods plotted. That’s just
because there are no demographics for two neighborhoods because there’s nobody
living there. We’re cool.
­ If you right­click inside the window, you can select “Show trend lines” and then
“Describe trend model.” Know your limits. If you’re not an expert in stats, I would consult
a few before actually putting anything into print. But the main things you want to look at
to see if you have anything to go on are the p­value and r­value. Although there’s some
debate about the significance of the p­value, the stats for dummies measure is that the
relationship may be statistically significant with a p­value of (<0.05). Then you look at
the r­value, which tells you how closely the results are fitted to your regression line, or
how much your independent variable explains the variation in your dependent variable.

In this case, it’s saying 19% of the variation is explained by the percent of the population
that is black and Hispanic. That’s actually not very high so there are a lot of other
factors at work here that explain the variation, such as crime, population density,
poverty, etc. You would also want to create a calculation for rate. And consult an expert
in stats before moving forward.
­ But to give you an idea of some filters that you could do, you could choose to only look
at census tracts that have a certain poverty level, for example. Drag “Poverty Level” into
filters and then choose “Minimum” then click “Next” then punch in 10 at the minimum —
this will only look for neighborhoods that have at least 10% of the population below the
poverty line. Now you have 55 neighborhoods that fit that description. You can
right­click on the pill in the filter and select “Show Filter” so you can adjust it.
Export:
You can export an image or a crosstab of your work. Just go to Worksheet in the menu
bar, then either select “Copy” if you want to just copy and paste right into an email or
Excel sheet, or “Export” if you want to export into a new file.
Saving:
I always save in the .twbx (packaged workbook) format so all of my extracts are already
packaged into a workbook and I don’t have to re­find them when I open a new file.

Some more formulas if we have time:
IFNULL from census: IIF([Partytype]='Residence',1,0,0)
IFNULL from demographics: IFNULL(SUM([cases_nicar.csv (cases_nicar)].[If
Residence]),0)
Rate from demographics: [Calculation1]/SUM(([Total Housing Units]/1000))

