Save Time Searching Federal Public Records
Retrieving and searching through public records is the lifeblood of investigative and business reporting, yet it can be painful. Worse is missing the scoop because a disclosure was filed 10 minutes
after you searched for it.
Sqoop is a free* web service that lets journalists search
and set alerts for records from public data sources. Right
now, Sqoop aggregates information from the SEC, the U.S. Patent
Office and the federal court system, and will be adding others soon.

Search, Set Alerts for SEC, Patents, PACER
Sqoop looks like a search engine. If you’re interested in information
about companies, executives or technologies, for example, simply type in
“Microsoft,” “Sergey Brin,” or “wearable technology,”
and Sqoop will quickly return results from all the data
sources it tracks.
Most importantly for some journalists is the ability to
save these searches as alerts so that whenever there
is a new filing, Sqoop will
trigger an alert so the reporter can jump on the
story.
Sqoop has been on the market for less than a year, but

already one in three business reporters in the U.S.
use the service. These reporters are generating stories every week, oftentimes
ahead of the competition.
* Sqoop will be advertising
supported

www.sqoop.com
info@sqoop.com

Quickly Assess News Value
Not only is it difficult to access public records,
it is also challenging to quickly determine
whether something is newsworthy.
For example, the SEC Form 4 has a bunch of
codes and numbers, but no totals. Sqoop
translates the codes and does the math to
help you quickly understand the form.



www.sqoop.com (SEC, Patents, PACER



10kwizard.com (same plus compare tool)



recapthelaw.ord\g (some free PACER filings



sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.htm



sec.gov/divisions/enforce/friactions.shtml (audit
enforcement releases)



sec.gov/litigation/litreleases.shtml (litigation releases)



searchwww.sec.gov/EDGARFSClient/jsp/
EDGAR_MainAccess.jsp



USPTO.gov (grants, apps and trademark databases



PACER.gov (documents for fed courts)

For other SEC forms that contain often-hard-tofind exhibits, Sqoop presents those on the same
page as the original filing in expandable view to
show, for example, this 8-K from Google along
with an offer letter to its new CFO.
Court cases are different from other records
because they persist for months or years.
Sqoop introduced a feature called Docket
Watch that allows reporter to receive email
alerts for every update to specific cases they
want to follow.
Simply click on the eyeball icon in the upperright of the docket page.

www.sqoop.com
info@sqoop.com

