The Digital Dark Arts
Nicole Hensley (@nkhensley)
New York Daily News

Desk jockey? How to be there when you can’t.
Jet-setting journalists is a fleeting dream, but there are ways to keep tabs on
developing stories.
1.

Find the local guys: reporters, photographers, law enforcement and city.

2.

Read the comments (not yours).

3.

Level the playing field by compiling a Twitter list featuring 10-15 people
covering the story and their sources.

Desk jockey? How to be there when you can’t
Additional Examples:
●

Kalamazoo

●

David Bowie

●

Chapel Hill

●

Idaho Pastor

●

SNL

●

Prez Candidates

●

Kim K. Nude Selfie Beef

Probing a person’s life during breaking news.
You have about 30 minutes before Google mucks up search results after a person’
s name hits a social media alert service, such as Dataminr.
1.

Maximize your Google search for name variations, address, occupation,
social media profiles, old news clippings.

2.

If you can identity one social media profile, you may find them all by banking
on consistency — or laziness. http://knowem.com/

3.

A-B-S: Always. Be. Screenshotting.

Kalamazoo, Mich. — Who is Jason Dalton?

The suspected gunman in the mass shooting was a ghost.

His wife was not.

Eagle River, Alaska — Who is Michael Camp?
Michael Camp was an alias for Joseph May.

“...will definitely takes some picks of mine and my kids and post it, I like this; our main pistols
are tokarev 7.62x25, and we also carry AK47's, as for long rifles we chose the mosin
nagant in 7.62x54R. one thing I did this past year was buy enough ammo for our weapons
that we would be hard pressed to run out. so the bulk will be stored and we can carry what
we want. But I am definitely going to post pics. I had to break my packs down kind of weird, I
have a 12 year old daughter to pack for and a 16 year old son. The boy can carry a lot
and he has a medium sized Alice pack, the girl's pack is the smallest, I can't let her be
overloaded and tire out. My pack is a large framed pack I have used for years and can carry
more than I can. our medical supplies are extensive, a well stocked antibiotic list also in
there, with kids I could not chance an infection taking any of us out, and infections are going
to kill a lot of people when things get bad.”

Hi all, I'm in Eagle River, and have a couple of bug out areas north of here. Myself and my two children, a
daughter 12, and a son 16, have been [prepping for a long time, well they have been into it for a couple years I
have been into it forever since I got out of the USMC in 75 after going to an NBC school at Cherry Point. We
have a pretty good little armory including ammo stores, one that suits us just fine, we shoot a lot, including bows
and arrows and my kids have become quite proficient at it. I have a good store of food and water and this winter
our project is to build our to-go-packs, or bug-out packs, I figure I can build them for about $200 each and they will
have exactly what I want in them, and mine will be a little heavy for the cold climate as a precaution. My
background up here, I trapped the Fairbanks area for many years before moving south ten years ago. Lived in the
remote bush for a year, completely alone, built my own cabin, the whole ten yards, just to try it out and did just
fine. So I know survival up here pretty good and have passed a lot of info on to my kids. I do plan on moving south
one day in a couple years or so, but I am stuck here through the 2012 thing no matter what comes. right now, my
kids and I are searching for a spot to drop down a quick underground, or covered safe spot as a precaution,
probably going to have to buy a half acre somewhere to do that even though money so pretty tight. even in Alaska
an underground can work, and be heated enough to live in through the winter, hell the Eskimo used to live
underground before the white man came here so I know it works. anyway, that's our plan for the future, to go
packs, shelter.
glad to meet you all. mcamp2011

Austin, Texas — Who was David Joseph?

David Joseph, 17, was naked and
unarmed when he killed by a
police officer.

Austin, Texas — Who was David Joseph?

Natural Language: Tracking next of kin
It’s hard to find young people, but their relatives will turn to each other on social
media to mourn and accept condolences from friends and strangers.
1.

If you have a name, try searching “RIP [First name]” on Twitter, Facebook
and Instagram.

2.

This also works to confirm photos of victims by using http://graph.tips/.

Natural Language: Finding stories
Tweetdeck is one of the best free tools to discover real-time stories with the help
of a little experimentation to find the sweet spot.
●

Engagement: Tweak the number of likes, retweets, and replies to find a tweet
that is on to something — before it takes off.

●

Think like an eyewitness: If you saw something incredible, what would you
say?

●

Know jargon: If you want to catch news before it takes off, think of what
authorities or local reporters would say.

Natural Language: Tracking the competition

“Hi, I’m a reporter with [AGENCY] writing
about [STORY]. Can you give me a call at
[PHONE #]? Thanks.”

