Data bulletproofing tips for “Right is the new cool”
NICAR 2016:
There is a shared collective wisdom about the best practices for bulletproofing a story, but
members of the NICAR community have different approaches.
We’ve collected tips from NICAR and IRE tipsheets and other sources to make a mixtape of
the best tips from the NICARian community. Many of the tipsheets are available to members
in the online tipsheet archive.
Make a plan:
Before you jump into a project you need to develop a methodology to guide your efforts.
Once you form your plan, run it by trusted colleagues and experts to see if there are flaws.
Ellen Gabler, reporter/assistant editor at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel offers this
advice and more on her tipsheet, “Develop your own bulletproofing methodology.”
●

●
●

“Understand the science, regulations or the or the process of whatever you are
investigating,” she writes in her tipsheet. You need to fully understand how things
work, or should work.
Read the studies and reports. Pay attention to the footnotes.
“Poke holes in your methodology,” is sage advice offered up by Gabler. It’s important
to think of all the ways your critics will attack your work.

Jennifer LaFleur, who is currently the senior editor at Reveal, writes up what she calls “white
papers” that detail what data were used, how the analysis of the data was done and what the
conclusions of that analysis were. Then she sends it around to experts for comment.
Gabler mentions the need to write up the “nerd box” that says how you did your analysis. A
new wave of programmers advocate for the publication of the computer programs written to
process and analyze the data along with the data.
Whatever your approach, you have to explain to readers what you did. And be prepared to
defend why you did it that way.
Data integrity checks:
Jennifer LaFleur, who is currently the senior editor at Reveal, has put together a
comprehensive checklist for performing data integrity checks.
Here are some tips from her:
●

Make sure you know how many records you should have and that you have them all.
Certain versions of Excel, especially ones used in gov't agencies, have row limits; be

●
●

●

●
●
●

concerned if you or someone in your newsroom tells you they have 65,536.
Database programs like MySQL have limits on the size of integers and on the length
of string fields. These limits tend to be powers of two ­­ 2^n or 2^n­1. or 1,048,576
records, so be skeptical if your strings are 255 characters long or if a sum appears to
be 2,097,152.
Double­check totals or counts. Check for studies or summary reports.
Consistency­check all fields. Are all city names spelled the same way? How about
other important fields? Check by running a GROUP BY and sorting alphabetically by
every important field. Check it for spelling inconsistencies. For example, if you’re
analyzing a database of highway accidents, GROUP BY and sort ascending on the
road name to check for inconsistencies.
Other basic checks: make sure all states/cities/counties are included. Check the
range of fields. (For example, check for DOBs that would make people too old or too
young.)
Check for missing data or blank fields. Are they real values, or did something happen
with an import or append query?
Check your methodology (if necessary) against other similar research.
Beware of lurking variables.

It’s important to try and get the same data from multiple sources, question methodologies
and keep talking to experts. Her tipsheet covers all that and more in great detail. Find it h
​ere.
Former Fresno Bee writer Russell Clemings shared these tips
●
●
●

Run different queries to see if you get the same results.
Pull a random sample from your results and make sure they match the raw data.
Always double check surprising results. It could be a story or, more likely, you did
something wrong.

Documentation:
We can’t emphasize enough the importance of documenting while doing integrity checks and
cleaning data. Most databases are large, complex and dirty and it is important that you don’t
miss something. Documentation also helps if you get back to the project after a while or if
multiple people are collaborating on it.
●

●

Make a word document of all the things you’ve done. You can either start with a
checklist of what you plan to do and keep crossing things off the list. Or you can start
with an empty word doc and add things you did with the database
Save and paste all your queries in another word doc. This will save you a lot of
repetitive work and help you organize better. You’ll most likely do similar types of
queries with other tables with slight modifications and this will save time and energy.
Also, by doing this, you don’t have to remember what you did.

Ronald Campbell, Data Editor, NBC Owned Television Stations has these tips on
organization

●

●
●

Keep a phone log in Excel. Ron records the date, time, person, employer, topic and
phone number of almost everyone he calls. If the call is an interview, he tries to
record the page number of his notebook where his interview notes begin.
Build a chronology and a “who’s who”
Find more of Ron’s tips in his handout available in the online tipsheet archive.

Ellen Gabler, reporter/assistant editor at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel offers this
advice and more on her tipsheet, “Develop your own bulletproofing methodology.”
●

Assume that your notes, spreadsheets and methodology could also be viewed by the
public.

In addition to notes, spreadsheets and methodologies any emails you send and code that
you write should also be crafted with the assumption that it can be viewed by the public.
In a bulletproofing tipsheet from August, 2014 Brad Heath of USA TODAY and Lisa Song of
InsideClimate News also point out that any of your voicemails or text messages could come
back to haunt you if you’re not careful.
Anything you do in the course of your work must be handled with care and professionalism
at all times.
Maud Beelman, Editor, Associated Press, offers many tips you should pay close
attention to in her tipsheet, “Bulletproofing the Big Story.” Go get this one.
●
●

Footnote everything you write. Every fact in a story memo or story draft needs a
footnote to back it up.
Include the “humility graf” in your story that lays out what you don’t know.

Data cleaning:
Jaimi Dowdell, senior training director at IRE has some handy ideas for data cleaning.
●
●
●
●
●
●

Always work off of a backup copy.
Save your notes and your data often.
Never alter the original data (add new columns).
Once you’ve identified the problem, pick the best tool for the job.
Double check your work.
Look for patterns in the data. Use the patterns to help you solve the problem.

More tips ​
here.
We’ve borrowed liberally from the tipsheets listed below but you should still get them from
the archive online and read them all. Take note that these people may be working for

different organizations now. The job titles and employers listed were at the time they wrote
the tipsheet that we reviewed in the archive.
A Guide to Bulletproofing Your Data, Jennifer LaFleur, ProPublica
Bulletproofing the Big Story, Maud Beelman, Deputy Managing Editor, Projects & Enterprise,
The Dallas Morning News​
. November 2012
Bulletproofing your story, Bread Heath, USA TODAY, August 2014
DANGER!! Look out for dirty data, Jaimi Dowdell, IRE, GIJC13 – Rio de Janeiro
Developing your own bulletproof methodology, Ellen Gabler, reporter/assistant editor,
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Bullet­Proofing a Watchdog Story, Ronald Campbell, The Orange County Register

