Mapping basics
akanik.github.io /mapping-basics-2016/
NICAR 2016
Saturday, March 12, 10:15
Sunday, March 13, 9:00
Alexandra Kanik (@act_rational)
Not all datasets needs to be mapped, but some do! This mapping class is perfect for beginners looking to learn the
basics of visualizing geographic data. We'll go over how to find publicly available data, convert addresses to map
points, join datasets and use the open source mapping software, QGIS.
Download the data

What types of data sets should be mapped, which shouldn't
Don't map one dimensional data
Do map comparison data
Do map proximity data

What you can do with QGIS
Analyze geographic data
Create static maps for display
Generate files for interactive map (cartodb or leaflet.js or mapbox)

Geocoding tools
Peter Aldhous's Refine geocoder - this is nice because it uses geocoders that are, in most circumstances, legal to
use. It also geocodes your data using two geocoders so you can compare the results. And it's free! Rate limits may
apply.
Census geocoder - Free but I've found it to be a little less accurate. Rate limit: 1,000 addresses at a time.
Here's a more complete list of geocoding tools and APIs

Common data types
Shapefiles

1/20

.shp - the feature geometry
.shx - positioning index of the feature geometry
.dbf - the data attributes for the features. This can be opened with editors like excel.
.prj - projection file. This can also be opened and analyzed. Especially if you're having projection issues.

GeoJSON

2/20

Delimited text layer
CSV
id, city, state,
population
001, Pittsburgh, PA,
310885
002, Columbus, OH, 822092

TSV

3/20

id city state
population
001 Pittsburgh PA
310885
002 Columbus OH 822092

PSV

id|city|state|population
001|Pittsburgh|PA|310885
002|Columbus|OH|822092

What is a .qgs file?
When you save a QGIS map file, it will save as a .qgs. This file is a configuration file. It basically just references the
files that you load into QGIS. IT DOES NOT HOLD ANY OF YOUR DATA. This means if you move the shapefiles
you load into your map after you save it, your map will break.
So establish a working directory for each map you work on. Put your shapefiles and your map file in there and
don't move them around.

This might seem like a weird, crappy way to organize things. But it's not. And here's why.
QGIS isn't perfect, and neither are you. Sometimes you come up against errors in behavior that you can explain. So
your only recourse is to shut 'er down and reopen the program.
And sometimes, that doesn't work either. So you need to scrap your map file.
Now, if all of your work depended on that one .qgs file, that would suck hardcore. But since your shapefiles and data
are separate files, and since you've taken crazy good process notes, you're totally fine.

Naming your files and taking mad notes
There are going to be projects you work on that will require you to slice and dice a shapefile in many different ways.
You need to be careful what you name each file so you aren't analyzing old shapefiles.
I would strongly recommend taking detailed notes about how you change shapefiles so you can return to the notes
in case you lose track of which file is which, or if something goes wrong and you need to diagnose a problem.
Here's an example of bad file naming. Notice the folders labelled "_old". What does that mean. I made
that folder and I don't know what it means. Sigh.

What is a projection?
So the earth is round, right? Turns out it's not the easiest thing to make something round and three-dimensional look
flat. But to hell if we don't try.
That's basically what projections are, flat representations of our round world. Lots of people have taken a stab at
making the best projection, but not all projections are created equal.
Depending on the scope and span of your data, you may want to stick to a more local, granular projection. But if
you're trying to show the whole world things are going to get a little wonky at some point.
More on projections >>

4/20

Mapping projections from the 1936 Oxford Advanced Atlas compiled by John Bartholomew,
cartographer to His Majesty the King

5/20

*

I've collapsed this section because while it's very important to understand projections, they are also amazingly
confusing and might serve only to confuse the novice map maker. Just know to return to this topic once you feel
more comfortable with QGIS and displaying and analyzing geographic data in general.

Demo
In this demo, we're going to be creating a map that overlays Pennsylvania nursing homes with abandoned mine
data.
This is a blank map.

6/20

7/20

8/20

The working directory
Download the data
Choose your working directory, and stick with it

A working directory is a place on your computer where you house all of your map shapefiles. Once a shapefile is
added to the working directory, it should not be moved around because that can break the file path and therefore
your map.
In the example above, abandoned-pa-mines-data is the working directory.
This is what you'll see if you move layers and map files around

9/20

Adding data
We're going to be focusing on VECTOR LAYERS and DELIMITED TEXT LAYERS. These are the layers you will use
most often.

Adding vectors
Click the vector layer button
Navigate to your working directory
Add tl_2014_42_county --> tl_2014_42_county.shp
Let's talk about projections now.
Add aml_inve --> aml_inve.shp
Add pa-nursing-homes-20150220 --> pa-nursing-homes-20150220-shp -->
pa-nursing-homes-20150220.shp

Adding delimited text layers
There are two types of delimited text layers you can add: geographic and non-geographic.
Geographic delimited text layers
So we've already add the pa-nursing-homes-20150220 as a shapefile, but there's another
pa-nursing-homes-20150220 data file in our working directory.

10/20

Click the

delimited text layer button

Navigate to your working directory
Add pa-nursing-homes-20150220 --> pa-nursing-homes-20150220-geo.csv
On the data import screen, we have many options. Most of them are self explanatory. But look under Geometry
definition. This is where we will be telling QGIS that we have a delimited text layer that has geographic data.
Make sure Point coordinates is checked.
Then set your latitude and longitude fields

Write this down:
Latitude = Y
Longitude = X

11/20

Non-geographic delimited text layers
If your delimited text file doesn't have those latitude and longitude columns, you can still import the data, but nothing
will be mapped
This is often useful and necessary when you're trying to join non-geographic data to geographic data. Michael Corey
goes over that in his presentation.
Click the

delimited text layer button

Navigate to your working directory
Add the pa-nursing-homes-20150220 folder --> pa-nursing-homes-20150220-source.csv
Because we have no geometry in this file, QGIS won't let us add it to the map until we tell it that there's

12/20

No geometry (attribute table only)

The difference between On-the-fly (project-level) projection and layer projection
On-the-fly projecting
On-the-fly projecting is a way of setting the project-level projection so that subsequent shapefiles added to the
project assume that specified projection.
You'll want to set this on-the-fly projecting before adding any data to your map.
NOTE: On-the-fly projecting does NOT actually change your shapefile's projection. So next time you use this
shapefile in a new map, it will revert back to whatever projection it had before you added it to your on-the-fly map. If
you want to actually change a shapefile's projection see this section.

13/20

14/20

Changing a layer's projection
If you'd like to change a layer's projection instead of just changing how the layer looks in the QGIS system, you'll
need to follow these steps.
Right-click the layer you'd like to change
Select "Save as"
Click the "Change" button near the CRS section
Choose your desired coordinate system and click "OK"
NOTE: this process is going to create a NEW shapefile from your existing shapefile, so make sure to name it
something you'll remember
Name your new shapefile and add it to your working directory with the "Browse" button
You might be thinking... well that didn't seem to change anything. But close down QGIS, open a new map, and add
that newly projected shapefile. You'll see that it now looks much different. Much more like Pennsylvania is expected
to look.

Styling
Right-click or double-click the layer
Select the Style tab
Style accordingly

15/20

Selecting by location
Now we want to take a look at only those nursing homes that sit on top of abandoned mines.
Navigate to the Vector menu > Research tools > Select by location

16/20

Select features in = the shapefile you want to refine
That intersect features in = the shapefile that will determine which features are selected, the intersect layer

17/20

Right-click layer and select "Save as"
Follow normal saving procedures, but make sure to check the "Save only selected features" box
You probably want to add this file to the map after it's created, so check "Add saved file to map" also

18/20

Analyzing the attribute table
1. Right-click the layer and choose "Open Attribute Table"
2. Navigate to where the layer is stored in your working directory and open the .dbf file with an editor like excel
or libreoffice

19/20

You mean you want more mapping?
This is only the very beginning of what's possible with QGIS. Here's a link to Michael Corey's presentation where he
covers joining datasets within QGIS, simplifying shapefiles and grouping points by location.

20/20

