The Racial Wealth Gap
Covering everyday inequality

“We started our analysis with an overriding
question: Why has economic inequality become
so entrenched in our post-Civil Rights era of
supposed legal equality?”

Source: Feb. 2013, Institute on Assets and Social Policy, Thomas
Shapiro, Tarjana Meschede and Sam Osoro

“If you want to do powerful investigations into
racial inequality, you need to become an
expert in the laws and policies that deal with
civil rights.”
– Nikole Hannah-Jones, The New York
Times Magazine
Source: IRE Journal, Third Quarter 2015

King at Marquette Park in Chicago

Where I’m going
• A definition of the racial wealth gap
• Data and observation (using data to
conceptualize stories)
• Scholars and research
• Takeaways and tips

Defining the racial wealth gap

Biggest drivers of racial wealth gap
• Years of homeownership
• Household income
• Unemployment
• A college education
• Inheritance, financial supports by families or
friends and preexisting family wealth
Source: Feb. 2013, Institute on Assets and Social Policy, Thomas
Shapiro, Tarjana Meschede and Sam Osoro

Minorities have lower incomes and higher
poverty rates than whites, and are less likely
to own their homes or cars or enjoy income
from investments.

U.S. data for 2007 reveal that the net worth of
high-income African-Americans was
substantially less than that of middle-income
whites; and fully one-quarter of AfricanAmericans reported zero financial assets or
wealth.

Additional data from 2009 put the median net
worth of Hispanic and African-American
households at $6,325 and $5,677,
respectively, compared to $113,149 for white
households.

How do you turn such a
big issue into stories?

Data and observation
Data sets are a source. Your questions provide
the meaning and context for data.

Data and observation
From observation to data or from data to
observation?
It’s both approaches.

From observation to data:
Who’s doing business in the
neighborhood?

A three-part series
We decided to take a counterintuitive look at
African-American commercial corridors. Instead
of just examining disinvestment, we wanted to
look at who was there and why – and what did
that say about the economic power of the
surrounding communities?

The story was driven by observation.

Family Dollar generated $10.5 billion in sales in
2014 from more than 8,000 stores in 46 states.

Seventy out of 83 Family Dollar stores in Chicago
are located where the average annual income of
households within a one-mile radius is less than
$50,000 a year.

Family Dollar locations

Beyond Family Dollar
We also looked at tax increment financing (TIF),
a tax tool used by cities to help spur economic
development, and how TIF was being used in
one commercial corridor.

From data to observation:
No rebound from the recession

A new series that looks at black unemployment
and underemployment.

You can start with data or observation. Either
way, you have to find and frame the story.

Scholars and Research
• Raj Chetty, Stanford, The Equality of
Opportunity Project
• William Darity Jr., Duke University
• Kimberle Crenshaw, Columbia University
• Steve Pitts, University of California, Berkeley

More scholars
• Mary Pattillo, Northwestern University
• William Julius Wilson, Harvard University
• Devah Pager, Harvard University
• Monnica Williams, University of Louisville
• Michael Dawson, University of Chicago

Some takeaways

• Search the literature (JSTOR, Journalist’s
Resource, Social Science Research Network)
• Study civil rights history and laws and your
community’s unique racial history
• The first two points will help you put data in
context and tell your story
• Focus on patterns and …

