#FOIA blues
María Ines Zamudio
@mizamudio

“Journalism is printing what someone else does not
want printed: everything else is public relations.”

-George Orwell

Where to start?
Filing FOIAs can feel intimidating but it shouldn’t. Here are few ways to get started.

● Review your state’s open records law. In TN, you have to be a resident to file.
● Make the request VERY specific. If it’s too broad, you’ll likely get a denial. For
example, request correspondence between Rev. Richard Hamlet and HUD’s
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Multifamily Housing between Jan. 1, 2016 and
March 30, 2016 INSTEAD of requesting correspondence between Rev. Richard
Hamlet and HUD.
● Start small, then expand
Plan ahead. Most FOIAs will take time. Weeks, Months and yes, YEARS.
● Spend some time reading FOIA libraries. Most federal agencies have them.

Resources and tips
The Reporter’s Committee for Freedom of the Press has a lot of great resources
including a letter generator for both state and federal agencies. The site also has
sample letters for appeals.
MuckRock “is a collaborative news site that brings together journalists, researchers,
activists, and regular citizens to request, analyze, and share government
documents, making politics more transparent and democracies more informed.”
FOIA Machine, is a web site created and funded by the John S. Knight Foundation,
the Reynolds Journalism Institute and is hosted by The Center for Investigative
Reporting. It’s an incredible web site. It has contacts in many government agencies,
state laws among other resources.

Keep yourself organized
After you file your FOIA, call the next day to verify the agency received the
request. And DOCUMENT it.

Follow the law, if you filed a FOIA in Tennessee follow up with the agency within
seven working days. Put it on your calendar.

Think like a lawyer and write like a lawyer. If you don’t know the law, look it up.

Make sure you’re filing the FOIA to the right agency. Check and double Check.

I have a spreadsheet of all my requests. It helps me to make notes and keep

Fighting for transparency
Journalists are the only ones who get paid to advocate for government
transparency. Take that job very seriously.

If we don’t file FOIAs, no one else will. We have to push public agencies to be more
transparent. When we win those battles, it is easier for the general public to make
those requests.

Retention policies
It’s important to know how
records are kept and for

how long.
FOIA retention policies for the

agencies you cover.

Be stubborn and appeal denials
You can appeal denials, partial denials and if the agency wants to charge you an
unreasonable amount for the records. You can also appeal if the agency over
redacts information.
Don’t assume the agency is right. If they say something is private, tell them to cite
the law.
Sometimes the agency, will say that the document doesn’t exist, find a source and
prove that the documents exists.

Appeals, Appeals, Appeals
In Tennessee, file appeals with the Office of Open Records Counsel, which is part
of the Comptroller’s office. This agency doesn’t have much power but I still think is
worth filing the appeal.
I’ve had success appealing FOIAs in IL. After a 6-month FOIA battle with IL Dept of
Labor, the agency turned over the records. I wrote this investigation.
When cases are appealed and the journalists win, it could have great impact on the
next person requesting records. Take a look at some of these opinions the TN
Comptroller’s office put out and the IL

Get creative
There are so many possibilities for documents you can request. Get creative. Take
these request as an example:
Contract between a
Texas University and
Atlanta-based rapper
2chainz

Federal agencies
Filing FOIAs to federal agencies takes a lot, A LOT of time but it is worth filing those
FOIAs.
Take this example. In 2012, the FBI investigated all these threats against federal law
makers. The FOIA was filed in Feb. 2013 but the requester didn’t get the
documents until last year. Despite the long wait, a lot of interesting documents
were released.

2012 Death Threats against federal lawmaker:

FOIAs aren’t easy. Sometimes they are ridiculous

I was charged $73.40 for labor fees. This was part of
the labor:

FOIAs for reporters covering immigration
●

Treasury Department
○

●

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
○

●

Merida spending, embassy correspondence, treaty reports

Department of Homeland Security
○

●

changes in policy, enforcement practices, citizenship data

State Department
○

●

seized assets, repatriated cash, money laundering investigations

Repatriation and deportation data, immigrant files, disciplinary cases, private firm contracts

Customs and Border Protection
○

Arrest data, incident reports, violent assault data, corruption cases

