From Mike McGraw, Kansas City Public Television
Tips:
plug into the local/organic food movement and develop sources re: frustrations, and govt and other
roadblocks for them.
keep tabs on food recalls in your area through usda/fda websites
develop sources and get feeds from DC­based food­safety and environmental lobbyists such as food and
water watch and environmental working group
troll for lawsuits and epa actions against local food producers and suppliers
data sources: online recall database, usda
online residue database, usda
environmental working group's online farm subsidy database
link: ​
http://www.mcclatchydc.com/2012/12/09/176738/big­beef­beefs­raw­edges.html
Kansas City Public Television | 125 East 31st Street, Kansas City, MO 64108 | Station: ​
816­756­3580​
Main
Fax: ​
816­931­2500

Connect with KCPT:​
FB: /kcpt19 | Twitter: @kcpt | Youtube: KCPTOnline
From Kate Golden, Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism
Tips re environment and agriculture:
1. Sources: Talk to the farmers and get to as many farms as you can. Also, extension agents and crop
consultants are the experts farmers trust most; land and water conservation departments or other county
officials know exactly what is going on at the local level.
2. Examine how cumulative impacts are regulated.
3. To understand what's going on, you have to look at the demographic changes in agriculture ­­ number
and size of farms, who is farming what.
Four data sources/ideas:
1. National Agricultural Statistics Service's query system called ​
Quick Stats​
. Always talk to a human. They
respond quickly.
2. Groundwater supply: Ask state for data on high­capacity well permits. In WI, we got data on section level
going back several decades, and they have been tracking the permits and numbers since the 1950s. Since
2008 they have been tracking water use as well.
3. Nutrient pollution: Ask state for data on the money given to farmers to install best management practices.
Nationally, this is way underfunded ­­ as a side note, there's little proof the BMPs work.
4. Well data ­ county level health departments often have outreach programs and are keeping the data on
what proportion are polluted.
Links to our work:
Project: Water Watch Wisconsin
Drying Up: Wisconsin's dwindling groundwater supply
Hormonal wells found in state's karst region; dairy farms possible source

