Covering agribusiness
Nils Mulvad, nils.mulvad@kaasogmulvad.dk, 9th
​​of March 2016
Industry fight back and change the coverage of resistant bacteria in livestock
Agri business industry and their interests’ organizations seems to have the strategy of
pushing authorities and society to accept their use of antibiotics and the widespread
existence of reservoirs of resistant bacteria in pig stables. After pressure, the industry might
accept small reductions in the use of antibiotics. However, they think it is impossible to get
rid of MRSA­infected pigs in stables. In Denmark, MRSA­infected pigs are found in around
70 percent of the stables. The industry argue society must accept this and then should try to
minimize the spread of resistant bacteria from the stables to the rest of the society. Out of
this strategy, they try to keep it secret how much antibiotics is used and where the infected
pigs live.
The farmers associations fight hard for this strategy, for instance taking the state to court,
claiming it will stigmatize the farmers if the places of MRSA­pigs gets public.
The industry then are able to change the coverage in most of the Medias to focus on this
disagreement. Instead of covering the missing activities from authorities in fighting the
spread of resistant bacteria.
Investigative Reporting Denmark has covered MRSA since 2012 –​
the latest story​
​
publish
the infected farms and show the rate of infections at organic farms to be only 6 pct. –
compared to 70 pct. in non­organic farms.
Correctiv coordinate project on resistant bacteria
Correctiv​
from Germany has also published stories on the spread of MRSA in Germany. The
non­profit investigative organization coordinates a project where several Medias, mostly in
Europe, work together on resistant bacteria.
Many reporters and Medias have faced fight­backs from strong organizations and business,
where they try to deny or “change” facts, raise court cases, and influence decisions at
authorities. We see it also here, rather strong, and I think we must prepare for heavy
reactions to investigations in agri business. Also reactions, which seems as overreactions
and hard to understand.
GMO and Monsanto left Europe
After a pressure in Europe for countries to accept GMO, Monsanto 3 years ago stopped
most of its activities for GMO in Europe. Very silently. We run a FOI­case in Denmark on
test­results of a failed GMO­trial. Monsanto succeeded to force authorities to keep the
test­results secret. They are still secret. As a side effect of that story, Monsanto admitted to
have decided not to push for GMO in nearly all countries in Europe.
See the story
Close related to that is the control of Seed. This is what Monsanto and some of the other big
companies really focus on in Europe now.
Water­pollution are related to agri­business

There have been a huge press coverage in Denmark on water­pollution related to fertilizers.
After the ministry manipulated with the numbers to please the industry and its wish for
increasing the use of fertilizers, the minister had to step down leave the government. The
Medias digging into that case uncovered how hard scientist where pressed to try to get them
to change conclusions. It also showed how the ministry tried to cover the real effect of
opening for more use of fertilizers, so the EU­Commission would not criticize the country.
Climate change related to agri business
An upcoming area of investigations are agri business contribution to climate change. It
follows the same pattern as other investigations in the industry.
You need to fight for the data
Due to an international​
UN­convention on access to environmental data​
​
, it is actually
possible to get many important data for stories such as the use of pesticides, spread of
resistant bacteria, use of antibiotics, fertilizers, water pollution, poisoned ground and farm
subsidies.
Normally to get data like this it takes a long FOI­case, and if you do it in several countries,
the data structure often differs. The great message are that today most of these data actually
exists and you can get them. But you can’t just download them.
Getting data and story ideas from GIJN environmental workshops
At the two latest Global Investigative Journalism Conferences, we have had workshops and
shared story ideas and possible resources for some of these stories. Please look​
here​
​
.
Working together on stories cross­border
There is huge potential for working together cross­border on stories related to agri business.
It’s the same issues from country to country. We can make most of the stories nearly
identical from country to country.
One problem is the need for funding for making this coordination of stories. It is normally still
quite hard to get funding in Europe.

