Stats Primer: Making Sense of Data
Peter Gade, Ph.D.,
Gaylord Professor of Journalism
University of Oklahoma
Contact: pgade@ou.edu

Statistics (a primer)
Statistics are tools that help us understand the world by describing,
organizing, and interpreting data.
Stats allow us to reason mathematically (systematically, objectively,
empirically) about the meaning of the data.
Stats provide researchers ways to understand:
--errors in measurement,

--probabilities (predict the likelihood of outcomes),
--relationships between variables (correlations),
--group differences (tests of significance).

Sampling
You may not have the time, energy, or resources to study an entire
population, but if you do a good job drawing a sample, the data produced by
the sample can be inferred to be representative of the population.
To make inferences from a sample to a population – to generalize, you want
a sample that is representative of the population.
Sampling from a population introduces the likelihood of sampling error.
--To control for sampling bias, researchers allow
the “process of pure chance” to work.

Random Samples
Randomness means totally left to chance.
To ensure randomness:
1) Sample selected in a way only chance operates, and
2) every member of the population has an equal chance of being chosen.
Non-random samples (convenience, volunteer, purposive, quota) are
unlikely to produce data that can be generalized to populations.

Polls and sampling error
When researchers refer to margin of error, they are referring to sampling
error (SE).
Sampling error (or standard error) is a measure of how much a sample
varies from other samples we could draw from the same population.
Put another way, if we drew additional samples of the same size from the
same population, how similar/different would they be?

The normal curve

The Central Limit Theorem (normal curve) indicates that
95% of additional theoretical samples would fall within
+/- 2 SE of the percentages in the sample.

Interpreting polls
• In Ohio, a March 9 Quinnipiac poll of 689 likely Republican
voters found:
• Trump
38%
• Kasich
32%
• Cruz
16%
• Rubio
9%
Margin of error: +/-3.7% at 95% confidence level
Note: The error is assumed at the 95% confidence level.

Interpreting polls
Considering the margin of error, another poll taken from same population
can be 95% likely to return these results of support for each candidate:
Trump
38% +/- 3.7 =
34.3 to 41.7%
Kasich
32% +/- 3.7 =
28.3 to 35.7%
Cruz
16% +/- 3.7 =
12.3 to 19.7%
Rubio
9% +/- 3.7 =
5.3 to 12.7%

We can conclude (at 95% confidence level):
--Trump and Kasich are within margin of error – no clear leader
--Trump and Kasich lead Cruz and Rubio
--Cruz and Rubio are within the margin of error

Variable Relationships:
Confidence Level and Probability
Researchers want a high confidence level in their statistical tests.

Most use 95% confidence level as a threshold for determining “statistical
significance” of relationships.
This level is indicated by statistical probability (little “p”).
Thus, when p < .05, we can say with at least 95% confidence that a
relationship did not occur by chance (something caused it).

Correlations
Pearson product-moment correlation (aka Pearson “r”)
The most common way of expressing the relationship between two
variables.
--the range is from -1.0 to +1.0
--a positive correlation means that as one variable increases or
decreases (or varies) the other variable varies in the same direction.
--a negative correlation means that as one variable increases or
decreases the other variable varies in the opposite direction.

Correlations
Pearson r tells us two basic things:
1) an estimate of the strength of the relationship (number)
2) direction of relationship (sign)
-.83 is stronger than .23
Correlation strength: Kind of tricky.
--+/-.5 and above is quite high, but it depends on the extent the variables
vary and sample size.
--Look at the probability (“p”): the lower the p, the higher the confidence
level that the relationship did not occur by chance.

Sample problem: Seeing the possibilities
State Department of Education data set includes:
--state aid per district (per student/year)
--demographics per district (ethnicity, gender, income)
--district size (number of students)
--urban/rural (number of students/square mile)
--high school graduation rates (by district)

Some questions statistics can answer
RQ1: Is there a relationship between state aid and graduation rates?
(correlation)
RQ2: Are there differences between two groups (e.g, gender or
urban/rural) and graduation rates? (t-test)
RQ3: Are there differences between more than two groups (e.g., ethnicity or
income) and graduation rates? (ANOVA)
RQ4: Which variables are most important predictors of high
school graduation? (multiple regression)

RQ1: Interpreting correlations
RQ1: Is there a relationship between state aid and graduation rates?
Variables in test: state aid and graduation rates
Results: Pearson r = .418; Significance (confidence) level: p = .007
Is correlation significant?
Yes, p < .05.
Interpretation:
There is a statistically significant positive correlation (or relationship) that as state
aid increases, high school graduation rates increase.
AND
There is a statistically significant (positive) correlation that as state
aid decreases, high school graduation rates decrease.

RQ2: Differences between two groups:
independent samples t-test
RQ2: Are there differences by gender and graduation rates?
Variables in test: gender (IV) and graduation rates (DV)

Male: .71 (or 71 percent graduate); Female .74
Results: t value = -.2036, df = 511, p = .042

Significance?

Interpretation:
Females are (statistically) significantly more likely than males to graduate high
school.
AND
Males are (statistically) significantly less likely than females to
graduate high school.

RQ3: Group Differences
(more than two groups): ANOVA
RQ3: Are there differences between more than two groups (e.g.,
ethnicity) and graduation rates? (single factor ANOVA)
Variables in test: ethnicity (African-American, Latino/Latina, Native
American, White, Other) (IV) and graduation rates (DV)

Results: F = 3.692, p = .003

Significance?

If ANOVA finds significance, must run a post hoc test (e.g., Tukey’s,
Scheffe, Bonferroni) to see where (between which groups) the
differences are significant.

RQ3: Group Differences : ANOVA
Post hoc Results: Homogeneous Subsets:
1
2
African-American
.68
Latino/Latina
.66
Native American
.71
White
.79
Other
.70
Interpretation: White students are (statistically) significantly more likely to
graduate high school than African-American, Latino/Latina, Native American and
other non-white students.
AND
There are no statistically significant differences among AfricanAmerican, Latino/Latina, Native American and other non-white
students and high school graduation rates.

RQ4: Predictors of conditions/outcomes:
Multiple Regression
RQ4: Which variables are most important predictors of high school
graduation?
Multiple regression calculates the relationship between multiple
independent or predictor variables (IVs) and a dependent variable (DV).
The coefficients produced are called “beta weights.”
Variables in test: state aid, demographics (ethnicity, gender, income),
district size, urban/rural (all IVs), and graduation rates (DV).

RQ4: Predictors of outcomes
Multiple Regression Results:
Beta weights
Sig (p)
State aid
.253
.018
Gender
-.149
.267
Ethnicity
.189
.173
Income
.363
.001
District size
.091
.452
Urban/rural
.062
.538
Interpretation: School district average income and state aid are statistically
significant predictors of high school graduation rates after controlling for the
influence of all variables in the model.
AND
The school district average income is the strongest predictor of high
school graduation rates of all variables in the model.

Review: What have we learned?
In this one-hour primer, we discussed:
--Understanding sampling error
--Dispersion and probability
--Margin of error and polls
--Asking other questions (relationships, differences, predictors)
--Statistical tests (correlation, t test, ANOVA, multiple regression)
--Interpreting the results
Your turn: Questions?

Additional Resources:
Salkind, N. (2011). Statistics for People Who (Think They) Hate Statistics.
(4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Williams, F., & Monge, P. (2001). Reasoning with Statistics: How to Read
Quantitative Research. (5th ed.). New York: Harcourt.
Wimmer, R., & Dominick, J. (2011). Mass Media Research. (9th ed.). Boston:
Wadsworth.
The most common software for running statistics is Statistical Package for
Social Sciences (SPSS).
A tutorial can be accessed for free online at:
http://www.spss-tutorials.com/statistical-tests/

PSPP: Alternative statistical software
PSPP is a free software that works much like SPSS.
Overview: https://www.gnu.org/software/pspp/

To get PSPP: https://www.gnu.org/software/pspp/get.html
PSPP tutorial: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GG-wbMS9i7g

Thank you!
Contact Peter Gade at
pgade@ou.edu

