Finding U.S. Data
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE
@jaimidowdell
jaimi@ire.org

Records requests – Know the law
Reporter’s Committee for Freedom of the Press Open Government Guide – Use it for summaries of the
law and for help on what is open or closed.
Request open records logs. Check out the FOIA logs on the Government Attic website here.

What do they have?
Retention schedules:
-Colorado municipal schedules here and state agency schedules here
Major Information Systems for federal agencies
Federal IT Dashboard data here

Public records portals
BRB Publications - https://www.brbpublications.com/freeresources/Pubrecsites.aspx
Online searches - http://www.onlinesearches.com/
Portico from UVA (property) - http://indorgs.virginia.edu/portico/

Use The Google (and/or other search engines)
Site-specific searches. For example:

Or

Add in file type searches – this gets the older versions of Excel:

And this gets the newer versions of Excel:

Other ways to find what they keep…
Online forms to submit information
State and federal statutes
Annual, inspectors general and Audit reports
Something in a chart format hints that data exist
Data readily available (searchable databases)
Business/labor/economy
Quarterly Census of Employment & Wages from BLS (goes down to county and MSA)
OSHA workplace safety inspections

DOL enforcement data & Union data search
Local Area Unemployment Statistics from the BLS
Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA)
Economy at a Glance from BLS
Migration data from the IRS
Tax data from IRS (tax exempt orgs)
National Agricultural Statistics Service
Subisidies from Good Jobs First (see tipsheet)

Spending
SmartProcure.us (Purchase order data) ($$)
Federal contracts (FPDS)
System for Award Management contractor registration
USAspending.gov or FedSpending.org – Federal spending data including grants, loans, contracts, etc. Be
aware of limitations.
Federal Audit Clearinghouse - “Non-Federal entities that expend $300,000 ($500,00 for fiscal years
ending after December 31, 2003) or more in a year in Federal awards shall have a single or programspecific audit conducted for that year
GAO bid protest docket – When contractors lose a bid, sometimes they complain. Search by federal
agency or protestor.

Public health, safety & environment
Recalls (look at tabs for topics)
EPA environmental data searches
Nursing home, hospital and home health data from Medicare.
National sex offender registry (Department of Justice)
Firearms data from the ATF
Import refusals from the FDA
FBI Uniform Crime Reports

Transportation and infrastructure
Fatality Analysis Reporting System data (FARS)
Transportation data from BTS
Air travel consumer report
Aircraft data (service difficulty reports, on-time data, aircraft registry, etc.)
NTSB Aviation Accidents (and more)
FAA accidents/incidents and service difficulty reports (SDRs)
Flight tracker from flightaware
On-time statistics
National Bridge Inventory from NICAR
Higher education
Equity in athletics from the US Department of Education
The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System from the National Center for Education Statistics
College Navigator for profiles of schools
Also check out tipsheets: 4193, 4234, 4285, 4489

