Tipsheet – finding International Data
Notes from presentation at NICAR2016, Denver, CO
Jonathan Stoneman
Sometimes we need to find data in countries we have never visited. This may be because we
plan a reporting trip there, or because we need to research data virtually, without leaving
home. When I need to do this, I use five or six steps, in roughly this order:






Advanced Google: Site:, filetype:, inurl:
Portals
3rd country sites
Social Media
Real people

Taking them in order, let’s start with Google – advanced searches using a combination of
site: filetype: inurl:
Site: tells Google you only want to search within one domain. That could be a single site
such as ire.org, but even more usefully for our needs, you can use TLD’s (Top Level Domain
country codes) to narrow your search to websites in one country – fr for France, de for
Germany, za for South Africa, br for Brazil, and so on. The complete list is on Wikipedia
(search for “top level domain”). A small extract is shown here – a selection of African states:
cd
cf
cg
ci
cm
cv
dj
dz
eh
er

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Central African Republic
Republic of the Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Djibouti
Algeria
Western Sahara
Eritrea

et
ga
gh
gm
gn
gq
gw
ke

Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
The Gambia
Guinea
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya

As well as the state domains, there are some international domains which can be useful –
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global

aero
biz
com
coop
info
int
jobs
mobi

air-transport industry
Business
Commercial
Cooperatives
Information
international organizations
Companies
mobile devices

Global
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global
Global

museum
name
net
org
post
pro
tel
travel

Museums
individuals, by name
Network
Organization
postal services
Professions
Internet communication services
travel and tourism industry related

These can all be pretty useful to find all kinds of things. But we are mainly concerned with
data. When I need to see what’s available in a country I don’t know, then I will use a
combination of site: and filetype: - which as the second name suggests, narrows the
search to specific types files.
Knowing that MS Excel is pretty common, I would first try filetype:xls – so, for
example, if I were looking at the general availability of data in Croatia, I would google:
Site:hr filetype:xls
This – with no further search terms – gives us a rough count of how many websites in
Croatia have spreadsheets attached to them. If I just want Croatian government data, I
would probably enter:
site:gov.hr filetype:xls
(gov is pretty common, even in languages where gov does not spell the beginning of the
word for government!)
It’s important to note that the colon [:] is important, and there are no spaces between site:
and the domain name code.
We’re looking for datasets, so I am only thinking of entering csv, xls, xlsx, ods and maybe
pdf. Finding other filetypes can be pretty handy – ppt - powerpoints - are a great way of
identifying experts in specialist fields. Pdf is a mixed joy – good for finding published reports,
but sometimes an annoying way of presenting data.
The third, and surprisingly useful operator is inurl:
Inurl: especially used in combination with the other two can be very powerful –inurl: terms I
have used include 2015, open, opendata, open_data, report, public.
There are now quite a few datastores, datacatalog (also datacatalogue) and
some dashboards.
When looking for explicitly data-connected terms like those, it’s worth leaving out
filetype:xls as it kind of cancels out the inurl:data term and you risk getting a null
result. Other words which can be useful include public, report, investigation, safety – you
will see what works for you.
It’s also worth bearing in mind that because quite a lot of organisations publish databases
online, and will let you create and export a dataset from their enquiry page, although you
will end up with a csv file, it won’t be searchable/findable as one.
These 3 search operators are all you will probably need for finding data. There are plenty
more – you can find them in an excellent cheatsheet on googleguide.com. This are shown in
brief in the table below; on the googleguide.com site the terms link to explanations of
exactly what each does.

As you look around for data you will find quite a lot of portals and other attempts to curate
datastores – data.gov has one (see at the bottom of the homepage, listed under “Open
Government” and scroll down.
There is also opendatainception.io – these are great for getting you started but the task of
keeping them up to date is nearly impossible, so don’t take them as the last word.
That said, there are some big international organisations who either curate other
governments’ data, or are given it by the governments themselves. These include – the UN,
Unesco, the world bank, OECD, EBRD, European Commission and Eurostat (“EU Open Data
Portal”). For health matters WHO and CDC are also good sources.
If dealing with a “less than open” government, rather than hunting on that country’s
domain, you may get more useful data from a 3rd party – such as USASpending.gov – which
allows you to search for all Federally funded projects, tenders and contracts. For example –
try searching for Federal funding going into Afghanistan, or Iraq. Probably easier to – and
easier to read – than data coming out of those countries.
Finally – two lines of enquiry which might get forgotten in the rush to find data online –
Social Media – especially Twitter. I permanently keep a Twitter search running on opendata
and data as well as following lists of data gurus and organisations. If I am heading to a
particular country I will then refine those searches with a localised Twitter filter
near:”cairo” within:50mi. I might also try terms like hackathon – to see If
anything is happening when I am there (a unique string like “hackathon” is pretty useful in
an inurl: search, perhaps in combination with a national site: and/or including the name of
the city in the search.
And don’t forget real people – via Twitter or LinkedIn, (and NICAR-L, of course); you can get
an idea from other searches of who is into data in a given country – and then get in touch.

