Tableau Tutorial Using Canadian Arms Sales Data
1) Your data comes from Industry Canada’s Trade site.
2) If you don’t want to download the data yourself, use this file. You
can also download it from the website we’ve created for this
session. (Note: Click on this file to learn how to transpose tables)
3) Open a Tableau workbook
4) Data – new data source

5)
6) Browse for your Excel file
7) Select the arms sales workbook that we downloaded.
8) Double-click “WorkingCopy_2-Tableau” sheet or drag and drop
the sheet in the “Drag sheets here” area

9)
10)

Select “Sheet 1”

11)
12)
Double-Click on the “Countries” icon in the “Dimensions”
section to produce your map.

13)

14)
You’ll notice that at the bottom right-hand corner, there’s
an icon which indicates that there are “7 unknown” countries. We
can clean those up later.
15)
Rename the worksheet from the generic “Sheet 1” to
“Countries” by double-clicking on the “Sheet 1” label and typing
the new name.
16)
To obtain the country names, select Map/Map Layers in the
top menu. In the left Map Layers window, check Country/Region
Names

17)
18)
Close the Map Layers window
19)
To make the map look more interesting, you can drag the
“Countries” icon into the “Color” section under “Marks”.

20)
21)

In marks, select Filled Map

22)
23)
We can always return to the countries tab. But for now,
let’s move on and create a new one by clicking on the icon to the
right of your “Countries” tab.
24)
Rename it “Arms Sales”.
25)
Drag the “Countries” icon into the table’s “Rows” section.

26)
27)

Drag the “Amount” onto the table’s “Columns” section.

28)
29)
The visualization we want is a horizontal bar chart. So select
that option in the “Show Me” panel to the right of the table,
which is the horizontal bar chart icon highlighted in red.

30)
Now we want the country that buys the greatest number of
our arms to be at the top. But this chart is organizing the
countries in ascending order.
31)
To change this, hover your mouse over the “Amount” label
below the number 500M ( which we will reformat as currency ), to
produce an icon that allows you to sort in descending – if the
arrow is pointing down – or ascending if the arrow is pointing up.

32)
If you wanted to display the sales as a conventional chart,
select the icon with the numbers in the “Show Me” box.

33)

34)
You’ll also notice that selecting this option places the “SUM”
of the arms sales into the “Text” option under “Marks” on the left.
35)
Let’s return to the horizontal bar chart because it’s a more
interesting visual.

36)
37)
Before we go too much farther, let’s reformat the sales
figures at the bottom.
38)
To do this, hover your mouse over the “SUM(Amount) tab in
the “Columns” section until you see an arrow to the right.
39)
Click on the arrow to produce a drop-down menu.
40)
From the menu, select “Format” to produce a menu to the
left of the table.

41)
42)
Click on the on the arrow to the right of the
“Numbers”option and choose “Currency (Custom)” and no
decimal places.

43)
44)
45)

Okay, that’s better.
Create another worksheet, we’ll call “Sales by Year”

46)

Drag “Amount” into the “Drop field here” in the data canvas.

47)
Drag “Year” into Columns.
48)
Hover your cursor over the “Year” tab to obtain an arrow.
Click on the arrow and select “Discrete” from the drop-down
menu.
49)
Drag “Countries” into “Rows”.

50)
51)
Make the Year in Columns “Discrete” by right-clicking on the
Year tab to get choose the “Discrete” option.

52)
53)
Sort the dollar “Amounts” by hovering your cursor over the
word “Amount” at the bottom of the first table to the left, and
double-click on the icon that appears to the right.
54)
To get rid of the format box, click on the “X” at the top righthand corner of the box.

55)
Before we create a dashboard, let’s return to those seven
countries that Tableau doesn’t recognize.
56)
Return to the “Countries” tab, right-click anywhere in the
map to obtain a drop-down menu, and click on the “Edit
locations” option.

57)
We can see that there are seven “Unrecognized” countries.
58)
Double-click on the first name, which produces a blank
rectangle to your right, and plug in the correct name, in this case

“Bosnia and Herzegovina”.

59) For the rest, get rid of the parenthetical bits of information to the
right of the remaining six country names.
60) The “Matching Location” section to the right contains the correct
country names.

61)
62) Now we’re going to create two NEW columns: Sum of Total and
Percent of Total. Sum of Total will add the arms sales to all countries
for each year. The Percent of Total will calculate the arms sales per
country as a percent of the total arms sales for any given year.
63) To create the “Sum of Total” column, right click anywhere within
the “Measures” section to the left, and from the drop-down menu,
chose the “Create calculated field” option.
64) Let’s call the new column “Sum of Total.”

65)
In the space below, type the formula <<{fixed [Year] :
SUM([Amount])}>>
66)
Your formula should look like this:

67)
You’ll notice the Tableau is informing us that the
“calculation is valid”. If this were not the case, we’d receive an
invalid message highlighted in red.
68)
Repeating the same steps, we must now create a second
field, which we’ll call “Percent Of Total”.
69)
Your formula should look like this:

70)
Since this new calculation is a percentage we need to
change the format for the field. Right-click on “Percent of Total”

under Measures. Choose Default Properties…/Number
format…/Percentage with one decimal place.
71)
Now we want to show the filter with all the countries,
allowing us to make choices.
72)
Take the “Countries” tab and drag it into the Filters section.
Click on the “Countries” tab and select the “Show filer” option.
Your screengrab should look like this:

73)
Now let’s use the Percent Of Total Column we calculated, by
dragging the field into the “Columns” section to the right of

“SUM(Amount)”.

74)
Make the labels for the columns are sum([amount]) and
Percent of Total in the second column. Make sure that Year is
Discrete as we did in step 51.

75)
To change the colors to make each column distinct, have a
look at the menu to the left of the table.

76)
Tableau has placed the aggregated amount and percent of
total into the “Marks section
77)
Tableau’s default colour is blue. So that colour can remain
for the column that has summed the sales amounts. To change
the colour for the Percent of Total, click on the AGG(Percent OF

Total) label to produce a palette.

78)
Click the “Color” icon and choose something different to
create two tables that are distinguishable from each other.

79)
80)
Hovering your cursor over any of the horizontal bars
produces the Country, Year, Amount and Per cent of Total.

81)
Now we can use the filter on the far right to full effect. This
is where the power of Tableau is on full display. Select a country,
say, the United States.

82) Now we can create a dashboard, that combines visualizations of
the map and aggregates of sales and their percent of totals.

83) We’ll do this in a new tab. Right click on the empty tab to the right
to obtain a short-cut menu and select “New dashboard”.

84) Drag “Countries” into the drop space to the right.

85) Click on the countries filter to produce a grey bar across the top,
which gives you the option to make it disappear by clicking on the

“X” to the top right-hand side.

86) Drag and place the “Sales by Year” tab just below the map, by
clicking on the icon, dragging it to the bottom of the table until your
table and then letting go. It’s tricky. So you may have to do it a

couple of times.

87) You’ll also notice that I renamed the dashboard.

88) Get rid of the “Countries” filter, by repeating step 85.

89) Looks pretty good.
90) Name the dashboard with something like Canadian Arms Sales.

91) Give the visualization a title by clicking on the radio box next to
the “Show Title”.

92) The title becomes the label you’ve given to your dashboard.

93) If you want to change the title, clicking on the actual title to
produce an “Edit Title” dialog box.

94) You can plug in and format a new title.
95) Now to link the two tables, we will ask Tableau to use the map as
a filter, meaning what clicking on a country produces the
corresponding sales figures in the table below.
96) To do this, click on the map to produce a grey bar at the top.

97) From the drop-down menu, choose the “Use as filter” option.

98) Now when you click on a country, you’ll get the corresponding
values.

99) To recoup all the countries, click anywhere inside the map.
100) Export the result, by going to the “Server” portion on your menu,
then to “Tableau Public”, then to “Save to Tableau Public”, which

produces a “Tableau Public Sign In” dialog box.

101) To upload your visualization to Tableau’s server, select the “Save”
option under “File” from the menu. Do this if you’re using the

Tableau Public version.

102) Once the visualization is in your browser, click on the “share”
icon. To get the “share” option, use the vertical scroll bar to the right
of the visualization to get to the bottom.

103) You’ll be given the Embed Code and Link. To chose the former,
click on the script copy and paste it into your blog post’s HTML view.

104) You can see what I’ve done, by clicking here.
105) If you’re using the Tableau Desktop version, the process has a few
more steps.
106) Go to “Data”, click on your file name, select “Extract Data”.
107) Select the “Extract” tab.
108) To go “File”, “save as”, browse to the location you want to save
the file, select “Tableau Packaged Workbook with the “twbx”
extension.
109) Go to “Server’ on the menu, “Tableau Public”, “Save to Tableau
Public”.
110) You’ll get a sign-in prompt.
111) Type your password to sign in.
112) Once the file is uploaded, you can get the embed code and URL
from hitting the share icon.

