Tracking government spending
Ziva Branstetter, editor in chief
www.readfrontier.com
ziva@readfrontier.com
@zivabranstetter
When reviewing a particular agency:
● Is your state / county / city agency engaging in insider dealing for
contracts?
○ Examine no­bid, long­term contracts. When is the last time the
agency put its largest contracts out for bid? Beware of RFPs
and the lowest and best bid language. Have they been written
too narrowly? Did the agency claim sole source when other
vendors are available?
○ Examine financial disclosure statements of the top officials to
see what companies they have stock in and whether those
companies do any business with the agency.
○ Who is on the bidding committee?
○ Is the agency paying an inflated amount for routine services?
(physicals story)
○ Does the agency have any power to sell property? Who is
buying it? Go to the auction.

https://www.readfrontier.com/investigation/sheriff­bought­stock­then­bought
­companys­cleaning­product­for­jail/
● How to make the travel story different
○ What are the policies? Are officials staying longer than allowed?
Spending more per diem on meals than allowed?

○ Get the details and color. Did they order cheesecake to the
room? Did they arrive in horse­drawn carriages?
○ How much do employees collect per diem?
https://www.readfrontier.com/investigation/sheriffs­office­travel­includes­po
sh­resort­paid­trips­for­reserves/
Other types of government records you should review:
● Audits ­­ same problems every year? GET THE AUDITORS” NOTES
● Grant reports ­­ did they stick to the guidelines of the grant? Federal
grants require an audit tracking the spending. It’s not an investigative
audit but still helpful to examine. These are gathered at the Federal
Audit Clearinghouse. https://harvester.census.gov/facweb/
● Bidding records or RFP proposals ­­ are they written narrowly so only
one vendor can apply?
● Bidding committee member lists ­­ get the list of people assigned to
the committee that chooses winning bidder on large contracts. Is the
deck stacked?
● Outside legal contracts ­­ Does your agency pay a lawyer on staff and
also contract with outside attorneys? Do they lose all the time and
charge exorbitant fees?
https://medium.com/@readfrontier/frontier­exclusive­sheriff­paid­outside­att
orneys­700­000­from­jail­fund­to­defend­civil­rights­81d4c0d33bfb#.78gakfi
w6
● Payrolls ­­ Look for nepotism, favoritism and cronyism in the staff;
look at payrolls over time for secret pay raises during a pay freeze
● Reserve funds ­­ how much carryover is there and what is done with
it? Does the agency build things without taking it to the voters? Why
is there a carryover from year to year?
● Budget requests ­­ agencies often expose their weaknesses and
problems in these to get bigger piece of budget pie

● Tort claims ­­If you want to sue a government agency, you usually
have to file a tort claim first and give them a chance to settle before
the suit is filed. If a lawsuit is eventually filed and a settlement is
sealed, ask for a copy of the check.
● Recordings of meetings and sign­up sheets where financial issues
are being discussed reveal who is waiting to cash in.

