Excel 101
By Patti DiVincenzo
2016
SECTION 1: LEARNING YOUR WAY AROUND
If you haven’t learned Excel yet, you’re missing out. Unlike journalists, Excel will never make a math
mistake. As long as you give it the correct instructions, it will do math for you. And that’s just one of the
many reasons to love Excel.
Here’s a guide to get started.
Let’s say you’ve just been assigned the higher education beat in Georgia, and you’ve asked the
University of Georgia the names of all employees, their salaries, and the money they spent on travel.
What you get back is a spreadsheet. You’ll find it by searching “Excel 101 data” in the tip sheet search
box. Go ahead and open it up, and save a copy to your computer.

The data is organized in columns and rows. The headers are in row 1. Each column represents a
category of information. The rows have specific information that fits into the columns, or categories.
The little rectangles on the screen are called cells, and every cell has its own address. Click on the cell
where column A intersects with row 2. You will know you’re in cell A2 two different ways: First, the cell
will be highlighted in Green. Second, see where the arrow is pointed? No matter what cell you’re in,
you’ll see the cell address right there.

Now look at the bottom of your worksheet. See the little tab at the bottom that says Sheet1? Let’s
rename it so it actually tells us what’s inside that worksheet. Right click your mouse on Sheet1.
Once you see a little pop up box that looks like this, select rename and give it a new name, like UGA.

We can have several worksheets in a workbook, and the way to get a new sheet is to click on the
Plus sign just to the right of the UGA tab.

There are also tabs at the top of each worksheet. Right now, we’re in the HOME tab. Click around on the
different tabs and you’ll get an idea of all that Excel can do. I’ve been using the program for years, and I
have yet to use PAGE LAYOUT or REVIEW, so don’t worry about those.

SECTION 2: SORTING
The first thing I do when I get a new spreadsheet is take a good look at it. And then I decide what
questions I want to ask Excel. One question might be, who makes the largest salary at UGA. We can get
there in a few easy steps:








Make sure you have clicked on a cell in the data. Any one will do as long as it has words or a
number in the cell.
Go the tabs at the top and instead of HOME, select DATA. Now, look for the icon that says SORT
and click on it.

You should see the pop up box shown below: Make sure My data has headers is checked.
(Otherwise, when you sort the data, your header row will end up in the middle of your data.)
Now, it’s a simple matter of clicking on the drop down tabs. Under Sort by select Salary.

Once you select Salary, the box on the right changes from A to Z to Smallest to Largest.
Click on the drop down menu and change it to Largest to Smallest. (The middle box stays the
same because you want to sort on the Values in each cell.) Click the OK button at the bottom.

So who makes the most? President Morehead. But look at column D. Jere Morehead might make the
largest salary, but other people spend more on travel.
Next, go through the same steps to find out who spends the most on travel.

If you need a cheat sheet, here are the steps:
1) Make sure your mouse is in your data.
2) At the top of the sheet, select the DATA tab and then select SORT.
3) In the pop up box, select Travel and on the right, choose Largest to Smallest.
If the answer you got is Professor Scott A. Jackson, congratulations! Move on to the next section.

SECTION 3: FILTERING
Somewhere in this data, you’ll find 63 people with the title SECURITY GUARD. You could sort by the
Title column alphabetically and scroll down until you find it, but there’s an easier way to isolate this.
Again, you want the DATA tab, but this time, select the funnel that says FILTER.

Once you do that, you’ll see a drop down arrow at the top of each column. Go to the Title column and
click on the drop down menu. Unselect the line (select all), then scroll down until you find SECURITY
GUARD, and check that box.

Now, all we see are the security guards. Notice the funnel at the top of the Title column. That’s the sign
that this column has been filtered. Also notice the row numbers. Row 1 contains the headers, but the
next row is not 2. That, (and the fact that the row numbers are now blue), tell you that there’s more
data in this worksheet. It’s just hiding. If you want just the security guards in one worksheet without all
the other titles, just go the top of the worksheet, and click just to the left of column A and above row 1.
This is the select all button. Once you do that, it highlights everything that shows, and nothing that is
hidden.

Select all
button

Now just copy (CTRL C), and open up a new worksheet by clicking on the plus button at the bottom of
the worksheet.

When it opens, click on cell A1 and paste (CTRL + V).
Don’t forget to right-click and name your new worksheet so you can easily find it later. Something
obvious, like “SECURITY GUARDS”.
Before we work on this tab, go back to the UGA worksheet and get rid of the filters by clicking on the
filter button again. The filters should disappear immediately. Now, back to the SECURITY GUARD
worksheet.
If your sheet looks like this, don’t panic. You didn’t lose the salaries. Your columns are just too narrow.

There’s an easy way to fix that. First, go to the select all button. (Above row 1, to the right of column A).
Once everything is highlighted, hover your mouse between two columns at the very top. If could be any
column in the data, but this time, go between column C and column D. You want to be above row 1.
Once you get the curser there, it will turn into something that looks like this:

When you see that sign, double click, and all of your columns will expand wide enough for you to see all
the data in each cell.

SECTION 4: BASIC FUNCTIONS
Now, it’s time to do some math. We’ll stay in the security guard worksheet. One of the most common
calculations I use is SUM.
To find out what all the security guards make, go to cell C66. That should be two rows down from the
last bit of data in the worksheet. There’s a reason to skip a row. If you later want to sort the data, you
don’t want the totals to get all mixed up in the data.

Whenever you want Excel to do math for you, (or other functions you will learn later), you start with a
signal. That signal is the = sign.
When you type = into a cell, Excel knows you’re about to give it instructions. In this case we want to tell
Excel to add Column C between rows 2 and 64. (Remember, the headers are in row one, so you want to
start with row 2.)
So here’s how it looks: =SUM(C2:C64)
= means “get to work”
Sum means “add it up”
Then in parentheses you have the first cell you want to add, the colon sign means “through”, and C64 is
the last cell you want in the calculation. You should get the number 1197329.95
If you want to change the number to currency, go up top to the home tab, then look for the drop down
that says General.

Click on the drop down menu and select Currency.
Two other common calculations are AVERAGE and MEDIAN (median is the mid-point in the range of
numbers).
In cell C66 type this: =AVERAGE(C2:C64)
Your answer should be $19,005.24
For the MEDIAN (I’m guessing you’ve figured this out by now) type:

=MEDIAN(C2:C64)

There’s so much more to learn in Excel, but I hope this gets you started.
Make sure to practice until you have sort, filter and these basic calculations down. If you want to learn
more, there are plenty of other tip sheets in the resource center. Try searching for pivot tables. It’s
probably my favorite thing to do in Excel.

