Broadcast: When Things Change Dramatically
We all try to make sure every detail is buttoned up before airing an investigation. But sometimes that
curve ball is just unavoidable. This panel will focus on unusual developments with investigations.
From last minute court settlements aimed at squashing your report, to your source unexpectedly
becoming the subject of your investigation, or even reporters finding themselves in handcuffs, hear
how these journalists dealt with the 11th hour developments and still got their stories on air.
Rick Yarborough – WRC-TV rick.yarborough@nbcuni.com
Jodie Fleischer – WSB-TV jodie.fleischer@wsbtv.com
Chris Nakamoto – WBRZ-TV cnakamoto@wbrz.com

WHEN THERE’S A SETTLEMENT HOURS BEFORE AIR:
“We have reached a confidential settlement….I must withdraw consent for any type of use of my
interview.”
http://www.nbcwashington.com/investigations/Patients-Report-Suffering-Severe-Burns-From-FiresDuring-Surgery-370846391.html
Questions from a legal perspective:
 What is the nature of the information being reported?
 Is the information private or public?
 Is there a public interest in airing the interview?
 Could our broadcast cause a party to be in breach of a settlement agreement?
 Is there any argument we induced them to breach a settlement?
 Is there any possible copyright issue with pictures or video provided to the station?
Questions from an ethical perspective:
 How did we get the information? Did the station find them, or vice versa?
 Did they willingly consent to the on-camera interview?
 What is the overall impact of the story?
 Is this information the public should know about?
If it happens to you:
 Make sure your News Director or managers are involved from the beginning of story production.
 Immediately talk to your Legal & Standards team if you’re contacted by attorneys about a
settlement.
 Maintain email chain and phone logs of communication with attorneys and victims.






Evaluate the importance of the information and the type of information you will be reporting.
Be realistic about what kind of harm the person could face if you broadcast the interview.
Be prepared to react to any impact from airing the story.
Be flexible about making some changes to avoid risk.

WHEN YOUR SOURCE BECOMES THE SUBJECT:
https://vimeo.com/169963974
Password: investigator
Question Everyone:
 Even if you think you know your sources and even if you think they’re honest.
Think Critically:
 No matter who they are, make them prove what they’re telling you with records.
Follow the Story:
 No matter where it leads – no one is off limits. Don’t discount someone because you think you
know them.
Watch Out for Misdirection:
 You think this is bad, you should see what so and so is doing!
Be Prepared:
 Switch directions in a pinch if needed.
Don’t Immediately Recuse Yourself:
 If you can be critical and remain on the story, those connections could be beneficial later.
 Know that it could backfire. Some sources will turn on you, so have a plan B.
Be Honest with Your Viewers:
 If something changed at the last minute, disclose that.
 If something surprised you as a reporter, say so. It will probably surprise your viewers too.

WHEN YOU END UP IN HANDCUFFS:
http://www.wbrz.com/news/leaders-avoid-questions-nakamoto-escorted-away-in-handcuffs-givensummons/
Sources:
 Your best sources are your viewers. Embrace them, but vet everything they tell you.
Hold the Powerful Accountable:
 Keep asking questions until you get answers. Don't let the interviewee off the hook.




Point out contradictions. Ask the interviewee to clarify inconsistencies.
Bring critical documents to interviews. It’s okay to quote from them if necessary.

Never Stop Recording:
 When things get dicey the camera is your best friend, and will back up everything that just
happened to you.
Know the Law:
 If you are in a place where you have a right to be, you can resist an unlawful arrest.
 You have a right to be in a public building and in a public space in that building.
 This does not apply to schools, certain museums, courthouses etc.
Avoid Becoming the Story:
 As journalists we try to NEVER become the story. If you become the story, have another coworker report on what happened to you. In my case, I did not cover my arrest.
 Don't lose sight of your story's focus. Continue your quest for the truth no matter what happens
to you in the field.

