Money, power, secrecy and complexity – a tipsheet on investigative ‘triggers’
By Dan Kane, staff writer, The (Raleigh) News & Observer for IRE2016

Reporters and editors often work investigative stories off of tips. But some of the best stories
come from recognizing opportunities within the information given – or withheld. I call them
triggers:

Money – The money government and nonprofits spend comes out of your readers’ pockets.
Apply a common sense test: Is this a justifiable expense? I found nearly $90,000 in unnecessary
Sister Cities trips by Durham officials after listening to a council member’s two-minute speech
about a Sister City that has its own bird and tree. Ask the agencies you cover how they track
spending, and learn how to read budget documents, check registries and financial audits.
Power – As the saying goes, power tends to corrupt. Deals are done to put people in power or
keep them there. Correspondence on the creation of a state job exposed the NC House speaker
doing a favor for a former lawmaker who helped him stay in power. Emails, political donations
and ethics disclosures are some of the records that can help you find that deal that got done.
Secrecy – Sometimes secrecy laws are abused, if not outright created, to hide misbehavior.
Recognize the dynamic created by such laws and fight through them by finding ways to obtain
the information through other (legal) means, or by challenging their nonpublic status. (In other
words, know your state and federal public records laws.) A college transcript, which is tightly
protected under a federal privacy law, broke the dam on UNC’s staggering academic fraud.
Complexity – Every time an official tells me “don’t even try to understand how this works,” I
say ‘’try me.” Complicated areas such as the environment or medicine can yield great stories of
misspending or shoddy practices once you understand them. I delved into NC’s Ecosystem
Enhancement Program, which restores streams and wetlands so developers can destroy others,
and found suspect science and tens of millions of dollars in project failures. Find disinterested
experts to help you navigate the turf, and use spreadsheets to record information that can help
you identify troubling patterns or problems. Learn how to spot the outliers.

dkane@newsobserver.com, @dankanenando or 919-829-4861

