Alison Young, @alisonannyoung
USA TODAY NETWORK
http://biolabs.usatoday.com
http://lead.usatoday.com

Untangling Investigative Threads
and Staying Organized
•

Prioritize reporting: Create a roadmap for your initial digging. Brainstorm all of the possible reporting
sources and techniques you might use to answer the main question(s) in your investigation, then
prioritize them. What are the critical threads that must be pursued to know whether or not you have a
story? What types of reporting will answer those initial questions and determine the scope of your
story? Focus on those first. What kinds of documents, data, interviews or other reporting efforts are
only worth pursuing if your first layer of reporting supports moving ahead with the project. Don’t waste
time on peripheral reporting until you know you have a story.

•

Find patterns in the noise: Use a spreadsheet to create a “theme tracker” for the project. Use it to track
“Hey Martha!” moments in your reporting – great findings, examples of key issues, names of sources
on key topics you may want to talk to closer to when you write. Create a “Type” field as a grouping label
for each text block you enter. For a recent project on laboratory safety (http://biolabs.usatoday.com),
the type fields in my theme tracker included: Incidents, Unreported Incidents, Oversight, Secrecy,
Risks, Unapproved Research, Photo, Video, Interactive, Explanatory and Infections. Also make sure to
include a “Location” field to remind you where you put your notes/data/photos/video/audio/documents
that prompted you to put the entry in your theme tracker. This tracker is great way to avoid forgetting
gems found during a long-term project or when pursuing a project while doing daily stories. And it’s a
huge help when you start to outline before writing.

•

Create data while reading documents: Got a big pile of documents? Take notes in a spreadsheet. If
applicable, create fields that allow you to categorize and count information you come across while you
are reading. Have a field that tracks the page number for each document cited in the spreadsheet so
you can refer to the paper or pdf record quickly. Example: http://usat.ly/1sFzkat

•

Have an information tracking system: Set up a system that works for the specific project. For national
projects, I find it helpful to set up folders by macro topics. Then I also tend set up additional state
folders and each of them contains folders about each entity investigated in that state. If investigating
multiple entities, it may be helpful to create an ID number for each to avoid confusion about entities with
similar names. Each of the 464 potential sites of former lead factories in our Ghost Factories project
(http://ghostfactories.usatoday.com) was assigned a unique ID number. Folders were organized by
state, then within each state there was a folder for each factory site that was labeled and organized by
this Site ID. This unique Site ID was also useful later for linking photos, copy blocks, soil samples and
other information in online presentations to the correct factory site – avoiding confusion caused by
factories with similar corporate names. The same was true with our recent Biolabs in Your Backyard
project, which examined safety at more than 200 high-containment labs nationwide:
(http://biolabs.usatoday.com).

•

Track information requests: Have a system that works for you to keep track of the requests you put out
for information (FOIAs and interview/information requests) – and remind you to ping the person/entity
after a certain period of time has passed. Spreadsheets can be helpful. Outlook also can be a big help:
When you put out a request, put a note on your calendar when you need to follow up. Follow up verbal
requests for interviews with emails to the interview subject, reiterating what you asked for. Copy
yourself on the email – and use the email program’s flag function to set a follow-up date and time. Print
a copy of the email for a quick, easy reference to your interview topics.

