The Courts You Rarely
Think About
Kendall Taggart
IRE 2016
kendall.taggart@buzzfeed.com

What are ‘low-level’ courts?
● Sometimes called municipal courts, justices of the peace, town &
village courts, etc..
● Often handle high-volume offenses, like traffic tickets, driving without
a license, and disorderly conduct.
● You sometimes have no right to an attorney.
● The stakes don’t seem as high — no one is facing death row or life in
prison — so they get less attention. But the consequences for people
can be devastating.

Where to look for stories?

‘Where’s the harm?’

Mark Schoofs, investigations editor at BuzzFeed

Framing reporting questions helps keep me focused:
● Are certain judges sending way more people to jail than their
peers? Why?
● Are judges sending people to jail illegally?
● If so, what are the consequences for people going through those
courts?

Lots of crimes are punishable by fines. What if someone can’t pay?
● U.S. Supreme Court: someone can’t go to jail just because they
don’t have money (Marshall Project explainer).
● Get the judges’ training manuals (Texas ‘Bench Book'):
○ Someone has to willfully not pay their fine to be sent to jail.
○ A judge must make a written determination of indigency.
○ If someone doesn’t have money, a judge must offer them
community service.
○ If they don’t do community service, then they can be sent to
jail.

Start with sources:
● Alex and I called defense attorneys, advocates, legal
scholars.
● But in this case, data led us to the judges violating the
law and the people whose lives had been devastated
by the judges’ actions.

Jail records kept by the largest counties
DOB

Release Date Release Type

Charges

There are lots of stories in jail data.
● Great resource for reporting on judges, schools, police, and
for backgrounding people:
○ What are the most common charges per judge?
○ What is the most common charge for people under 20?
○ If it has addresses, what neighborhoods are heavily
impacted by arrests?
○ Request the entire thing — not just a slice related to a
specific story idea.
Here are the details of how we analyzed jail data for one story.

Common fields in jail data:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Name of the inmate
Race/Ethnicity
Age/Date of birth
Home address
Warrant number (which might tell you what court the case came from)
Charges
Bond amount
Bondsman/bond company

Data on the outcomes of criminal cases
● Amount of fines/fees $$$ the court collected
● Number of cases where fines were ‘paid’ through jail time
● Other interesting fields about how many fines were waived, etc.

El Paso: in FY2014, fines in almost 40,000
cases were ‘satisfied by jail credit.’

Reporting questions:
● Maybe this is just an issue with messy data?
● Early on, we called the court — what’s your process for
determining if someone can pay?
El Paso clerk: we don’t really do indigency.

It can take awhile to find the people most affected by the
court system. We knocked on more than 50 doors and made
dozens of calls.

Where to look for stories:
● Jail data
● Ask the state controller — or whoever receives the
money from court fines/fees — for a breakdown of how
much each court collects.
● Trace the money — what is fines/fees $$$ used for?
● Sit in on several days of court proceedings.
● Search for old lawsuits — has your city been sued?
● Judicial misconduct reports
● Request contracts between your local court, county jail
and outside entities.

Tips:
* Don't make the mistake of thinking if there was a big problem,
someone, like an advocacy group, would have heard about it.
* Find your sherpas: several judges and lawyers helped us
understand the nuances of the law (i.e. reviewing case files,
talking through what we observed in court).

kendall.taggart@buzzfeed.com | 646.589.8582

