History of the False
Claims Act
False claims actions date to the 13th and 14th
centuries, when law and order was not
maintained by a police force or by government
inspectors. Instead, the public was enlisted to
police wrongdoing on behalf of the king.
Enlistment came via monetary incentive: Turn in
the wrongdoers, get paid a reward.
A whistleblower case is called a “qui tam,’’ short
for “qui tam pro domino rege quam pro se ipso in
hac parte sequitur.’’ Rough translation: He who
brings an action for the king as well as for
himself.
Today someone who files a qui tam case, called a Relator, is said to be “doing well while doing
good.” In other words, the whistleblower does well for himself (monetarily) while doing good for
the public (saving the government even more money and catching the bad guys).
1863: The original Lincoln Law
President Abraham Lincoln pushed the first federal whistleblower statute through Congress during
the Civil War. The False Claims Act, which came to be called “Lincoln’s Law,’’ gave individuals cash
incentive to report fraud against the Union.
Dishonest government contractors were making out like bandits during the war, including one who
sold the Union moth-eaten blankets and reportedly said: “You can sell anything to the government,
at almost any price you’ve got the guts to ask.’’
Crates that were supposed to contain muskets instead came filled with sawdust. Decrepit horses
were sold to the cavalry. The soles of soldiers’ shoes were nothing but glued together wood chips,
and their uniforms were made of “shoddy’’ that fell apart in the first rain.
In fact, the word “shoddy’’ was “first used with reference to those who made fortunes by army
contracts at the time of the Civil War,’’ according to The Oxford English Dictionary, “it being alleged
that the clothing supplied by the contractors consisted largely of shoddy.’’
“The world has seen its iron age, its golden age, and its brazen age,’’ the New York Herald
editorialized. “This is the age of shoddy.’’
Before Congress passed the False Claims Act in 1863, only government officials could sue
contractors said to be defrauding the government. The new law gave private citizens the right, as

well. Wrongdoers could be assessed double damages, plus a $2,000 fine for each false claim
submitted. The whistleblower’s reward: 50 percent of whatever the government recovered.
1943: Rise of the lobbyists, decline of the law
World War II blew open the door to fraud by military contractors.
Greedy people who wanted to profit from the False Claims Act but who had no inside information
instead cribbed details the government included in criminal indictments and repackaged it into
their own False Claims Act civil suits. Citing such “parasitic lawsuits,’’ lobbyists persuaded Congress
to close the loophole. In the process, the law was crippled.
The 1943 changes reduced the Relator’s share from 50 percent to as little as zero and barred qui
tam lawsuits “whenever it shall be made to appear that such suit was based upon evidence or
information in the possession” of the government. Never mind if the government was not
investigating and had no plans to investigate. Never mind if it was the Relator who brought the
fraud to the government’s attention.
The False Claims Act fell into disuse.
1986: Those $640 toilet seats
First came the government reports: In 1980, the Department of Justice reported that fraud was
eating up as much as 10 percent of the federal budget. In 1981, the General Accounting Office
estimated the government was losing tens of billions of dollars to undetected fraud.
But what riled the public and spurred Congress to act were reports that the military paid $435 each
for claw hammers, $640 each for toilet seats and $7,600 each for coffee makers.
The False Claims Act pendulum swung back as Congress restored teeth to the law: The statute of
limitations was extended. The burden of proof was eased so defendants who acted with “deliberate
ignorance” or “reckless disregard” could be found liable. Whistleblower protections were added to
keep companies from retaliating against employees who came forward.
The Relator’s share of a recovery was bumped back up to as much as 30 percent. And Congress
loosened the ban against bringing cases about which the government possessed information. The
revised act made companies that lose liable for triple damages, plus they have to pay the Relator’s
attorney fees.
The False Claims Act was back in business.
Today: Back to Lincoln
Almost 150 years since President Lincoln got Congress to act against “shoddy,’’ the government and
private whistleblowers use False Claims Act cases to combat fraud in Medicare and Medicaid,
housing programs, defense contracting and other areas.
Congress continues to tweak the law. The 2009 Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act overruled
judicial decisions that had limited False Claim Actions. The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable

Care Act gave the Department of Justice more discretion over whether to bar a qui tam in which the
information already has been publicly disclosed.
In 2012, the Department of Justice reported that it recovered nearly $5 billion in taxpayer dollars as
a result of whistleblower lawsuits filed under the False Claims Act; $3 billion of that was from
Health Care fraud. Since 1986, when the law was beefed up, more than $25 billion has been
recovered.
It’s a vindication of sorts for a president who considered those whose fraud lines their pockets
while putting soldiers in harm’s way to be the lowest of the low. The Congressional House
Committee under Lincoln echoed his sentiments, declaring:
“Worse than traitors in arms are the men who pretend loyalty to the flag, feast and fatten on the
misfortunes of the nation while patriotic blood is crimsoning the plains of the south and their
countrymen are moldering in the dust.”
##

Courtesy of the James Hoyer Whistleblower law firm – Tampa, Florida – 813-397-2235
www.JamesHoyer.com

