Supply Chain Reporting/Produce from Mexico
WHERE TO GO – For Data
Mexican Export Data -http://www.siicex.gob.mx/portalSiicex/Transparencia/Avisos%20Automaticos/avisos-infespecifica.htm
This is probably the best source for data on tomato exports to the U.S. It provides breakdowns on
Mexican farms and, most importantly, the label/brand of the grower.
Food Safety Inspections -- http://www.primuslabs.com/psr/platino.aspx
These reports can be handy for linking specific Mexican farms with U.S. distributors and buyers.
California Pesticide Residue Monitoring Program –
http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/enforce/residue/rsmonmnu.htm
Food safety inspections in California are one of the most complete windows into supply chains. These
reports trace supermarket produce all the way back to the growers in the source country.

WHERE TO GO – IN MEXICO
Packing Facility/Labor camps – Every agribusiness has one, and a labor camp is usually located nearby.
Most big farms have multiple labor camps, often remotely located. Laborers are the best source for
finding them. Google Earth can also help.
Highways in growing regions -- If you spot a dusty yellow school bus, follow it. They’re usually filled with
pickers and are either coming or going to a field or labor camps. Also be on the lookout for overloaded
pick-up trucks, which often carry child pickers.
Distribution Hubs – Packing facilities are your best bet, especially if you find a chatty truck driver. The
trucks themselves can provide key information: The names of distributors are often listed on doors or
trailers.
Produce Markets – Every big city has one, and these wholesalers know who all the big growers and
distributors are in Mexico.
Child labor is concentrated at small farms that produce chile peppers or tomatoes. The chile pepper
harvest trail cuts across Southern Sinaloa, Guanajuato, Jalisco and Chihuahua. Fields are not on the map,
so you’ll be taking long drives down dirt roads.

WHERE TO GO – IN U.S.
Supermarket shelves -- Look for produce that is labeled. Most only list the U.S. distributor, but it’s a
start.
Dumpster diving -- If you don’t mind getting grimy, get permission to go behind your favorite restaurant
or supermarket and search for boxes of produce. They usually list the label/brand.
Local school districts -- Ask for names of vendors/distributors who provide produce to school districts,
which are big buyers of Mexican produce.
Distribution Hubs – Highway 19 in Nogales/Rio Rico, Arizona, which is lined with warehouses on both
sides of the freeway, is one of the biggest in the U.S. There are also hubs in Laredo and McAllen. Truck
drivers and buyers are the best sources, if they’ll talk.

