2016 IRE Conference – New Orleans
Broadcast Deep Dives
KARE 11 Investigates: Invisible Wounds
Steve Eckert
Executive Producer
seckert@kare11.com
@Steve_Eckert

A. J. Lagoe
Investigative Reporter
alagoe@kare11.com
@AJInvestigates

VA Traumatic Brain Injury Exams: In the wake of our investigation, the Department of
Veterans Affairs has announced that nearly 25,000 veterans – from all 50 states – are eligible
for new TBI exams and, quite possibly, additional treatment and retroactive benefits. It’s
happening because the original TBI diagnosis was done by medical personnel who weren’t
qualified. Here are links for more information:
 VA Official release - http://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id=2795
 Number of veterans impacted listed by Regional Office –
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2850547-VA-TBI-Location-List.html
 Sample letter veterans are receiving https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2850572-National-TBI-Letter.html
Stories of pain and healing: The VA’s decision means there will be stories in almost every
corner of the country about veterans who were wrongly denied – and are now getting help.
Finding individual veterans: Because of patient privacy the VA won’t release names, but we
found veterans by calling veterans service organizations, patient advocacy groups, state
veterans support agencies, Congressional staffers who handle constituent complaints and
lawyers who handle benefit appeals. Once you find veterans, they can obtain their own
medical records and pass them along to you.
Checking doctor’s credentials: When we analyzed the credentials of VA doctors, we also
discovered false and misleading information posted on the VA’s own websites. In addition to
checking state physician licensing records, we cross-checked credentials by comparing these
two online sites:
 http://www.va.gov/health/OurDoctors.asp (with links to doctors at each VA facility)
 http://www.certificationmatters.org/ (a master list of board certified physicians maintained
by the American Board of Medical Specialists)
(continued on back)

In addition, here are some general tips that apply to almost any investigative project:
Keep ‘Pulling the String’: Don’t give up on a story after it fades from the headlines. Long after
the VA wait list scandal seemed like ‘old news’ we continued to follow up on our new VA leads.
Our persistence paid off.
‘Prime the Pump’: Don’t assume officials are always watching. Before we break major stories,
we alert key officials – and tell them we’ll want reaction. That generates follow-ups. And it often
results in calls for government investigations.
Tell powerful personal stories: Whenever possible, find poignant personal stories to illustrate a
problem. Data is important and instructive, but richly reported personal stories can be critical to
engaging your audience. We shouldn’t just be investigators; we should be great storytellers.
Working with sources and victims: Take time to build trust. When possible, meet them in
person. The more comfortable they feel with you – and the better they understand the
important role they can play in your investigation – the stronger your actual interviews will be.
Capture informal moments: In addition to formal interviews, try to capture key subjects in
informal settings. Sometimes just walking or driving. Magic happens in relaxed moments when
true feelings often surface.
Keep tipster names: Even if you don’t use their original information, remember where your
tipsters work and keep their contact information. That way you can circle back to them when
you get a new lead they might know something about. Tipsters like that proved to be invaluable
at key points in our investigation.
Keep a clear focus: The strongest stories have a clear focus and a central theme. Trying to
cram too many elements into a single report can confuse viewers. It’s better to sharply define
your story – and, thus, make time to let the great moments with your characters breathe.
Natural Sound pauses: They not only improve pacing and help viewers feel a part of the scene,
a simple pause can give viewers a chance to let the last important thought sink in.
Records requests: Be aggressive and persistent in requesting records. Don’t delay, but do make
sure to do your homework so you can ask for specific records. That can speed up a response.
Hint: check IRE’s detailed tip sheets and Jason Leopold’s recent IRE podcast on how to make the
most of your FOIA’s and how to appeal denials.
Watch a compellation of our VA stories here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rLi0111Ywj0
See additional KARE 11 investigations at: http://www.kare11.com/local/kare-investigates

