Case studies:
Flawed UCR data in
Los Angeles and Milwaukee
Ben Poston
Los Angeles Times

#1 offender - aggravated assault
- Aggravated assault is the only Part I
crime type with a Part II counterpart
- Therefore, it’s ripe for
misclassification and LE agencies
acknowledge this.
- It’s harder to misclassify a robbery as
a theft, or a burglary as trespassing or
vandalism becomes the elements are
different.
- This motion graphic explains it all

Three ways crimes are misclassified
1. Human error
2. System error
3. Manipulation

Human error
Several factors at work here:
- Translation of state statutes to FBI UCR
guidelines can be difficult, burdensome
- Lack of training for officers, watch
commanders, record clerks, detectives
- Often, beat cops are not trained on
UCR at all, meaning errors are
introduced from outset and must be
caught by supervisors.

System error

James Simpson suffered third-degree burns
when his girlfriend poured boiling water on him
as he slept. Police misclassified the crime —
which fit the criteria for aggravated assault — as
a minor offense. (Kirk McKoy / Los Angeles
Times)

- Police departments sometimes set up their
records management systems in a way that
allows under-reporting of crime.
- For example: LAPD certain crime
categories were all misclassified as Part II
crimes, such as mayhem and brandishing a
weapon.
- In Milwaukee, all batteries were prepopulated as “simple assaults” in the
system used by clerks even when guns or
knives were used.

System error (cont.)
- In Milwaukee, clerks were told to change weapon
codes for knives and blunt objects to “unknown” or
“other” in the NIBRS so that the simple assaults could
be sent to state UCR agency.
- LAPD’s crime data database did not link to their
detective case tracking system so when detectives
changed classifications, those changes often would
not appear in crime database. (still broken)
- LAPD also had a paper-to-database conversion
problem - vague report titles had to be translated by
overworked civilian clerks, often with error. (now fixed)

Manipulation (cooking the books)
- The most compelling cause of bad data, but
the hardest to prove.
- CompStat pressure travels downhill
- Downgraded crimes - evidence of
manipulation?
- Case Study: LAPD Det. John Elder disciplined
for “cooking the books”
- LAPD case study: Burglary downgraded to
Vandalism
- Hundreds of burglaries were downgraded to
thefts by Milwaukee PD

The bigger picture
- Affects deployment of officers.
- The UCR statistics are a city’s report
card on crime and there is
tremendous pressure to keep crime
down.
- Paints a rosier picture of crime.
- Public is misled.

Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti and LAPD Chief Charlie Beck
discuss the mid year crime report at a July 2015 press
conference. (Los Angeles Times)

Bigger picture (cont.)
- Police departments know their data is inaccurate, but make no
mention of it publicly, instead usually presenting the numbers
as gospel.
- An internal email from Milwaukee Police Capt. Terrence
Gordon, then head of crime stats unit, wrote in a July 2011
email:
- "We just can't be sure that anything is accurate because
training was terrible for officers and for records management
and we have no quality control.”

Impact
Both projects brought reforms:
-

-

-

In Milwaukee, internal audit for police
found 5,300 serious assaults were
miscoded during six-year period. Police
commission also hired an “independent”
auditor.
LAPD created a Data Integrity Unit,
increased training, changed police report
form and created a flowchart to help watch
commanders.
At both, the number of aggravated
assaults increased in the following years.

Methodologies
-

-

-

For Milwaukee series in 2012, compared
how crimes were coded in NIBRS data to
criminal complaint narratives from District
Attorney’s office by matching incident
report numbers.
For LAPD project in 2014, obtained
incident-level data and compared crime
codes to short narratives.
This year, LA Times obtained eight years of
violent crime data from LAPD and found the
department miscoded an estimated 14,000
serious assaults. Used a machine-learning
algorithm to analyze the data and manually
checked results.

Reforms proposed to UCR system
In May, a National Academy of Sciences committee of 15 crime reporting experts
argued for omitting aggravated assault as a category because of its ambiguity.
It could apply to a shooting as well as a barroom fight where no physical harm was
inflicted but a gun is drawn.
As a result, “the nation as a whole lacks reliable measures of shootings,” the panel
said.
(Also state statute confusion because of “aggravated term”)

Reforms proposed
Instead, they propose creating a new assault category that breaks out as:
1 Serious assaults with shooting or discharge of weapon
(to be able to count shootings)
2 Serious assaults without shooting (stabbings or beatings)
3 Minor assaults
Serious threats would be in a different category and would include incidents in
which weapons are discharged or brandished (or not)

Questions?

Ben Poston
Los Angeles Times
ben.poston@latimes.com
Twitter @bposton

