Covering Recovery
CONTEXT, BACKGROUND & THE CHALLENGES OF PREPARING FOR MAJOR DISASTERS
The seemingly increased prevalence of catastrophic events, from natural disasters, biological threats,
large-scale industrial accidents to infrastructure failure and terrorism, has created many challenges for
journalists. Beyond the obvious stories focused on the immediate drama of a massive storm, the threat
of Zika virus or the fatalities of a mass shooting, there are deeper issues that need to be explored by the
press. These are the investigative reports that will help policy makers and the public understand critical
underlying factors, clarifying what happened and what should be done in the future.
Currently, too many questions go unanswered … even unasked. Perhaps during the critical elections of
2016, some of these issues should be addressed by candidates running for public office.

Why is optimal preparedness – if there is such a state – so difficult to reach? Why are we doing
such a poor job of ensuring that vulnerable populations are protected in catastrophic events? Why,
many years after 9/11, is there still evidence of insufficient coordination among and between local,
state and federal agencies – as well as with voluntary and private sector entities? Are we providing
the resources and leadership necessary to protect from disasters and to minimize their impacts?
How do we keep ourselves safe from acts of terrorism, including lone wolf and “known wolf”
attacks? Would a ban on assault style weapons make a material difference in frequency or severity
of mass shootings?
Are schools and other “soft targets” optimally prepared for large-scale events? Why is New Orleans
still struggling with recovery 11 years after Hurricane Katrina and what happened to the more than
$48 billion dollars appropriated for Superstorm Sandy recovery?
What are the most important steps we need to take to minimize and mitigate the potential of a
dangerous Zika epidemic?
We are in an era of great uncertainty and risk from climate change, increased terrorism, more sophisticated ability to disrupt electronic systems, biothreats like Zika or a potential pandemic, and increasingly
fragile infrastructure. These conditions suggest that we will see more disasters and an even greater need
for journalists to explore how and why we are so vulnerable, and what needs to be done to make society
more resilient and better prepared.

National Center for Disaster Preparedness, 215 W 125 ST, STE 303 New York, NY 10027 | t. 646.845.2300 f. 646.845.2329 | www.ncdp.columbia.edu

Here are some of the stories that could and should be on the agenda for journalists interested in these
profoundly important concerns:
1. Funding for hospital disaster preparedness has been cut by 50% since 2004; for public health preparedness by more than 30% and proposed 2017 budget cuts for counterterror efforts (Urban Area Security
Initiative or ‘UASI’ funding) of almost 50%. The scale of disaster planning is already grossly inadequate
in nearly every megadisaster scenario. How will these funding cuts effect local preparedness?
2. Planning for vulnerable populations in large-scale disasters is inadequate – representing a major and
dangerous omission.
3. Are citizen preparedness programs effective? How do we measure their success? Does it matter how
well citizens are prepared?
4. Vaccine development remains primitive and prolonged; it is impossible to produce essential vaccines
in a timely manner. Same for other “medical counter-measures”.
5. Failing infrastructure and consequences of climate change dramatically increase disaster vulnerability.
6. Recovery is complex. How do we measure recovery, how to account for perception vs. so called objective measures?
7. How – and why - to find meaningful personal stories about recovery struggles in the aftermath of a
major disaster?
For more than 12 years, the National Center for Disaster Preparedness at Columbia University’s Earth
Institute has served as a resource for academics, policy makers and journalists seeking background and
insights on many aspects of preparedness, vulnerability and disaster risk.
Contact us:
Irwin Redlener, MD
Director
ir2110@cumc.columbia.edu
@IrwinRedlenerMD
Author: Americans at Risk: Why We Are Not Prepared for Megadisasters and What We Can Do Now
Jeff Schlegelmilch, MPH, MBA
Deputy Director
js4645@cumc.columbia.edu
Sabine Marx, PhD
Director of Research
sm2234@cumc.columbia.edu

National Center for Disaster Preparedness, 215 W 125 ST, STE 303 New York, NY 10027 | t. 646.845.2300 f. 646.845.2329 | www.ncdp.columbia.edu

