HUMANIZING NUMBERS
Kendall Taggart
IRE 2016
kendall.taggart@buzzfeed.com

Start your reporting process with people instead of
— or at least at the same time as — analyzing data.

Photograph by Dylan Hollingsworth for BuzzFeed News

Focus on potential harm:
● Find the people who have been hurt
● Figure out how to quantify the magnitude of the problem

Who is getting hurt by
any of this?

Mark Schoofs, investigations editor at BuzzFeed

Reporting question: Kids don’t usually have any money —
are they ordered to pay court fines?
● We started with sources — defense attorneys,
advocates, legal scholars.
● Learned that Texas treated truancy as a criminal offense.
● Advocates said it was possible that kids went to jail for
unpaid truancy fines — but they had no idea how often.
● An added challenge — juvenile court records are sealed.

Jail records kept by the largest counties

Here are the details of how we analyzed jail data from a related story.

There are lots of stories in jail data:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Name of the inmate
Race/Ethnicity
Age/Date of birth
Home address
Warrant number (which might tell you what court the case came from)
Charges
Bond amount
Bondsman/bond company

Hit the road

Photograph by Dylan Hollingsworth for BuzzFeed News

Talking to kids we identified in jail records led us to John
Payton, a judge working in the suburbs of Dallas.

Texas Sends Hundreds of Teens To Adult Jail For Missing School

Some datasets for finding real people
● Inmate data from jails to report on judges, schools, police, and
for backgrounding people
○ What are the most common charges per judge?
○ What is the most common charge for people under 20?
● Pension data to find former employees
● Birth records (i.e. Ancestry.com for finding the parents of
juveniles. Young people tend to be harder to find on Lexis
Nexis, but you can usually find their parents)

Go looking for data sets that will help you find people:
● Editors tasked us with finding people who had been
repeatedly taken advantage of by for-profit
telemarketers that call on behalf of charities (and often
pocket 80 cents of every dollar donated).
● We called every state charity regulator who would
answer the phone.
● The Iowa Attorney General had subpoenaed the
donation log from one of the largest telemarketers in
the country.

Meet Judith
● Legally blind and
living on a small
Social Security
pension
● 25 checks to 11
different charities in
one recent year

How to use numbers effectively:

How to write about numbers effectively:
● Don’t use them — sometimes regular old words work
better.
● Compare them to something tangible
● Pull most of it out of the main story (data explainers)
● Pretend you’re describing your analysis to people at a
cocktail party — not a NICAR cocktail party.

kendall.taggart@buzzfeed.com | 646.589.8582

P.S. Some examples of how to use numbers
effectively (and not so effectively) from:
● Chicago Tribune’s Pultizer-winning series on delays at Chicago O’
Hare.
● The Wall Street Journal’s Pultizer-winning series on backdating
stock options
● The San Francisco Chronicle’s recent story on men living with AIDs.
● California Watch’s series on shoddy school construction and
earthquake safety
● BuzzFeed News’s series on matchfixing in tennis

How to use numbers effectively:
● Don’t use them

Don’t use them: Gateway to Gridlock by Louise Kiernan,
Chicago Tribune
“The air smells as if it has been inhaled and exhaled by too many people
for far too long and they are breathing it still, snoring and snuffling,
sighing and murmuring as they sprawl about O'Hare International
Airport like refugees from some invisible war.
Everywhere you look there are bodies. Stretched along tables and the
conveyor belts of x-ray machines. Curled up on baggage carousels,
slumped against walls and draped along benches.”

How to use numbers effectively:
●
●

Don’t use them
Compare them to something tangible

The perfect payday by Charles Forelle and James Bandler, Wall Street Journal
“On a summer day in 2002, shares of Affiliated Computer Services Inc. sank to their lowest
level in a year. Oddly, that was good news for Chief Executive Jeffrey Rich.
His annual grant of stock options was dated that day, entitling him to buy stock at that
price for years...

Just lucky? A Wall Street Journal analysis suggests the odds of this
happening by chance are extraordinarily remote — around one in 300 billion.
The odds of winning the multistate Powerball lottery with a $1 ticket are
one in 146 million.”

How to write effectively about statistics
●
●
●

Don’t use them
Compare them to something tangible
Pull most of it out of the main story

San Francisco Chronicle:
Last Men Standing by Erin
Allday
They outlived an epidemic,
but San Francisco's AIDS
survivors are still fighting
for their lives.

Numbers make the intimate portraits feel like part of something bigger
AIDS diagnoses

Living with AIDS

Data explainers
●

Here’s a bad one (I helped write it, so I can say that).

Just look at the headline.

Data explainers
Use simple language — don’t let a sophisticated analysis make you lazy.
How we identified the nation's worst charities
“The United States is home to roughly 1.6 million tax-exempt organizations.
That’s far too many to examine closely. So the Tampa Bay Times and The Center
for Investigative Reporting used data collected by the nonprofit charity tracker
GuideStar USA to narrow the pool to the 5,800 charities nationwide that report
paying professional solicitation companies to raise donations.”

Data explainers
When simple language won’t cut it...use gifs?
How BuzzFeed News Used Betting Data To Investigate Match-Fixing In Tennis

