Tip Sheet — IRE 2016 — The business of freelancing: securing grants
Esther Kaplan, Editor, The Investigative Fund
What kinds of stories do you commission?
We seek out reporting on important stories with the potential for social impact. We like to see reporting plans that
are ambitious but realistic, with the potential to expose institutional failures or abuses. If you already have
important sources or documents in hand, that will strengthen your proposal. If your previous work indicates you’d
have the capacity and knowledge base to tackle the story, that helps too.
What makes a story "investigative"?
By investigative we mean enterprise reporting — digging up stories other reporters haven't found yet or
significantly advancing stories that have been covered, but not in depth. Our application calls for reporters to do a
brief analysis of the originality of the story proposal — what has been reported previously on the topic and how
your approach would substantially advance upon what is known. Failing to take into account important previous
reporting is not a good idea.
Who may apply?
Anyone may apply, but it’s best if you have some substantial feature reporting experience, whether for print,
broadcast, or online. We meet monthly to review proposals, and our decision-making process is designed to be
informal and supportive. If a project has potential but we have questions about your track record, your reporting
plan or your budget request, we'll contact you to ask for revisions.
Do you only commission stories for print?
We commission investigative reporting in any medium — print, online, or broadcast. All of our stories are
published or broadcast in partnership with a media outlet.
How big are your story budgets?
Our support is not designed to replace fees at that host outlet; we expect each outlet to pay our reporters their
standard story fee. On our end, typical budgets for first-time Investigative Fund reporters range from $2,500 to
$10,000 and are based on the submission of a detailed reporting plan. When we green light a story, we cover the
reporter’s direct costs associated with the investigative project, in addition to a reporting fee.
Do I have to have an assignment to query you?
Reporters often already have interest from an assigning editor when they query us, but if not, we work closely
with our reporters to find an outlet for their stories.
Do you assign stories that won't run in The Nation?
Yes. In fact, the vast majority of Investigative Fund stories appear in other outlets. (While The Nation Institute has
historical ties with The Nation magazine, we are financially and editorially independent organizations.)
I am a reporter based outside of the United States. May I apply?
Yes, absolutely. But our shop produces stories that speak to a U.S. audience and appear in a U.S. media outlet. A
strong applicant will have previously reported feature stories for U.S. outlets.
Besides covering reporting costs, what role do you play?
We offer guidance to journalists throughout the investigative process — from project concept to story
development to field reporting to placement in a media outlet that provides maximum visibility for its subject. We
provide research assistance and access to expensive services such as Nexis and Accurint. We also provide fact
checking and legal vetting in-house, as needed. In some cases, we have sued in support of reporters' FOIA
requests. When our stories appear, we assist with publicity work and outreach to communities of interest to
increase each story's impact.

What does the reporter have to promise in return?
We require that you do the reporting outlined in your proposal, stay in regular communication about any
reporting roadblocks, and submit a draft for editorial review in advance of submitting to the partner outlet. Any
substantive editorial changes in direction or a change in the partner outlet must be made in consultation with our
editors. The Investigative Fund must be credited as a reporting partner upon publication or broadcast.
Beyond The Investigative Fund, where else can I get support for freelance reporting?
Here’s a partial list of alternatives:
Alicia Patterson Foundation (6-month and 12-month fellowships)
www.aliciapatterson.org
Economic Hardship Reporting Project
http://economichardship.org/
Food and Environment Reporting Network
http://thefern.org/
Fund for Investigative Journalism
www.fij.org
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation (health reporting)
http://www.kff.org/mediafellows/
Investigative Reporters and Editors
www.ire.org/training/fellowships
Leonard Goodman Institute for Investigative Reporting
http://inthesetimes.com/investigative
McGraw Fellowship for Business Journalism
http://www.mcgrawcenter.org/the-harold-w-mcgraw-jr-business-journalism-fellowships/
Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting (international reporting)
pulitzercenter.org
theinvestigativefund.org
queries@theinvestigativefund.org

