Here are some of our favorite resources

Political Advertising (who’s doing it; who’s behind it)
Political Ad Sleuth: Who’s buying up the air time.The Sunlight Foundation’s searchable
database of FCC ad buy data (soon to include cable and radio buys) that can help you identify
who is behind “Mothers for Furry Kittens” and other innocuously named groups and can give
you an early heads up on who’s reserving airtime in your area. It’s also often the only way to
see dark money groups’ spending.
Wesleyan Media Project: This academic group tracks and evaluates advertising and can share
limited Kantar/CMAG data
Internet Archive
-Wayback Machine
-Political TV Ad Archive: A poor man’s Kantar/CMAG. Check out the TV ads in your markets
(coverage limited)

Business/financial backgrounding
EDGAR http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html is the Securities and
Exchange Commission web site where mandatory disclosures by public companies are posted.
Documents there include 10-Q and 10-K (quarterly and annual reports) DEF-14A (proxy
statement, includes salaries) and S-1 (initial public offering)
Open Corporates: Help in tracking the identities of corporations or corporate types behind your
candidates.
You can also search all contracts at http://usaspending.gov.
The Project On Government Oversight (POGO) tracks misconduct on the top 100 contractors:
www.contractormisconduct.org.

Charities
For nonprofit, tax-exempt charities, you can get the 990 tax forms on Guidestar at
www.guidestar.org or citizenaudit.org.
The Foundation Center www.fdncenter.org has tax returns and financial info on
charities/trusts. Click on Foundation Finder, http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder.html,
http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder_990.html Economic Research Institute for nonprofit
searching; has nonprofit executive pay searching: http://www.eri-nonprofitsalaries.com/index.cfm?FuseAction=NPO.Search
If you are looking for a quick, FREE snapshot, try Propublica’s search engine. The data for
nonprofit tax returns processed by the IRS during the 2012-2014 calendar years, which includes
filings for the 2011-2013 fiscal years (and some older records.)
https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/

Campaign Contributions
Open Secrets
Congressional profiles: http://www.opensecrets.org/politicians
Interest group profiles: http://www.opensecrets.org/industries
Revolving door. See which ex-lawmakers staff members became lobbyists:
http://www.opensecrets.org/revolving
-990 Search
-Campaign Committee search
More information about members of Congress: https://www.govtrack.us
Federal Election Commission or the more user-friendly beta version (the functionality is more
limited but there’s an opportunity to give feedback! Make sure the future FEC website is
everything reporters need!!)
-Individual donor lookup
-Calendar (keep track of filing deadines in your races!)
Plus loads of downloadable data on campaign committees, traditional PACs and super PACs.
-Online directory of state disclosure rules and offices
National Institute of Money in State Politics: State and local campaign finance data:
Legistorm - (partial pay site) Has records on gifts, Congressional travel, staff and more.

Legislative records
Congressional roll call votes:
-House
-Senate
Bill introductions: https://www.congress.gov

Personal Records
-Call your local police department and request reports AND records of calls of service for your
subject and his/her address(es)
-Use PACER to search for federal court cases and bankruptcies. (pay site) Use Sqoop to get
alerts on some court cases that you are following.
-If they are not online, visit the local court houses and search for records pertaining to your
subject
-Find web sites with a Reverse Domain Search tool
-Head to city hall and check local offices for records, like taxes, zoning, business. (Be sure to
make public records requests for communications, while you are there)
-Use Web Archives to find old versions of web sites affiliated with your subject. You can look for
changes to bios or old press releases.
-Flight tracking tools can be helpful in seeing movements of a plane.
-Use archival records, such as the National Archives, local libraries and Ancestry.com.

General
Check out the piece by Henk Van Ess of the European Broadcasting Union on “Backgrounding”
for nifty tips on using search engines. It’s in the Q1 2016 IRE Journal. In the same issue, David
Cullier of Arizona State U has a good piece on “FOI Power Tools” that contains helpful info for
everyone from newbies to advanced users.
If you lost your paper copy of the mag, members can download back issues here.

