Panel: Uncovering stories on the business beat
Tip sheet: Behind the Gold Rush/addiction treatment fraud
Background/Key terms:
• POC: “Point of care”; shorthand for the relatively inexpensive urine drug
tests taken on site, such as in a doctor’s office. The classic pee-in-a-cup test.
• Confirmatory testing: Expensive, comprehensive drug screens conducted
by sophisticated labs which can confirm or refute the results of the cheaper
POC urine drug test. Tests for a much broader array of drugs, can pinpoint
the amount of drug as well. Generally appropriate when the first test result
was a surprise: either a drug showed up that the patient should not be
taking, or the test showed the absence of a drug the patient should be
taking.Routinely ordering confirmatory testing regardless of the POC test
results, especially when there is no surprise in the POC test, is indicative of
fraud.
Background/Levels of addiction treatment:
• Detox. Medical. Insurance covers. Can last for a week or two. Usually
handled by state-licensed substance abuse treatment facilities.
• Rehab. Medical. Insurance covers. Can last a few weeks or several
months. Usually handled by state-licensed substance abuse treatment
facilities.
• Intensive Outpatient, or IOP. Medical. Insurance covers. One key
source of much, though not all, of the drug screening abuses. IOP is
typically state-licensed; however the “treatment” can be dubious: golf
therapy, for instance, or rap music lessons.
• Sober homes. Not medical. A residence in which newly sober people
out of rehab live together in a sober environment, sometimes referred to
as halfway houses or three-quarter way houses. Increasingly owned by
for-profit businesses.
Ways it all goes south:
• Too frequent urine tests. Once out of rehab, in a sober home or IOP,
even once a week testing is considered excessive.

•

•

•

•

•

Overly comprehensive confirmatory tests. For instance, elderly
seniors –even really cool ones- with no history of drug use do not need
to be tested for angel dust, heroin, pot, cocaine, and methadone every
month.
Routine negative confirmatory testing. Routinely using an expensive
confirmatory test to confirm the absence of a drug; i.e., one not found in
a cheap POC test, is indicative of fraud.
Self-dealing. Cross-ownership of a sober house and a lab and/or IOP.
Enables the sober house company to make money by requiring sober
home residents attend the company’s IOP as a condition of residence,
where they will be extensively drug tested by the IOP, which can use the
sober home company’s lab.
Gift-giving. Waiving or reducing sober home rent, giving gift cards,
promising free gym memberships, cigarettes, etc., as a means of
persuading people to live in a sober home is a form of inducement and
may break federal and/or state patient brokering laws. It’s done because
rent isn’t needed by the sober home company if the renter is regularly
providing urine for testing- a much bigger source of revenue.
Abuse. Anyone can open a sober home: Felons, pimps, people only a few
months clean and people who are still using. Prostitution, overdoses,
physical and mental abuse, theft can and do occur in these homes.

Things to look for:
• Cross ownership that lays the groundwork for self-dealing. State
corporate records can confirm cross-ownership among sober home
operators, IOPs, rehab centers and labs.
• Lab ownership, which can be found through corporate records, NPI
(National Provider Identifier) records, state laboratory licensure records.
• CLIA-waived labs. These are the limited-use labs most likely to be
associated with sober homes, IOPs and rehab centers. States typically
license and oversee them for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. In state licensure records, watch for lab names that are
suggestive of rehab facilities: Serenity Labs, Paths to Recovery Labs, etc.
They likely share ownership with a treatment facility or sober home.
• Reasonable accommodation records. A small percentage of sober
homes can be located looking through a town or city’s “reasonable
accommodation” records, typically filed with code enforcement. Bear in

mind, these records represent, at best, a small fraction of the likely sober
home operations. And some cities don’t have such records, because sober
homes set up shop without asking.
• Overdose incidents. Depending on public records accessibility in your
state, you may be able to identify sober homes using Fire/rescue
department call records by address. You would be looking for addresses
where there were several ODs and/or use of Narcan.
• SAMHSA. This federal agency has a list, by state/county, of all rehab
facilities and some – but far from all- sober homes.

Links:
• SAMHSA. Searchable map of substance abuse treatment facilities. Its
list of sober homes is very limited.
https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/
• NPI: Provides bare-bones data on specific labs, treatment centers, and
medical providers related to addiction. Searchable by name.
http://www.hipaaspace.com/medical_Billing/coding/national_provider_id
entifier/NPI_number_lookup.aspx
• Federal Stark Law, and the Anti-Kickback Statute, known as
AKS.These federal laws govern patient referral practices in federal
programs: VA, Medicare, Medicaid, and were used against Millennium
Laboratories by the feds. The DOJ lawsuit against Millennium explains
what the government considers a kickback, and why.
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2679951-DOJComplaint.html
• Reasonable accommodationrules: A primer
http://www.mypalmbeachpost.com/news/news/heres-a-little-known-waycities-can-keep-tabs-on-s/nrDMs/
• American Society of Addiction Medicine Can speak on use and over
use of urine tests.
http://www.asam.org/
• National Alliance for Recovery Residences. Supports standards for
recovery residences (sober homes), good source on existing law and may
address industry abuses.
http://narronline.org/

• Shared National Credit Program. If interested in pursuing leveraged
loans/CLO stories. The 2014 annual report, below,to the Federal Reserve
on the state of bank lending included a special report on the dangers of
leveraged loans.The November 2015 report repeated the concern.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20141107a.htm
Any questions? Feel free to contact Pat Beall, Palm Beach Post
pbeall@pbpost.com

