Broadcast: How To Get People To Talk
IRE 2016
Cindy Galli
Senior Investigative Producer
ABC News
Cynthia.K.Galli@abc.com
@mustangalli

The Approach
 Before anything, remember to be two things: be human and be
honest. People will sense if you’re not being genuine with them.
Whether it’s a grieving family who has lost a loved one or a corporate
executive for whom you’ve got tough questions, be truthful about why
you want someone to talk.
 Take the time for a face-to-face meeting. Sitting down in
someone’s living room so they can get to know you first will go a very
long way. Many people have never done a TV interview before and
are quite intimidated, so let them see YOU first before they see lights
and cameras and other gear. If this is a taped interview, remind them
that it’s not live – they can stop and start if needed or say something
over again.
 Vet them well – and use the information. You should be doing this
anyway in order to protect yourself from something someone doesn’t
tell you about themselves … but use information you find out to
ingratiate yourself. Do they have particular interests or hobbies that
may help you find common ground? Something that helps you
speak the same language and makes them more comfortable?

 If this will be a contentious interview, be transparent about the
context and the ground you’ll cover. That’s not to suggest giving up
questions beforehand (never!) but don’t approach with a pretext of a
friendly sit-down interview if what you’re asking them about will
ensure it will be anything but.
 Sometimes an “unscheduled” interview can lead to a fruitful sitdown later. Be open to that possibility if he contacts you afterward,
especially if he plans to act on something due to your involvement
(giving back money, etc.) BUT! Don’t ever agree to not use the
confrontational video in exchange for a sit-down!

The Agreement
 How are you characterizing your interviewee? Are you using this
person as a “whistleblower” versus a “former employee”? Do you
need to disclose any financial relationships? (ie. a consumer
“advocate” who gets paid by plaintiffs’ attorneys, etc.) Is this person
speaking on behalf of an entire industry or for just one company?
 Be careful of making promises. If this person faces retaliation for
speaking out, can you indemnify them against legal action? Likely
not – so don’t tell someone you can. If this is a source whose identity
you’re protecting (if you’ve agreed to silhouette, etc.), how far will you
go to guard that? Have a conversation with your
management/legal/standards team so they know what you intend to
do.

The Set-Up

 Where you conduct the interview sets the tone. For a skittish victim,
will he be more comfortable in his home or perhaps somewhere
unidentifiable, such as a hotel room or other location? Be open to
options but don’t give up control.
 Try not to chitchat before the camera goes on. We’ve all been
there – people are nervous as you’re setting up, asking things like “so
what questions will you be asking me?” as they’re getting mic’d up.
Resist the urge to elicit something you’d really like to get on camera –
they might not say it that way again!
 How you set up the shot, the questions, the mood of the room –
will all influence how someone answers your questions. So be
cognizant of it, as well as play it up. If your interviewee enjoys a
healthy ego, for example, throw up another light or camera. If he
feels you’re making a big deal out of him, he may be more candid and
colorful.

The Questions
 Getting someone to talk doesn’t end when they agree to sit down.
Sometimes that light goes on and suddenly the guy who couldn’t shut
up now responds with one-word answers. Have a conversation
rather than run down a list of questions. If you’re someone who
writes questions for yourself beforehand, consider ditching them and
just talk. And that means listening – if you’re not constantly glancing
at a list of questions to see what comes next, you can ask thoughtful
follow-up questions.
 Follow through and don’t leave someone in the dust after the
interview. Return emails and answer calls, even when they just want
to vent. You’ve convinced them to do a very bold thing so don’t cast
them aside when you’ve wrapped or after it airs. And … you never
know when you’ll need them for a follow up.

Dina Gusovsky, Reporter/Producer
CNBC
Dina.gusovsky@gmail.com
@dinagusovsky

DON’T NEGOTIATE
 When you’re trying to get a key source on camera, the first instinct is
usually to do whatever it takes to get him or her to say yes. But, once
you start throwing out the possibility of a silhouette interview or some
kind of disguise, it makes it easier for the subject to choose the less
risky option even if they were inclined to do the interview anyway.
This does not apply to every case---sometimes the source’s identity
HAS to be protected, but in a piece that is not very visual to begin
with, yet is provocative and eye opening content-wise, the interviewer
must be insistent, without being pushy, that the piece will work if the
person agrees to talk---out in the open. You may be pleasantly
surprised that the subject agrees. If the interviewer feels strongly
enough that the piece would only work if the source agrees to show
his or her identity, the interviewer should convey that to the subject
right away.
 Of course, there is always a chance the subject may only be
comfortable going on camera in disguise, but as a reporter, never
start from that vantage point.
 Explain why it is so important for the story and for your audience to
have the subject go on camera. There’s a reason you spend so much
time and effort to convince sources to go public with what they know--relay that to your subject. Honesty is key.

SELL YOURSELF---SHOW THEM WHAT YOU’VE DONE


Why should someone trust you? Well, you can come up with all the
reasons in the world, but the proof should be in your work. Send them
examples of work you’ve done, but also send general information so
the person does not think you’re picking and choosing whatever you
think best exemplifies your work. If you have a website, send them a
link to that. Give them your twitter handle. Let them decide who you
really are and what you stand for.

TALK ABOUT THE RISKS—ALL THE RISKS---OF COMING FORWARD
 It’s your job to think of and explain any and all risks associated with a
person coming forward to share his/her story. You must explain
everything from the best case to the worst-case scenario and
everything in between when it comes to possible retaliation and
negative consequences of speaking out.
 For you, this is just another story and another interview. For the
subject, though, this is usually the first time they’ve done anything like
this and they may not be aware of the power of the press. It is your
job to not only take them through the interview process step by step,
but also what happens AFTER something airs and becomes public.
 Also make sure to explain that if there is retaliation against the
source, you will follow up with another report highlighting that. In
other words, you won’t leave them to hang out to dry. This often
helps the subject feel more comfortable because he/she knows you
will continue to follow up with the story, especially if the subject
becomes the story at some point down the line.
THEY SHOULD BE WITH YOU EVERY STEP OF THE WAY

 Once someone makes the decision to do the on camera interview, it’s
just as important to keep them in the loop AFTER the interview as it is
before. Never leave your sources in the dark. Continue to touch base
with them and let them know what step in the process you are in
terms of writing, editing, and when you expect the piece to air. Any
information that makes them feel included is important, even if it is
just to check in and see how they’re doing/feeling.

DON’T FORGET ABOUT THEM ONCE ALL IS SAID AND DONE

 Even after the piece airs, it’s important to stay in touch with the
source. If there is retaliation, it’s your job to fully understand the
scope of that and follow up with a report. If there is not, it is good to
let him/her know that they are not just another subject in your roster
of thousands of people and stories you want to talk to and work on,
but that they actually mean something to you and your network.

Scott Zamost
Senior Investigative Producer
Scott.zamost@cnn.com
@scottzamostcnn

 Transparency is key. Be very direct about the interview topic and
explain why it’s important to the story. Make it clear there is no hidden
agenda and a sit-down interview is an opportunity, not a
confrontation. Don’t expect an immediate answer to your interview
request.
 Send the subject or whoever you are dealing with links to previous
stories where an interview was conducted. Show them you are fair.
Stress your experience and openness to getting both sides.
 Discuss why you aren’t interested in a non-scheduled interview
because that usually doesn’t result in anything substantial. You want
to get answers that will illuminate the investigation, not detract from it.
 It may require a series of discussions before someone agrees to talk.
Stress that the decision is entirely up to the person, but also point out
that the interview would be the ideal way to get their message out.
 In some cases, an unscheduled interview turns into a sit-down
interview. Avoid making any commitment in that case not to use the
unscheduled interview.
 If a public official turns you down, ask for the schedule of public
events. Tell the media spokesperson that it’s certainly not ideal for
you to attempt to get a comment at a ribbon cutting ceremony, but
you will need an on-camera response for the story.

