IRE Tipsheet
Constructing the Narrative: An Unbelievable Story of Rape
Ken Armstrong, The Marshall Project
karmstrong@themarshallproject.org; @bykenarmstrong; www.bykenarmstrong.com
Suspend the reader
One way to do this? The unanswered question. The question can be big or small, direct
or implied, answered in a little while or a long while. If you end a section with, “She
heard the phone ring,” the reader will wonder: Who’s calling? And to say what? To find
out, the reader must keep reading. Unanswered questions are hooks. Dangle them to
pull readers along.
Enable the reader
With most things we write about, there is a set of rules: How should a police officer do
this? How should a schoolteacher do that? Instead of applying the rules to each separate
act (e.g., “The police officer violated department policy by …”), embed the rules early on
– and let the reader apply them as the action unfolds. The writer gets out of the way
while the reader, with each rule violated, senses the approach of doom. This creates
tension and dread – akin to a horror movie sending a character into the basement.
Surprise the reader
The most obvious means is some big reveal. But there are other ways. Consider shifting
the story’s perspective. This can be especially effective if done late in the story – and if
the perspective comes from an unexpected source.
Spare the nut graph
If you’re writing a narrative, don’t write a nut graph. Write a story – and let the reader
write the nut graph. This takes some courage. But you can always test before publishing.
Enlist cold readers and ask: What did you take away from the story? What was the
lesson here?
Simple language = speed
Big fancy words are a drag. They distract. They pull readers out of the story.
Think cinematically
A narrative isn’t about findings. It’s about scenes. Figure out the most important scenes
and report them into the ground. (And whenever you can: Get dialogue.)
Mind the packaging
Don’t let the headline – or a cutline, or a graphic, or a pull quote – give away what the
story holds back.
Simple people = fable
How many people do you know personally who are pure and simple, representing all
that is good or all that is bad? Pretty few, I’d guess. So why do so many people like that
show up in stories? Write about people in full.

