Tips for a Successful Newsroom Partnership
Kirsten Danis, Managing Editor, The Marshall Project
IRE Conference 2016
kdanis@themarshallproject.org/ @kirstendanis
BEFORE YOU START
• Know your project.
Scope out the project before you approach a partner. Estimate a timeframe
and set realistic reporting goals. Consider all possible aspects: reporting, writing,
filming, graphics, data, photo, interactives.
Leave room for flexibility and input for your partner, but have a clear idea of
what you would like to do.
Determine why the project would benefit from a partnership. Does it need
more geographic reach? More expert reporting? More boots on-the-ground? More
data support? Better distribution?
• Know your partner.
Consider whether your project meshes with their overall work and whether
you share newsroom values.
Understand the needs of other media: Magazines want to be part of the
conception of the story; newspapers often need sharp, local angles; video and audio
reporting often takes a different approach than print reporting.
Figure out what strengths you each bring to the table and where you can
complement each other.
• Know your contacts.
Ultimately, partnerships aren’t between organizations, they’re between
people. It’s easier to start initial conversations with people you know.
• Know your ask.
Don’t approach a partner with the vogue but vague notion of “collaboration.”
Come up with specific requests. You can adapt later, but start with an ask.
GETTING GOING
• Meet with all the players.
Even the least complicated projects need buy-in from all parts of the
newsroom. Have a joint group meeting or conference call to make sure everyone is
on board and supportive. Have frequent follow-up conversations to keep each other
updated.
• Make your expectations clear at the outset.

A pre-nup is uncomfortable, but it’s easier than a divorce. Discuss how you’ll
share credit and/or bylines. Talk about sharing expenses, including travel or
freelance/research fees. Get an agreement on about how long the piece will be or
how much airtime it will get. Establish who will take the lead on editing.
• Don’t forget the tech.
Have platform compatibility conversations at the beginning to avoid sad
surprises later.
• Use DocumentCloud.(documentcloud.org)
This free tool allows journalism organizations to share documents and
photos and then surface relevant sections when they’re ready to go public.
AVOIDING MINEFIELDS
• Call, don’t write.
When you have a serious disagreement, don’t try to work it out over
email/Slack/Gchat etc. Pick up the phone. It will be friendlier (and likely far
shorter).
• Stay flexible and ready to compromise.
Do you really feel that strongly about that sentence? Be prepared to let some
things go.
• Know when to walk away.
Most partnerships will work. A few won’t. And some will just be really
bumpy. If things are going sour, pull out before there are hard feelings. You may
figure out a way to work together again later.

