Reporting on Guns
#IRE16
With @loisbeckett, @mrmclively, @ben_hallman, @jrbullington +
@mattdrange
Salon D
3:45 p.m. - 4:45 p.m.
Friday, June 17

Some recent reporting on guns …

“In New Orleans alone,
more than 2,100 guns
were reported stolen
between 2012 and 2015,
NOPD data show.”

NYT recent story on daily death toll…

“Unlike the butchery that
bookended it, it merited no
presidential statements, no
saturation television coverage.”

Mass Shootings
What’s significant?
What to look for?
What to avoid?

CONTEXT:

Things journalists often get WRONG about guns:

Gun policy: What needs more attention?
Concealed carry

Mental health and access to firearms

Background checks

National Rifle Association

Resources
Various states Attorneys General (in California DOJ conducts its own
background checks, for example)
ATF (trace information and database of licensed dealers)
Gun Violence Archive
CDC’s WISQARS database
www.gunpolicy.org - international comparisons of crime rates and gun
laws
DOJ’s CrimeSolutions.gov
Local police records (details you can’t often get elsewhere)

More resources
State and federal gun policy: Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
From Mike McLively: “Our Trendwatch document summarizes what’s going on in
legislatures across the country (we track every gun bill), our Post-Heller Litigation
Summary explains what’s going on in the courts with the Second Amendment, our
StateScorecard gives a grade to each state based on the strength/weakness of
gun laws, and we regularly post about the issues of the day. We also have a brief
bank available on request that has the pleadings from all major Second
Amendment cases.”
Law Center attorneys and their areas of expertise: Laura Cutilletta (state
legislation), Allison Anderman, (state and local legislation), Ari Freilich (CA
legislation), Mike McLively (Second Amendment and urban gun violence), and
Lindsay Nichols (gun policy and federal legislation).

Subject area experts
Mike The Gun Guy - gun owner and blogger
Garen Wintemute - ER doctor and gun violence expert
Others: Phil Alpers (for international comparisons), John Donohue III (public carry
analysis), Adam Winkler (Second Amendment & gun policy), Dave Kopel (legal
expert/gun rights advocate), Michael O’Shea (conservative legal scholar on guns)
Pastor Mike McBride (faith community/race, violence policing), Dante Barry (gun
violence/police reform) Margot Hirsch (smart gun technology), David Kennedy
(GVI strategy), Jeffery Swanson (researcher), David Hemenway (researcher),
Daniel Webster (researcher), Saul Cornell (historian), Mark Jones (former ATF
agent and now at ShotSpotter), Jeff Asher (crime data), George Tita (researcher).

QUESTIONS?

