Navigating Legal Minefields in the
Source-Journalist Relationship
Michael Isikoff, Yahoo News
Mark MacDougall, Akin Gump
David Schertler, Schertler & Onorato
Karen Williams, Akin Gump
____
June 17, 2016

© 2016 Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP

Overview
 The First Amendment does not serve as a blanket immunization of
journalists – or their sources – acting in the newsgathering process.
 Fact-dependent analysis, with limited legal precedent. U.S. Supreme Court
has not given a categorical answer whether truthful publication may be
punished consistent with the First Amendment.
 Criminal and civil liability as to both the journalist and the source has the
potential to chill newsgathering activities.

1

Potential Legal Minefields
 Information obtained illegally (such as by hacking or wiretap)
 National security reporting
 Sealed documents and proceedings
 Undercover investigations

2

National Security Leak Cases
 Complicated cases to prosecute:
● Generally involve classified information governed by the Classified Information
Procedures Act (CIPA)
● Assessment of what information can be declassified for use in the case
● Broad scope of the Espionage Act

 Generally the sources have been prosecuted for revealing secret
information, but the federal government does not tend to pursue charges
against journalists or publishers.
● E.g. Morison, Sterling, Kiriakou cases

 Nonetheless, the government has characterized journalists as soliciting or
encouraging the disclosure of classified information, such that the journalist
also violated the law.

3

Leak Cases
Manning/WikiLeaks
 Prosecutors reportedly had logs of internet chats between Private Manning
and Julian Assange, founder of WikiLeaks
 When the judge asked if Manning would face the same charges if he had
given the documents to The New York Times instead of WikiLeaks, the
prosecutor answered in the affirmative.
Snowden/Greenwald
 Freelance journalist Glenn Greenwald was accused by a Congressman of
selling U.S. secrets stolen by Snowden because Greenwald was receiving
payments from news organizations. In an interview, Greenwald stated that
he ensured he had a signed freelance contract before filing any Snowden
story to ensure he was seen as a journalist rather than the source.

4

Leak Cases (continued)
Kim/Rosen
 Kim was a State Department advisor and naturalized citizen from South
Korea.
● Indicted in 2009 for communications with James Rosen of Fox News regarding
North Korea and its nuclear activities.

 In pursuing the case, DOJ undertook surveillance of Rosen’s movements
and stated in a search warrant affidavit that there was probable cause that
Rosen was “at the very least, either [ ] an aider, abettor and/or co-conspirator
of Mr. Kim.”

5

News of the World – UK Phone Hacking
 Multiple arrests in the UK of journalists
● Former editor Andy Coulson was found guilty of one count of hacking and
sentenced to 18 months in prison.

 Tabloid shuts down.
 NoW/News Corp. paid multiple claims
to hacking victims, reportedly $551 million
in settlements and legal fees.
 U.S. investigation launched
but no charges filed.

6

Planned Parenthood Videos
 Texas grand jury investigation into alleged criminal wrongdoing resulted in
the indictments of Center for Medical Progress (CMP) founder David
Daleiden and employee Sandra Merritt.
● Charges for tampering with a government document – i.e. a California driver’s
license.
● Daleiden also charged with written attempts to purchase human organs.

 Poses issue of who is a journalist and potential impact upon journalism.
● CMP website states that it “uses the same undercover techniques that investigative
journalists have used for decades in exercising our First Amendment rights to
freedom of speech and of the press, and follows all applicable laws.”

7

The Journalist-Source Relationship
 Factors:
● Journalist’s role/involvement in procurement of illegally obtained materials
● Whether the information is a matter of public concern

 Does your source know the potential ramifications of your story being
published?
 Will publishing your story “out” your source and any illegal conduct by your
source?
● Issues with publishing documents

 What happens if your source is indicted or sought for questioning by the
government regarding conduct related to your newsgathering?

8

Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532 U.S. 514 (2001)
 Addresses illegally intercepted phone conversation
 Recorded parties sue media and later join the source as a defendant.
 Key facts:
● Played no part in the unlawful interception
● Found out about the interception after-the-fact and did not know interceptor’s identity
● Access to the tapes was obtained lawfully
● Recorded conversation was a matter of public concern.

 Notes that New York Times v. United States did not resolve “whether, in
cases where information has been acquired unlawfully by a newspaper or by
a source, government may ever punish not only the unlawful acquisition, but
the ensuing publication as well.”
 Here, the Court addresses a narrower issue and concludes “a stranger’s
illegal conduct does not suffice to remove the First Amendment shield from
speech about a matter of public concern.”

9

Peavy v. WFAA-TV, Inc., 221 F.3d 158 (5th Cir. 2000)
 Addresses illegally intercepted phone conversations
 Key facts:
● Neighbor could hear conversations on cordless phone of Peavy and began
recording after purportedly overhearing Peavy make threats and discuss corruption
● Neighbor contacts TV station and speaks with investigative reporter, who notes he
would like a copy of recording and any future recordings. Reporter advised neighbor
to record complete conversations.
● Confusion/mistake at the TV station regarding legality of recordings.

 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit concluded that the lower court
erred in ruling that the First Amendment precluded liability of media
defendants for broadcasting contents of illegally recorded phone
conversation.
 U.S. Supreme Court declined to grant cert.

10

