Investigating child mistreatment
IRE National conference
Duff Wilson @reuters.com
June 17, 2016

HELPLESS & HOOKED:
DRUG-DEPENDENT NEWBORNS AND PARENTS
WHO NEED THE HELP REQUIRED BY LAW

Drug-addicted babies in Mass. are triple national rate
By Tracy Jan BOSTON GLOBE STAFF JUNE 19, 2014

5th graf……..........

The state’s tally is dramatically smaller — just 128 babies born
with drug dependence in 2013 — raising questions about
Massachusetts’ method of counting.
“There has to be some lapse there. We see that many at Boston
Medical Center alone,” Wachman said.
The state’s figures are based on cases reported to the
Department of Children and Families. State law mandates
hospital staff to report instances of addicted newborns to the
child protection agency, but some experts say the numbers are
underreported because of the stigma and fear that mothers will
lose their children. A department spokeswoman says the number
only includes addicted babies who show withdrawal symptoms.
Asked why the state does not instead analyze and publicize the
hospital statistics that it submits annually to the federal
government, a spokesman for the Massachusetts agency that
collects the data said it does not have the manpower to sort
through the thousands of hospital procedure codes in its
database.

ICD-9-CM 779.5
NB drug withdrawal syndr.
A billable medical code at patient discharge

ICD-9-CM 779.5 (NB drug withdrawal syndr.)
A billable medical code at patient discharge

Methodology:
Go to: http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/
Click “national statistics on all stays”
or “state statistics on all stays”
Click “researcher, medical professional”
Click “Trends”
Click “Specific diagnoses by ICD-9-CM”
Click “All-listed diagnoses”
Enter “779.5” in the box (NB drug withdrawal syndr.)
Click “Next” / Accept
Click “Show graphs of trend data”

National statistics

State statistics - Massachusetts

Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA)

Section 106(b)(2)(B)(ii)
Keeping Children and Families Safe Act of 2003

(b)ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
(1)STATE PLAN
(A) In general To be eligible to receive a grant
….(ii) policies and procedures (including
appropriate referrals to child protection service
systems and for other appropriate services) to
address the needs of infants born with and
identified as being affected by illegal substance
abuse or withdrawal symptoms resulting from
prenatal drug exposure….
including a requirement that health care providers
involved in the delivery or care of such infants
notify the child protective services system of the
occurrence of such condition in such infants,

except that such notification shall not be
construed to—
(I)establish a definition under Federal law of what
constitutes child abuse or neglect; or
(II)require prosecution for any illegal action…
(iii)the development of a plan of safe care for the
infant born and identified as being affected by
illegal substance abuse or withdrawal symptoms,
or a Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder;
(iv)procedures for the immediate screening, risk
and safety assessment, and prompt investigation
of such reports;

State FOI’s
We're seeking all releasable records concerning child
fatalities in Minnesota from Jan. 1, 2010, to date, for
children from birth through three years of age.....These
would be the individual fatality reports, not
summaries.... The federal Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Act (CAPTA) section 106(b)(2)(B)(x) says
states must make full disclosure upon request of
findings and information “including but not limited to
the cause of and circumstances of the fatality or near
fatality; the age and gender of the child; information
describing any previous reports made to and
investigations conducted by the child welfare agency
regarding the child and/or the child’s family, and the
results of any such investigations; and information
describing any services provided or actions taken…”

Secrecy and child death
http://www.caichildlaw.org/Misc/StateSecrecy2ndEd.pdf

State child fatality reports
 Arkansas index and listing
 Delaware listing and typical report
 Florida listing and typical report
 Illinois listing and case reports
 New Jersey listing and case reports
 Oklahoma listing and typical report
 Pennsylvania listing and typical report (Cummings)
 Tennessee listing and report
 Washington listing and report

Organizing the records
 GetThemAll
 Google Drive
 2-step Verification

Finding the families
 TLO
 Lexis/Nexis

 Clips & lawyers if charged
 Obituaries
 Police reports (dispatch  incident)


To address privacy concerns:
 Ask for list of dispatches to an address.
 Then ask for the incident reports by number.

Overcoming Secrecy

Harrison Memorial Hospital and the doctor who delivered
Lynndaya knew of McKenney’s drug problems… McKenney “has
been testing positive throughout her pregnancy for opiates,
benzodiazepines, and marijuana, none of which she had a
prescription for,” the report said.
But no report about McKenney’s drug use was made to child
protection authorities when Lynndaya was born, state records
show. Hospital spokeswoman Mollie Smith declined to talk about
the case, citing medical privacy.
Derek Clarke, the doctor listed on the hospital discharge
document, delivered Lynndaya by Cesarean section. He later sent
McKenney home with the prescription for Percocet, one of the
drugs she took the night before she smothered her baby…
Contacted by Reuters, Clarke defended his decision to send
McKenney home with Percocet. “Just because they’re a drug
addict doesn’t mean we’re not going to give them something
for their pain,” he said.
The day before Lynndaya died, pharmacy records show, Clarke
also prescribed Xanax, which McKenney took with the
Percocet and Subutex…
McKenney said Clarke should have known better than to give her
the prescriptions. “I’m an addict. It was my fault, of course,
and also it was his fault for offering me the medicine.”

“Helpless & Hooked”
Investigating child mistreatment
IRE National conference
Duff Wilson @reuters.com
June 17, 2016

