TIPSHEET: Turning Your Investigation Into A Book

IRE Conference, New Orleans, June 18, 2016 Saturday, 9-10 a.m., Studio 9-10, New Orleans Marriott
Mike Stanton, University of Connecticut, mike.stanton@uconn.edu

DEVELOPING YOUR IDEA
1.
2.
3.

Does your investigative piece deserve book-length treatment? Is there more to tell?
Does it have a narrative arc, broader context, developed scenes & characters?
What successful books have been published on your topic, and what distinguishes yours? It
could be your expertise, new information, special access to key people or documents.

FINDING AN AGENT
1.
2.
3.

Look at books in your genre, read the acknowledgments to identify agents & see what
authors have to say about them. Network with fellow journalists, authors.
Check Publishers Marketplace, at www.publishersmarketplace.com, to research agents’ track
records and clients.
Write a strong query letter to an agent. Use your journalistic skills to separate yourself from
the hundreds of inquiries agents receive. Show that you’ve done your homework and know
their track record. Be professional, name-drop if it’s not forced – and don’t brag.

THE BOOK PROPOSAL (also see back of this page)
1.
2.
3.
4.

The book proposal is a sales pitch that reflects your vision of the story, why it’s important
and why YOU’RE the one to tell it.
Summarize your research to date, what’s left to be done, and offer a REALISTIC timetable.
Provide a brief overview, chapter-by-chapter outline and a sample chapter or two.
Publishers want proof that your writing can carry a book of 80,000 to 100,000 words.
Describe the market. The trick here is to use other successful books to demonstrate the
potential for strong sales, but show that yours is different.

PROMOTING YOUR BOOK
1.
2.
3.
4.

Your publisher may help, but figure that it’s mainly on you, especially after the initial rollout.
Use your personal network to arrange talks, signings and media appearances (from talkradio to op-ed pieces). Is there a local angle you can discuss?
With fewer bookstores, consider libraries, organizations tied to your topic (historical
societies, environmental groups, etc.)
Don’t despair if 6 people show up for a book talk. You’re still getting the word out about your
book.

(See BOOK PROPOSAL GUIDE on back of this page)

Milwaukee, Chicago, Minneapolis and Oregon. There are fewer bookstores, but consider libraries, colleges
(including your alma mater), local clubs/organizations. A friend wrote a biography of American Revolution
general Nathanael Greene, then promoted it at historical societies up and down the East Coast. Don’t be
embarrassed if only 6 people show up at an event. You’re still getting the word out about your book. And
if you sign copies for a bookstore, they’re more likely to display it more prominently. (The actor Russell
Crowe came across my book in a NY bookstore, while filming American Gangster, and called me about the
movie rights.)

Approach it like you would a story where you have to reach out to a lot of people, make a lot of calls,
push yourself to make the extra call.
Don’t be afraid to call in your contacts: for blurbs, for stories & appearances.
Who do you know in this city?
Can you write an op-ed, call in to a talk radio show, appear on local TV?
Get a producer’s name, email, cite any local connection/angle.

The second alternative works for me. In preparation I spoke to my Henry Holt editor on my current book
project about what he looks for in a book proposal, and what needs to happen to elevate a newspaper or
magazine piece into a book. I also spoke to my agent about how to find an agent, which is not as easy as it
sounds. They gave me some good examples of projects they’ve worked on with journalists, including the
first Donald Trump biography and Supreme Court justices Clarence Thomas and Harry Blackmun. I can
also draw on my own experience pitching, writing & marketing a book that that was not about a national
figure or issue but still made the NY Times bestseller list: a biography of the mayor of Providence, Rhode
Island, The Prince of Providence.
I’ll bring a tip sheet that includes how to write a good book proposal, how to find and query an agent, the
writing process and how to market your book. I also came across this fun 1925 query letter to Henry Holt
that demonstrates how to hook a publisher’s interest — a book about “the strangest things in the world,”
from a syndicated columnist named Ripley — believe it or not!
Handouts: write tip sheet, book proposal outline: copying? Sale of my book? Buddy just died.
Ripley’s query letter: https://twitter.com/HenryHolt/status/736950548046479360
http://gregaunapu.com/20-usually-fatal-query-mistakes/#more-1293
The Proposal
What elevates it from a 2,000 to 10,000-word newspaper or magazine piece to an 80,000 to
100,000-word book?
How do you answer an editor who says, “I read the story. It’s better as a magazine piece.”
Another challenge in digital age of long-form narrative journalism, sites like The Atavist: My agent
regularly receives emails from groups seeking stories too long for a newspaper but too short for a
book. No royalties, 50-50 partnership.
Your idea should be organic, something you’re passionate about, something that’s either new or that
you can bring a fresh perspective to something familiar that people care about. Find the sweet spot
between your interests and something that people want to read about.
Paul Golob says that you have to think differently about a book than a newspaper or magazine story.
The difference is between “What is news?” and “What is a story?”

In newspapers, you’re looking for a scoop, shake things up, clarify something that’s an issue. A
book has a narrative arc, is character-driven, is not news. You’re opening a new world through
the actions of the main and secondary characters.
Not all stories can be expanded into books.
Not to say that all books must be character driven. Some are policy, thematic, driven not by
characters but by ideas – ideas that change how we think.
The other big difference is the scale: a long journalism piece might be 10-15,000 words; a book, 80120,000 words. How do you keep the momentum going, readers’ attention from flagging? Not like
journalism where the biggest news is up front.
Years ago Paul read a Washington Post series about a poor woman who raised 8 children, inspiring
story of perseverance, Rosalie and Her Eight Kids, written with such feeling and empathy. Even
before it won Pulitzer, Golob contacted author Leon Dash, expanded it into a book with much more
reporting.
Challenges of a topical subject: DraftKings, fantasy football. White-hot story for several months last
winter. Proposal, strong. But now the issue has faded, many states have cracked down, ubiquitous
commercials have shrunk. Lower profile. On the other hand, that could give author space to develop
the story behind the story: who these people are, where they came from and how they continue to
operate under the radar after the burst of scrutiny.
Timing also key, and sometimes luck. Look ahead to milestone anniversary of historic, worldchanging event: NY Times v. Sullivan, gay riots in NY, 1st mass shooting at University of Texas this
past spring. News hooks are key in publishing not only for reasons they are in journalism but also for
MARKETING. Publishers love a book about something that’s on readers’ minds, will propel them to
buy a book.
Not going to start writing a campaign bio now. But 20 years ago, Tim O’Brien then of the NY Times
wrote a newspaper piece about Trump’s business empire that led to the first Trump book, Trump
Nation. Several publishers passed, because they felt that Trump would sue. Trump cooperated but
then sued O’Brien for $5 billion for concluding he had overstated his net worth, hurting the Trump
brand. One of the book’s conclusions was that he overstated his net worth. My agent repped O’Brien,
got deposed for 2 days. The book is being reissued June 14, on Trump’s 70th birthday. Agent talked
about taking out ads promoting the book & wishing him a Happy Birthday. (One publisher proposed
erecting a billboard outside City Hall promoting my book. But we’ll get to marketing later.) (Susan
Glasser recently sat Trump biographers down for a Politico piece)
Did your story present just a slice or the whole loaf? Is your newspaper story a sample
chapter, just part of a bigger story, or is it the whole story, but a skeleton of what you’d flesh
out in the book?
Are there ways to go deeper?
Do you have more to say? More characters, story lines, without padding?
Golob example of 102 Minutes, narrative about World Trade Center. Grew out of NY Times stories,
but expanded, much more details, characters running through narrative. The Times stories were
maybe a tenth of the book. Much more to tell.
Can it be representative of a larger, more universal, appealing theme, without being forced? (Hate
those books with long boxcar subtitles)
Do you have more to discover?
Is the story still evolving?
What new information do you have, or can you uncover, that isn’t already known and won’t be
revealed by someone else, in the time it takes for a book to be published? Picture your
insecurity when chasing a scoop for your publication or station and multiply that by 100.

My agent had a client who wrote a big story on the Harlem Globetrotters for the WSJ, failed to sell a
book.
As a young reporter, I once wrote a series about the finances of the Big East Conference for The
Providence Journal. An agent in New York saw an excerpt in Newsday and called me up, said I think
you have a book here. I developed a proposal, but it didn’t sell. Too much about dollars, no
compelling story arc. If I had to do over, I would have focused it more on the characters who built the
conference and the conflicts that came with success.
A colleague and I talked to a top publisher about doing a book on the Aaron Hernandez murder
trial, going inside a high-profile murder case involving a star NFL player on the Super Bowl
champion New England Patriots. He was skeptical. He saw it as a pretty straightforward narrative,
yes, involving a high-profile crime, but not a particularly compelling character. And it would be
blown out at trial. What more could a book do to compel people to read? I argued that the case would
be a good vehicle to explore the out-of-control culture of the NFL, which has become central in our
American culture. We got to talking about two themes: how NFL teams vet players, and Hernandez’s
journey through the system, including the equally out-of-control culture at the University of Florida,
where a top Tallahassee criminal lawyer represented so many arrested football players he was
known as the team’s defensive coordinator. Now you can see the narrative of a book taking shape:
the lawyer, find an ex-FBI agent who investigates players backgrounds. NOW you might have a book,
and in that case, the publisher said, timing wouldn’t matter.
Scott Price’s book about Coolbaugh: First, a news story. Then, an in-depth magazine piece that was
comprehensive and epic and so damn good that you wonder how it could be elevated. And the agent
received that pushback. But they found a publisher.
Agents comb magazines and newspapers looking for ideas. Being a journalist, having a track record
counts. Andrew reps Matthew McCall, author of memoir Bat Boy, about an LA cold case he wrote
about for The Atlantic. Holt editors approached him, said there’s a book here.
Liz Robbins, NBA writer, 1st book on NYC marathon. Good proposal to follow the stories of 12
runners, knowing that some would drop out, others not prove interesting. Wound up boiling down to
5-6.
Bob Ortega covered Walmart for The Wall Street Journal. Had never written a book, he wrote the 1st
big Walmart book, In Sam We Trust. Before it came out, the publisher received a letter from
Walmart’s counsel saying it would behoove them to allow Walmart to vet the manuscript.
IDENTIFY YOUR MARKET
Golob says when you write a newspaper series you think only of the impact, the takeaway, you have a
built-in readership, audience. With a book, nobody has bought into the notion that this is important,
worth making a discretionary purchase, time commitment. Why do I need to read this? What can
they get that’s unique? Are there precedents suggesting your book will be of interest? Sports, heroes
of the past, nostalgia, David Maraniss. What’s new, surprising, interesting? Not the 50 th Joe Namath
bio but Mark Krieger does a richly detailed, revelatory piece. Do you have a unique perspective,
experience with subject, special access?
China book/Eternal Dreams street: I don’t have a burning desire to read about China, not top of my
list, but bought into the concept, loved title. Heard NPR report that piqued my interest, then watched
video.
Another difference between author & journalist: You have to be a salesman, marketer. Gap is
closing with growing emphasis on journalists promoting their work via social media. We all pitch our
stories now, despite grumbling, and compete for ever-diminishing attention spans.

When we pitched an investigative story at The Providence Journal, we had a checklist that included
impact, relevance, who the story affects. You’re not going to do it if it doesn’t appeal to your readers.
Obviously how taxes are spent, laws are passed, schools are run, zoning is handled. Built-in audience.
But with a book, you have to reach a wider audience, one willing to plop down $25 and invest a
substantial chunk of time in reading it.
So who’s your audience – what’s the market?
In today’s fragmented media landscape, maybe you’ve told a compelling story but can argue it’s not
redundant because it didn’t reach a wider audience. Use that in your favor, rather than as a
disadvantage.
The Dilemma
Publishers want a book that’s fresh and new, but they also want to point to other books like it that
have succeeded.
So you might be caught between “There’s no track record that a book like that will work” and “It’s
already been done.”
Wrong: Every book’s been done before. Point to a book that may have a different topic but a similar
theme. For instance, when I pitched my book I encountered publishers who pushed back and said,
“Nobody cares about the mayor of Providence,” or “Books about mayors don’t do well”: pointing to
recent book on Rudy Giuliani.
I’m writing a biography now of Rocky Marciano. One obstacle: boxing isn’t that big anymore.
Agreed. But it’s a fascinating window into a bygone era in America, and an interesting culture. I told
publishers that I’m not a big fan of horse racing or Olympic rowing, but I loved bestsellers Seabiscuit
and The Boys In the Boat because they were compelling stories that transported me to interesting
worlds and reflected a certain period in American history.
My counter is that every book can’t be about New York, LA or Washington. People like to be
transported to different worlds: toxic waste in Woburn, Mass. in A Civil Action; Savannah in Midnight
In The Garden of Good & Evil, the Florida Everglades in The Orchid Thief, or, in my case, Providence,
one of America’s 1st cities, founded on religious freedom, birthplace of the Industrial Revolution,
capital of the New England Mafia, with a rich heritage of colorful and corrupt characters. I pitched my
book as Midnight In The Garden of Good & Evil meets Goodfellas. When I was on tour, I talked about
how Buddy was part Huey Long, part Tony Soprano, a larger-than-life figure who embodies the best
and worst of American politics.
My book was a NY Times bestseller.
Kevin Merida, 1st black editor, former M.E. at Washington Post, now running ESPN’s The Undefeated,
co-authored Post magazine piece on Clarence Thomas. He gave them his 1st sit-down interview in a
decade or so. They wrote a great proposal, used magazine piece. Concerns by publishers that story
was still evolving, because he was a sitting justice; that it would be stale (contradicting last point);
and that it would get lost in the shuffle with another book based on an Atlanta Journal series and the
fact that Thomas had just sold the rights for his own memoir for millions. But they sold the book to
Doubleday.
Conversely, Linda Greenhouse, Becoming Justice Blackmun. Library of Congress was opening access
to his papers on 5th anniversary of something. She and Nina Totenberg got advance access, prepared
long pieces that ran at release. I called Linda, This is a book. More to be told here. Cutting room floor
material. Write a book to paint the complete portrait, how he got there. First thing she said, “Do you
know how many editors come to me? Not doing a book.” He coaxed, didn’t have to be long, could
write it during summer when court in recess so wouldn’t have to take time off.

Then consider how you would tell the story, take a different angle.
For instance, my ProJo series about Buddy, Vice & Virtue, opens with a scene of him sitting on
the courthouse steps.
When I wrote the book, it opens with another trial – one 30 years earlier, when Buddy was the
prosecutor of the New England Mafia boss. I used the Intro to set the scene, but here I took a more
narrative approach, describing the day the investigation went public, focused on the FBI knocking on
his door. And here I focused as much on atmosphere, the overarching arc of the story (Buddy’s
history, the burning question would the feds nail him) as I did on the who-what-when-where of the
FBI raiding City Hall, arresting two tax officials and going public with a year-long undercover
corruption probe targeting the mayor.
How will you tell the story? Think characters, narrative that you weren’t able to get into in your
original published story. If it’s a story about a process, like unfair Ivy League admissions practices, or
surgery errors at a major hospital, pick a central character and develop that person into the narrative
guide through the story.
Finding An Agent
Agents are filters, can get the ear of publishers, keep you out of the slush pile.
Do your due diligence, like you’d check out a source, or a contractor you might hire to work on your
house. Avoid vanity press, people who want to charge you. One friend wound up with agent, seemed
sketchy when the agent “hired” someone to rewrite his proposal, charged the author. Then “signed” a
book deal with small publisher, with no advance, no plan for publication, waiting for some publicity.
Best way is to let the agent find you
Agents troll publications looking for ideas:
For example, my agent approached a New York Times writer who had written extensively about the
New York Marathon, encouraged her to write a book
Find an agent fishing in your pool.
Publishers Marketplace and Publishers Weekly, paid web sites, offer 2 valuable resources: section on
agents, what they’re looking for, who they’ve represented, their track record. Do your due diligence.
How is your agent to deal with, how much attention will they give you, are they fair-weather friends?
Will they return your calls, emails? Read authors’ acknowledgments. Small vs. large agencies.
Another section on DEALS, so you can see who’s working on what and let you scope out any potential
competition, conflicts. For instance, if you’re pitching an expose of the Ivy League admissions
process, you probably don’t want to approach an agent who has repped a similar book.
Study books and where they came from:
Did they originate as a work of journalism? Where?
Approach the writer: ask about the process.
Agents are selective, mine isn’t actively taking new clients – though he did relent when an
acquaintance approached him about representing Yogi Berra.
Referrals can help, but not guaranteed. I referred 2 friends and colleagues to him, he passed, they
later published books. Another, Ariel Sabar, he took on.
Networking is key. I worked backwards. Approached the publisher, who I knew, and he referred me
to an agent.
The Query
This is where your background as a journalist can help. You know how to frame and pitch stories,
and how to write. Make a good first impression, be professional, hook them quickly. My agent has
received queries “To Whom It May Concern” cc’d to 100 different agents. On the other hand, someone
he doesn’t know wrote, “Hey Andy.” Or he’ll get a letter saying someone he’s never heard of
recommended me.
What charms and impresses him is a letter that is respectful, professional, maybe mentions a mutual
friend, or cites a book by an author I represent and argues, humbly, why they think their idea is
similar. That tells me that they’re thoughtful and have done their homework.

The Book Proposal Guide
Say it in a few lines. Catchy title.
Why are YOU the person to tell this story? Your newspaper work gives you expertise.
This is where you prove you’re not a stereotypical newspaper reporter. Show you can write,
compelling prose, grasp the story arc, characters, action, larger themes. Lot of newspaper writers
aren’t great stylists, easier to get away with in a 500-word story.
Last point: Your agent can be helpful when you’re actually writing, researching the book. His Rolodex
to prominent people in world of sports, New York, other authors fishing in the same pool.
PROMOTION
Osnos said with journalism you find, report, write and publish. With a book you do all those things,
then you sell.
A lot is on you. Your publisher might make a big marketing push if the book has buzz.
400,000 books a year are published.
Approach it like you would a story where you have to reach out to a lot of people, make a lot of calls,
push yourself to make the extra call.
Don’t be afraid to call in your contacts: for blurbs, for stories & appearances.
Who do you know in this city?
Can you write an op-ed, call in to a talk radio show, appear on local TV?
Get a producer’s name, email, cite any local connection/angle.
Social media: my agent talks about meetings with the publicity department where they’re telling a
60-year-old writer he needs to be on Instagram. Price: Do I need a web site?
Libel/Legal issues: Egbert challenged ethics of writing a book, tried to call it a conflict, called my
newspaper publisher – had succeeded in scaring off a local TV reporter that way. Publisher cited
Woodward & Bernstein.
Ethical issues juggling your job and your book, duplicate content; Karp’s conniption over my Vice &
Virtue series. Narrower audience, only fraction of ultimate book, which I was still reporting and
which the series helped me bring in reluctant witnesses.

