Digging up secrets and story ideas in bankruptcy court records
By Katy Stech
The Wall Street Journal
Why do we love bankruptcy records?
-They put a spotlight on drama, trends and quirk.
-They unlock new details on stories that have already been heavily covered. Some information like trade secrets or
defamatory statements can be put under seal, but the standards for that are high.
-The information is filed under penalty of perjury, so it’s trustworthy.
Why is now a good time to become an expert?
On Dec. 1, the paperwork that people and businesses have used to file for bankruptcy protection since the 1980s were was
replaced with forms that have clearer, easier-to-understand instructions. The new forms ask for most of the same
information, but they are likely to be more complete.
What is bankruptcy?
It’s a legal time out. A bankrupt person/business gets a chance to propose a plan to repay some debts, or they can turn over
their valuables to a court-appointed trustee who sells them off and uses the money to repay some debts. At the end of the
process, most of the unpaid debts are canceled.
Digging spots via Pacer.gov (the federal courts’ online website)
Digging Spot #1: New filings
Check new chapter 11 filings in your coverage area. There are usually between 30-50 filings a day. Pacer’s national case
search is good, though it has a one-day delay in getting the information on new filings made to the 94 federal court
districts.
Digging Spot #2: Statement of Financial Affairs/Schedules
Read through the schedules/statement of financial affairs documents once they file. This is where you can find out how
much money a business took in during the last three years or what lawsuits the bankrupt person/business is involved with.
In personal bankruptcy cases, these forms show salary information, kids’ ages and details like how much someone spends
each month on auto payments, entertainment or student loans. A person or company typically has 14 days to file this
information. Find this information by searching the docket.
A bit of advice:
There are usually two reasons why someone files for bankruptcy. The first reason has to do with timing: did they file to
stop a foreclosure sale or prevent a wage garnishment? The second is the broader reason: why weren’t they paying their
mortgage? What debt prompted the threat of garnishment?
Digging Spot #3: Creditor lists
A creditor list shows every business and person that the bankrupt entity owes money too. This list puts a spotlight on the
relationships that a bankrupt entity has. Search the docket in a bankruptcy case for a service list (a constantly updated list
of creditors) or click on a case’s “Creditors” link.
Digging Spot #4: Claims register
Every creditor who wants to be paid a portion of whatever money is doled out has to fill out a claims form. Often, the
creditor will file a contract or other typically confidential information as proof that they’re owed money. Get this
information by opening a bankruptcy case and clicking on the “Claims Register” link.
Digging Spot #5: 341 Meetings
These are meetings that every bankrupt person (or the head of a bankruptcy company) must attend to answer questions
under oath from a U.S. Department of Justice official. The questions are usually about assets. Either attend these hearings
in person or get a recording through the DOJ’s U.S. Trustee’s Program.
Digging Spot #6: Lawsuits
Within a bankruptcy case, someone can ask the judge to determine an important issue by filing a type of lawsuit that’s
called an adversary proceeding. To search for specific types of lawsuits, go into one of the 94 courts and click “Query.”
That’s where you can find and search by a range of lawsuit types.

Digging Spot #7: Bankruptcy lawyers
Think of these people as doctors who tend to a company’s financial health.
Helpful hint: Find a Pacer imitator that’s right from you. From Sqoop to CourtDrive to PacerMonitor, each website has its
advantages when it comes to offering free documents, sending alerts and storing important documents that you’ve
downloaded to avoid duplicative costs. Unfortunately, no website is a far superior alternative to Pacer, partly because
Pacer itself is fed wording by courts that have their own special set of preferences, making docket wording and filing
details non-standard.
-30-

