Tips for Tracking Local Campaign Cash
David Washburn
Voice of OC
dwashburn@voiceofoc.org
Know your state and local campaign finance laws
Each state has a law that in some way regulates campaign finance -- in California it’s the
Political Reform Act. But most counties and large cities also have campaign finance
regulations that often further restrict the amount that can be given by individuals and
organizations in an election cycle.
Know your forms
The most common form you'll be working with is the individual contribution form. But
depending on the state, there may be a separate form for PAC contributions; and almost
certainly a separate form for independent expenditures.
Know who the custodians are for various records
Don't make the mistake of assuming that one agency is the custodian of all campaign finance
records for your county or city, especially when it comes to PACs. For example, in California
if a PAC is organized and operating in just one city, then that city's clerk is the custodian. But
if a PAC contributes to candidates on a countywide, or even statewide basis, the Secretary of
State is the custodian.
Focus not just on the sources of contributions to the candidates, but also to the
contributors to the PACs that funnel money to the candidates.
This is how we were able to track the dark money coming into the city of Irvine; and how
we followed the Disney money into the Anaheim City Council race.
Know the funding history of a particular politician's war chest.
We found, for example, that a sitting county supervisor, who also served on the local
Republican Party Central Committee, was able to raise unlimited amounts of money
through his central committee account and spend it on a variety of political expenses – all
legally.
Red flags for campaign money laundering:






Multiple donors living at the same address.
Multiple contributions dated within the same week.
Multiple large contributions from the same employer
Large contributions from people who list their occupations as student or
unemployed.
Contributions from business entities owned by donors

Important records beyond campaign finance disclosures:





Business licenses and incorporation records
Voter registration information
Properties and homes owned by donors
Facebook or other social media sites, ect., that might help you figure out donors'
relationships to each other.

