Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953

kidsvoog@kent.edu

Tips for Student Journalists Wanting to Get
Public Records from Universities
(scroll down for some story ideas)
1. Know what you want. Usually, that requires some preliminary research. Are
there paper records or electronic records? Use the phone! Call! Talk to the
appropriate person; find the information. What are the records called?
Universities have forms for everything. If there’s a disciplinary action taken on a
professor, there’s a form for that. What’s the name/number of that form? If the
campus police use force on a student, there’s a form the officer will have to
complete. What’s the designation for that form? Make some checks BEFORE
filing your public records request.
2. Do NOT ask for someone’s personnel record. Public agencies have learned
not to put anything in the personnel record so requesting one is often a waste of
time.
3. Plan your strategy. Maybe you’re interested in the university charge card
records of a single employee you suspect of abusing the card. If you request
that person’s specific records, most likely, that person will know immediately. Is
that ok? If not, you may want to make a broader request.
4. Personalize the communication. Send your public records request to a
person, not just to an office. Whether you check in advance who handles the
request depends on your strategy. Each request is project specific.
5. Know the public records law. They differ from state to state. A quick place
to check is http://www.rcfp.org In Ohio, records must be maintained so they can
be made “readily available.” Generally, that means same-day access for current
records. In Kentucky, the public official has three days to respond. It’s not
unusual for a university to have a policy that conflicts with the state’s public
records law. To keep from getting jerked around and to negotiate for public
records efficiently and effectively, know your state’s public records law.
6. Write conversationally. Eliminate gobbledygook. Be professional. Avoid
sarcasm and/or threats. Be precise. Do not threaten legal action. You may get
to the point where you have to file suit, but that’s done in consultation with legal
counsel. If you have no money to sue, don’t make empty threats. Never
threaten to sue unless you intend to take action immediately if the public agency
refuses to provide the requested public records.
7. Make your case. Remember, if there’s a battle over public records, your
request will become part of the court record. Think of it this way. Whenever you
write a public records request, you are writing it to the JUDGE.

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953

kidsvoog@kent.edu

8. List and number the requested items. Writing your requested items in
paragraph form complicates fulfillment and makes follow up more difficult. With
a numbered list, it’s easy to pinpoint specific items. You may want to request
items individually rather than collectively.
9. Do NOT submit a laundry list of items. That gives the university an easy
excuse to delay its response. Typically, the university will wait until it has
everything before giving you anything. Prioritize. Be specific. Go after what’s
most important first. You can submit multiple requests. You may want to ask to
INSPECT, not copy the records. It’s faster. After you inspect, you may decide
you don’t want copies.
10. Request a waiver of fees. Each state is different. In Ohio, the public
agency cannot charge for personnel time. When my students requested
electronic copies of use-of-force reports from police departments in Ohio, there
was no charge. When the students requested use-of-force reports for a police
department in Michigan, the department wanted payment of $21,350.00.
http://useofforceinohio.blogspot.com/2015/02/lifting-curtain-high-costs-ofpublic.html
11. Specify format. Do you want printed or electronic copies? For electronic
copies, always request a field layout and format specifications. (TALK WITH THE
DATA ADMINISTRATORS)
12. Always ask the public agency to respond in writing and provide the statutory
authority for denying any portion of your request. In Ohio, that’s required. It’s a
good practice anywhere.
A helpful resource: Although attorney Dave Marburger and I focus on Ohio’s
public records in Access With Attitude, the strategy sections are useful and
applicable in all states.
https://www.amazon.com/Access-Attitude-Advocates-FreedomInformation/dp/0821419390
Some Easy/Quick Worthwhile Stories
1. Ask for a copy of the contract your university has with ESPN. In the MidAmerican Conference, the MAC commissioner confirmed he never sent a copy of
the contract to any of the universities. He confirmed that at the meeting where
university athletic directors approved of the deal, there were no lawyers present.
That’s right. Universities approved a 13-year multimillion dollar contract without
having it reviewed by an attorney.
The ESPN-MAC Contract - https://vimeo.com/111317535

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953

kidsvoog@kent.edu

2. Free Cars for Coaches - https://carsforcoaches.wordpress.com/
There’s only one department on campus where instructors get free cars – the
athletic department. And remember to always get the documents. There’s a
great one here from Central Michigan that includes tips for how coaches can
develop a better relationship with the car dealer. That’s the kind of advice a
math or English professor never gets.
https://carsforcoaches.files.wordpress.com/2012/04/central-michigan-car-clubuser-guidelines.pdf
3. Is there line-item detail on the university bill? Do your students know how
much they pay to support athletics? Are they paying a separate fee to pay for
the football stadium like they do at the University of Akron? Examine all fees
charged to students.
Examining the University Bill: http://et.kent.edu/jmc40004/fees
4. What’s the full-scholarship scoreboard look like at your university? When my
students did this project, the athletes wiped out the academic students.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m30LrKG8SSM Why does the football team
get more full scholarships than any academic department?
5. What’s the future of football? http://www.presidentialfootball.com
The landscape for college football has changed dramatically thanks to medical
science and lawsuits. Has your university done an assessment of its risk of
litigation? How much has insurance gone up? Who pays the medical bills when
the athlete is injured, the university or the student?
Who Pays? http://medexpense.jmc.kent.edu/
6. Recruiting. Get the budgets. How much does the athletic department spend
to recruit the best athletes? How much do your top academic departments
spend to recruit the best students? Always follow the money.
7. What’s your university spending, if anything, to eliminate stories on the
internet the president doesn’t like?
http://www.sacbee.com/news/local/education/article71659992.html
Call and talk to the folks in charge of marketing and/or search engine
optimization. What outside contractors are helping them? Request those
contracts.
8. Where’s the money from the vending machines go? Does 50 cents of every
Coke sold go to the athletic department? Get the contracts.

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953

kidsvoog@kent.edu

9. How healthy are all the food service places on campus? Get the inspections.
Those will come from the city or county, not the university. But request them
from the university as well. The university will have copies. Will the university
provide the records or refuse? Either way, it’s a story. Don’t forget your
stadium. Stadiums often have a long list of health code violations.
10. Do you have puffball (eligibility) courses for athletes? Get the grading
database. Because of FERPA, you can’t get student names but you can get the
grades for every class from every professor for every semester. What are the
trends? Do some professors give nothing but A’s? Is a professor giving a
high number of independent study courses?
For background, read CHEATED by Mary Willingham and Jay M. Smith.
Eligibility classes at the University of North Carolina had been going on for years.
And UNC is hardly alone when it comes to academic corruption. As Willingham
and Smith point out, “Between the fall of 2004 and the fall of 2007, John Hagen
of the University of Michigan’s Department of Psychology offered at least 294
independent study courses in addition to his regular teaching load. At least 251
of those courses, some of which were individualized and some of which involved
small circles of students, enrolled varsity athletes.”
11. Get expense and revenue for all dorms. How much is the university making?
12. Change orders. Request the change orders on all new construction
projects. Why is something being changed? Poor planning? Some
administrator wants more of this and less of that? Budget problems? Are
change orders being approved expeditiously, or are there costly delays?
And always check the court docket. In Ohio, lawsuits against the university
are not filed in Common Pleas Court but in the Ohio Court of Claims.

###

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953

kidsvoog@kent.edu

