IRE 2016
David Armstrong
The Georgia News Lab
Georgia State University
david.armstrong@georgianewslab.org
@GeorgiaNewsLab
Tips for Doing “Controversial” Investigations from University Based Outlets
1. Understand that universities are not news organizations. They are not guided by journalistic
principles. They are understandably risk averse. They do not subscribe to the motto, “Without
Fear or Favor.” Proceeding accordingly. (See below.)
2. Don’t stick fingers in sockets unnecessarily. While it’s not necessary to back away from
potentially controversial stories it’s also not a good idea to court trouble. There are lots of
great stories out there. When deciding which to pursue, it’s not necessary to pick the most
potentially incendiary. Chose wisely. That said, when an important but potentially problematic
story turns up, you can’t ignore it. You have an obligation to tell the story. But look for ways to
minimize possible blowback from your university. (See # 3.)
3. Develop techniques for the care and feeding of administrators. If you’ve got a story that
may cause heartburn for your university, think about what you can do to minimize or
prevent it. Look at the situation from the administration’s point of view. Are
administrators likely to think that funding could be threatened? Will they see a possible PR
headache? Which administrators might be most impacted/concerned? What can you do to
ease their fears? (See # 4.)
4. Communicate. Some investigative teams have a “no surprises” rule. They make a habit
of going to the subject(s) of their stories as early in the investigation as possible. The idea
is to be fair and avoid the subject being able to claim they’ve been ambushed. The same
principle can be applied to university administrators. If you’ve got a story coming that may
create waves, let the relevant university officials know. You don’t need to tell them the
details of the story. Just let them know something could be coming and roughly when.
Hopefully, they’ll appreciate the courtesy and recognize that you’re not deliberately trying
to make things difficult for them. They’ll also know they can talk to you, if necessary. It
could win you a stockpile of goodwill, which you may need later.
5. Buddy up. Since universities can be vulnerable to pressure from funders and/or
politicians, insulate potentially controversial stories by emphasizing collaboration with
professional partners. Use joint student-professional bylines, if possible. Stress the
collaborative nature of the reporting, if legitimate. Professional news outlets are used to
dealing with pushback on stories. In fact, their involvement can significantly reduce the
prospect, or at least the intensity, of any controversy.
6. Bullet proof. Making sure your facts are correct is an essential part of any investigative
story. It is especially important for stories coming out of university based shops. Any slip

up can be used to cast doubt on the legitimacy of the entire operation. There’s no room for
mistakes. Triple check everything.
The Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism has complied an excellent set of factchecking guidelines: https://inn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/WCIJ-CPI-FactChecking-Guidelines.pdf
And Shawn McIntosh of the AJC has produced several outstanding bullet-proofing
tipsheets, including: http://www.ire.org/resource-center/tipsheets/2771/
7. Don't back down. Even when executed perfectly, investigative stories can set off
controversies. But that cannot be a reason for backing away from important stories. It is
our duty to pursue them. But we should do so in ways that are least likely to set off
unnecessary upheaval.

