2016 IRE Conference, New Orleans
Tawnell D. Hobbs, education reporter
The Dallas Morning News
thobbs@dallasnews.com
@tawnell

UNCOVERING STORIES ON THE SCHOOL BEAT
(Where to look, what to get and those red flags!)
1. Look for the fat. Get credit card purchase receipts, detailed budgets (not the
Powerpoint) and check logs. We went through the Dallas school district’s check register
and found millions in excessive spending that had nothing to do with educating students.
Team-building workshops at Dave and Busters; renting meeting space in upscale hotels
for small gatherings; and meals, meals and more meals for staffers on the taxpayer’s
dime.
2. Obtain your school district’s database of employee salaries and stipends. This
database has the potential to produce numerous stories. We used salary data to determine
that the number of school executives making six-figure salaries had grown – while
teacher salaries had been frozen for a couple of years because of tight budgets. Also, look
at stipends. We found that more than 2,300 employees were receiving car stipends in the
Dallas school district – but many rarely traveled on district business.
3. Get student directory information, such as name, school, age, grade level, address,
phone number and location of birth (if available). Student directories contain a wealth
of information and can be a big help in tracking down students during breaking news.
Also, the information can be used to look for trends. For instance, we found a lot of
overage students in classrooms – a few even older than their teachers to the concern of
parents. After our story, the district created a school for overage students. (Also get
directory information for school district employees).
4. Request discipline data. We looked at discipline data in the Dallas school district and
found that gang activity was up in the schools. Come to find out, a lot of the “old
gangsters” were getting out of jail and recruiting on campuses. Get a few years worth of
discipline data to look for trends.

5. Get your school district’s database of consultants. This information should include
contract amount, duration and duties performed. It can be used to check for outlandish
spending and measures your district is taking to educate students.
6. Was the promised product delivered? Go back and look at contracts to determine if
terms were met. We did this with a report on “school choice” that cost the Dallas school
district $100,000. We found the 306-page report grossly lacking. It was padded with
school district charts and maps that could be found on the district’s website; five research
studies that were easily found online; and printouts of two Texas bills that never became
law. After our story, the vendor cut the cost in half and charged the district $50,000.
7. Look at settlement agreements. Watch for departing employees who leave but stay on
the payroll under settlement agreements. In some cases, these arrangements provide lofty
payments to departing employees who agree to keep quiet about district matters. We had
a recent case in the Dallas school district where an executive who was pushed out stayed
on the payroll for five months after resigning.
8. Look for red flags.
-Even amounts for purchases. Even amounts for credit card and check purchases can
indicate that gift cards were bought. But what was bought with the gift card? That is not
always known.
-Frequent change orders and/or budget amendments can lead to budget overages and/or
show poor financial management.
-A decreasing reserve, or emergency, fund.
-Back-to-back purchases to stay under spending limits that don’t require school board
approval.
9. Create your own spreadsheet with contacts by using speaker lists from public
meetings. Make sure to include what issue the speaker addressed, the date and any
contact information. This spreadsheet could come in handy when you need someone with
knowledge to weigh in on an issue – or at least someone who cares enough to speak on it
at a public meeting.
10. Databases that you should be requesting. Check registers. Employee and student
directories. Lists of employees on paid/unpaid administrative leave. Internal audits and
investigations. Cell phone numbers for school district employees who receive a phone
stipend or use district-issued cell phones. Salary databases with stipends for employees.
These databases should be requested at least twice a year.

