The Listening Post​
: A blueprint for community engagement with news and
information
The tips I wanted to share pertain mostly to HOW I built this community
network that I call the Listening Post. It’s taken time, and it’s mostly been an
OFFLINE strategy.
1. LISTEN FIRST
I started by doing a information needs assessment, which is something I
learned how to do working in international development in other countries.
I went to community events over the course of a summer in neighborhoods
that are less connected and less likely to be represented positively in
media...AND I asked people if they’d fill out a SHORT survey telling me
where they get their news from, what kinds of devices they owned, and the
last question invited them to participate in the project by sharing their cell
phone number.
So I hit the street and I ASKED people where they got their information. I
didn’t sit in my office and create a news website and hope people were drawn
to it.
From that I learned that EVERYBODY had cell phones here in New Orleans.
2. Take what you learn from listening and find ways to ENGAGE
I studied the spaces around the city where people naturally congregated, and
tried to figure out a way to activate those spaces as Listening Posts. Not
surprisingly libraries, and grocery stores and community centers stood out.
That’s where my r​
ecording devices​
were placed.

I partnered with ​
GroundSource​
, a txt messaging tool, which at the time was
still developing its product. I got a local number through them, and started to
find ways to get that number out into the community.
SIGNS​
­­­ There’s a whole universe and culture of signs here that I love, and
it seemed like a good way to get people’s attention in a playful way, which is
very New Orleans.
WHY ARE YOU MAD
“I’m mad because i’m not happy with my body, i can’t seem to lose weight”
“I don’t know the recipe to willie mae’s mashed potatoes. They’re delicious and I
want them at home”
“I’m mad because I was born into poverty and it’s a 60% chance that I’ll die in
poverty. The countless opportunities that has passed me by because if the color
of my skin.”

Meant to be a fun way to get people involved, and then they get a message
from me saying...thanks for joining, here’s what this is...you can quit at
anytime.
3. Once you’ve gotten an audience by engaging them OFFLINE...THEN
start to INFORM
­­­start using all the tools available online as well.
Tell people things that they need to know...and share their experiences with
the rest of the city.

My goal is that a growing audience of people around the city know at least
one or two important things that are happening, and that they are given a
chance to jump in the conversation.
At least for now cell phones are an equalizer in terms of reaching everyone.
Not everybody goes home to a computer­­­important to remember that.
Some of the people who participate in my project may not ever hear my
public radio show...but that doesn’t preclude them from being in the
conversation, and benefitting from the project.
The people who run this city do listen to it. And there’s an impact there from
hearing the voices from different neighborhoods.
I haven’t quite figured out a way to commodify what I’m doing, so it is
sustainable on its own. I partner in part with the public radio station here, and
my umbrella organization is the DC based international NGO ​
INTERNEWS​
.
They do amazing work in 50 countries around the world, and gave me this
opportunity to see if we can use some of what we’ve done and learned in
other countries here, in the US.

