Investigating on the local criminal justice beat
IRE Conference – New Orleans 2016

Maya Lau

Reporter | The Advocate (Baton Rouge, La.)
mlau@theadvocate.com | lau.maya@gmail.com
mayalau.com | @mayalau
New to the beat?
Write a list of all the offices and power players you could think of that would have anything to do
with your beat. Your list could look something like this, just as a start:
City police; County/parish sheriff’s office; fire department; EMS; state police; coroner; fire
marshal; district attorney; attorney general; U.S. Attorney; U.S. Marshal; probation/parole;
inspector general; watchdog groups; advocacy groups like domestic violence awareness;
police/fire unions; police/fire civil service boards; judges; prison operators; defense
attorneys; public defenders; juvenile court personnel; clerks of court; professional
associations like sheriff’s association; etc.
Find the names of each person in the positions above, plus their #2’s, their spokespeople, etc. Sit
down with someone who knows the gossip. Draw lines between the names: Who’s related to
whom? Who dislikes whom? Who lost an election to whom? Who’s had an affair with whom? Who
has business deals with whom?
Face-to-face meetings
Have breakfast/coffee/lunch with as many of these people as you can. Ask them to show you their
job. Coroners might let you see an autopsy. Police might let you ride-along w/ an officer. Even a
walk in their building helps, as it’s a “shoulder-to-shoulder” activity – a great way to break the ice.
Constantly meet new people, such that you have at least a couple meetings a week, in perpetuity.
With time, you’ll get to know the mid-level and rank-and-file people – the ones with the real info.
And of course, charge all these meals to your employer!
Example: One source I met with “just to meet with” ended up being a jungle guide on a big
investigation. In many other cases, people let things slip in face-to-face conversation (in ways
they don’t over the phone) that aren’t exactly secret, but are stories nonetheless.
Retirees and “formers”
Repeat the entire list of positions above and put “retired” or “former” in front of every one. These
people still have dirt, and they’re more free to talk.

Public spaces
Make a habit of visiting places where people on your beat are: police/fire civil service meetings,
courthouses, community events, ceremonies, etc.
Example: I got an exclusive involving the daughter of a prominent man in the community,
merely by eavesdropping on a local politician at an unrelated meeting. No way I would’ve
gotten the story if I hadn’t been out in the world.
Documents
What are all the gateways where paper has to pass through in order for something to happen?
Court cases are filed this way; land purchases are filed that way. For clandestine processes, find if
they too have a “choke point” where a document gets created. Make a habit of doing public
records requests: budgets, organizational charts; complaints; misconduct reports, etc. And fight to
get them! They don’t always just hand ‘em over.
Correctness
Some sources feel burned or disappointed by other reporters they felt were sloppy or lazy.
One way to set yourself apart is to be fastidious. Be eager to initiate corrections when you do get
things wrong. Tell whoever was mischaracterized immediately and that you’re correcting the
problem. After stories run – especially on touchy ones – call the people in the story who are least
likely to have “liked” it and ask them what they thought of the story. Did you get things right?
Did you get things wrong? Let them vent at you if they didn’t like it.
Example: Some of my most surprising source relationships have come after I’ve been on a
rollercoaster with someone who dislikes what I write, but will later grudgingly admit that I
never print anything downright false or unfair. Some people who’ve been icy to me have
later come to me with info out of the blue.
On “likeability” vs. access
Doing investigative work means you’re going up against officials who can be expert at trying to
bully and bamboozle you. Don’t be preoccupied with being “well-liked,” as if people will slip you
information because they like you. Playing the access game, as in “if I’m chummy with this person
and never write a critical story I’ll maintain access” is a no-win game for you. Remember that they
need you (the press) more than you need them. Also: Everyone to some extent feels their job is
thankless. I will readily admit to an officer that I don’t think I could do his or her job. Give credit
where it’s due, be respectful, but be tough.
Final note: I owe a lot of these insights, which I’ve put to use, to various mentors who have shared
their experiences with me.

