Topher Sanders
Investigative Reporter
ProPublica
topher.sanders@propublica.org
@ReporterTopher
IRE 2016 New Orleans

Uncovering Stories on the Criminal Justice Beat
! Ask for your Police department’s legal settlements
o The narratives and values of the settlements are worth reporting on alone, but what you
really want to do is look at the settlements for trends.
" Are there a lot of wrongful arrest settlements?
" Do your police officers have a lot of car accidents?
" Are the K-9s biting a lot of people?
o Those trends will point you in the direction of other cool data and documents to hunt down.
If you go back far enough (five years or so), you’ll get two to three solid stories out of it.
! State/District Attorneys
o Yes, they are law enforcement too.
o Request data looking at drug crimes. How many people committing non-violent drug crimes
is your DA sending to jail?
" If you have a drug court, see if they keep data on who is eligible for drug court but
still ending up in prison.
" This is a good story that will stir the passions of both your liberal and conservative
readers.
o Juvenile data
" Go to your state juvenile department and ask them about what juvenile crime data
is out there. You’ll be surprised how much is available if you only ask and how
willing the juvenile folks are to give it to you.
" Are the juveniles in your area being given light sentences and lollipops? Or are they
being hammered by a system intended to reform them?
o Don’t be afraid to request emails for DAs, judges, and cops.
" In a lot of states these become public records after a case is closed, particularly if
the case was dismissed or there was an acquittal. These documents are incredibly
rich with details and are a window into what law enforcement was thinking and
saying about a case or issue. They are an absolute goldmine.
" Example: Jerome Hayes spends 589 days in jail.
o Ask for salary data for all the prosecutors in your local office. Elected DAs and State
Attorneys often control their own budgets and have very little oversight so you might see
some weird stuff with salaries like unsanctioned bonuses and raises.

Example: Corey handed out $425,000 in temporary pay increases that may have
violated law, experts say
Request the entire file
o Don’t settle for summaries or just the initial investigative report. Make sure you ask for the
entire case file to include all supplemental reports
o From the DA and from the police
Door knocking is a must
o You must be willing to drop by the homes of both police officers and citizens without them
knowing you’re coming.
o Do your research. Know what you’re there for and have your pitch ready. You’re surprising
someone at home, so don’t dilly-dally.
o Use handwritten notes. If you miss someone at home, write a hand written note and leave
it in the source’s door or mailbox along with your card. I love this, rarely fails to generate a
call back.
" Example: Name mix-up in sexual battery case sends wrong Clay County teen to jail
for 35 days
Use outside agencies
o If you’re at a small paper like mine and you don’t have the time or money to fight long
drawn out legal battles, you have to be creative.
o Think about all the places your police department either sends data to or receives data from
(State departments, school systems, health systems, local government offices, the feds).
o These agencies will be more than happy to hand you huge data sets when they realize the
story likely isn’t about them. :-)
" Example: Juvenile Justice Project.
Feet on the ground (Sourcing, sourcing and more sourcing)
o We can all agree, data is awesome, but you’ll never know about the super amazing data
your local police department keeps locked away in a volt without sources.
o Go at your source’s pace. Let them know you’re eager but don’t scare them away by acting
too thirsty.
" Make sure you keep good sources in the loop as you make public records request
and calls.
" Example: Jacksonville Sheriff John Rutherford voided tickets for WJXT TV-4 traffic
anchor; Rutherford: tickets are voided all the time
o Stay in contact with sources who have given you stuff before and go to them if you’ve got an
idea and need to know if there’s data or documents out there that speaks to it.
o Even stay in contact with sources you think hate you.
" Yes, that guy too. He hates you now for writing that story about his second cousin,
but next month he’s going to be in the middle of an Internal Affairs beef and he
might just be your best friend.
Learn about your agency’s integrity unit
o Often we get documents from general cases, or on police shootings or even from internal
affairs, but a ton of incredible stories live in the integrity unit’s documents. The integrity
"

!

!

!

!

!

unit (could have a different name in your community) is the unit responsible for
investigating any case where a sworn officer may have violated law. So this could be
anything from an officer stealing time (claiming hours they actually didn’t work) to an officer
running a drug ring. This is where the juicy stuff lives. Note that some smaller agencies
wont’ have an integrity unit and will let the internal affairs folks do these types of
investigations.
! Useful data that could lead to good watchdog stories
o Citizen complaint database: Your cops likely have this, but are they going to give it to you.
Try. Ask for the whole thing and see what happens.
o Forfeitures: Ask for the complete list of forfeitures. Both the cash and items. Find out
where the stuff is going and how your police department is using the stuff. If they say they
are selling it. Get the backing documents and verify it for yourself. You just want to make
sure the chief isn’t rolling an Impala on 20 inch rims on the weekends.
o Motor pool inventory: This is great because it will tell you how many cars are working,
damaged, totaled, etc.
o Use of force reports: In our community these are big and expensive. Start by just asking for
the summaries. Summaries are usually just a few pages, do a decent job of summing it all up
and they tell you whether the force used was justified. The summaries will also allow you to
go back few years and broaden your scope.
o Truancy data: This is good one that may be kept diligently by the school systems. Then the
cops will have data on how many parents they arrest for contributing to truancy.
o Curfew Data: Everyone loves a curfew story. You’re elected city officials will chime in on
this one and parents will have a lot of complaints about how the law is or isn’t enforced.

