How to find hackers/security researchers and get them to talk to you
by Yael Grauer @yaelwrites
Pools of potential sources
1. If you’re writing about a security vulnerability, the person who discovered it is a
good starting point.
2. People who give talks at conferences and events, teach workshops, organize
hackathons, do security trainings, etc. are often more comfortable speaking to
the media. (Make sure to watch some of their talks first.)
3. People working at non-profit organizations or consumer advocacy groups that
address the issues you want to cover can make good sources.
4. People who build free, open source tools for folks to test whether their site is
vulnerable to a new bug, or to solve a problem peripheral to the one you’re
covering are often happy to put their tool in context and explain the bug.
5. Academia: professors, graduate students, etc. who are well-versed in the
specific area you’re researching can make great sources.
6. Credible researchers who are blogging and tweeting about a problem and want
to draw attention to it will sometimes talk to you.
7. Ask anyone you speak to who else you should speak with.
The type of sources you want:
1. People who are media-friendly. (Convincing someone who’s reticent to speak to
you to do so anyway is often not worth the trouble.)
2. People with a knack for making complex topics accessible to the type of
audience you write for (and to you).
3. People who care about accuracy and will patiently field multiple follow-up phone
calls if you get confused. This is also great for when your gut tells you that
companies/PR folks/etc. are lying to you but you don’t know the ​
technical
reasons why.
4. People who will only speak on background (often because they work for large
companies and don’t want to go through their media/PR team for approval) are
still incredibly valuable.
Doing amazing work will open doors to sources that speak to media selectively:
1. Be humble enough to realize you may not understand things you think you do.
Verify ​
everything​
. (You are only as good as your last article.)

2. Whenever possible, verify claims with multiple sources. Security researchers are
great at making sure writers don’t embarrass themselves by covering hoaxes (or
even just taking something out of context).
3. Many quality sites get tech wrong: if possible, avoid rehashing/summarizing
other people’s posts without doing independent research (or at least checking
for feedback from people you trust on social media, if not in person).
4. Many great editors don’t grok tech: be your own fact-checker if need be. The
sources you want are incredibly attentive to detail, and will notice sloppy, lazy,
or even slightly inaccurate reporting.
5. Push back on stories that fall apart with scrutiny or no longer make sense to
write when you start investigating. (Pivot or walk away.)
6. Push back on publications that ask you to write hypey and inaccurate posts or
“prove” false claims. (As a freelancer, you can shop these pieces around.)
7. Keep track of what security researchers are up in arms over (on social media,
listservs, etc.) to avoid making those same mistakes.
8. When contacting a potential source, send them links to your best stories on
topics they’re well-versed in (with quotes from people they know or have
worked with, if possible).
9. Be incredibly clear about on the record/on background/etc. and what that
means.
10. After the piece is published: Make sure to make corrections or clarifications if
needed, or at least explain why you made an editorial decision you did.

