Laboratory Testing as a Beat Reporting Tool
Or: How to do the job your environmental regulator maybe isn’t
Rob Davis
Investigative Reporter
The Oregonian
rdavis@oregonian.com
503.294.7657
Laboratory testing can be a reporter’s best friend: An instant story. It can be conducted simply (a few
easy story ideas are below) or with a broad, groundbreaking scope. It can be the story — or a
reinforcing complement. A few ideas for getting started.
Study the studies. ​When scientists look for your target chemical, metal, drug, etc., how do they do it?
Develop a methodology and then vet the hell out of it​ ​with experts​. Potential sources: industrial
hygienists, state health departments with childhood lead poisoning experts, toxicologists, university
researchers and scientists. Ask them: What protocols do they follow? What certification do they
require from laboratories? How would they do what you’re proposing? Would they take five samples?
Ten? From random locations, a grid, or targeting where they think they’ll find it?
Pick the right lab. ​Who do your experts use? Those experts will be able to give you a ballpark cost for
a lab test. Be careful — you can find a wide range among labs conducting the same test on the same
machine. I’ve found lead testing for soil and surfaces that cost between $10/sample and $70/sample.
The latter gets pricey, fast. You’ll want to know what the lab’s standard turnaround time is. You’ll
want to know what their minimum detection limit is. Accreditation agencies will have names and
numbers for the labs they’ve certified. I’ve used those lists to shop around for the best price. Consider
enlisting academics.
Understand baselines​. If you’re taking soil samples, you should expect to find some heavy metals
regardless. Lead is in the soil near roadways from historic use of leaded gasoline. Lead is in the soil
adjacent to homes from deteriorating of lead paint. Lead smelters have polluted entire cities with
plumes of lead. Arsenic levels are higher in Pacific Northwest soil because it’s volcanic. Your state
environmental regulator should have this information. (If they don’t, you might want to write about
why they aren’t paying attention.)
Understand action levels. ​Lead in the air? Above 50 mg/m3 and you have an automatic action
triggered by OSHA. Lead in the soil? It’s complicated. Different states set different soil guidelines,
backstopped by the federal 400 ppm threshold. Even soil above 400 ppm of lead doesn’t
automatically trigger cleanup. Lead on surfaces? The same problem exists there. Regulations for
lead­contaminated surfaces (think daycare floors or windows at home) are guidelines. Workers can
stay in lead­contaminated workplaces if it isn’t airborne. Remember that OSHA guidelines are

outdated and not exhaustively protective of worker health. (The agency uses a 38­year­old trigger for
blood lead levels in workers.) Harm happens at levels well below OSHA’s guidelines. One helpful but
imperfect comparison: See what other standards agencies like the American Conference of
Government Industrial Hygienists use for their action levels. And compare it to Cal­OSHA’s standards,
which are frequently more protective.
Document everything.​ Out in the field taking samples? Remember to take photos and videos (your
homepage manager will thank you). Ask the lab to do the same, from receipt of your samples to the
testing itself. (A benefit of ubiquitous smartphone cameras.) Even if the lab’s images aren’t perfect,
they’ll still help establish the continuous chain of custody and offer readers humanizing visual
reinforcement (techs in white lab coats!) of how you uncovered the data in your story’s few, tightly
written sentences. You’ll also want to record the latitude and longitude of each sample to easily map
it later.
Be transparent​ with readers about everything you do. Write your How We Did It sidebar as you’re
doing it. It’ll be easier before you forget that you followed the soil sampling methodology outlined in
EPA 747­R­95­001.
Ask for help.​ IRE members have been invaluable resources for me. You’ll also find that expertise in tip
sheets #2741, 3101, 2954 and 3579.
Don’t freak out​ if you don’t find what you’re looking for. That sinking feeling when your first lab tests
come back with a line of non­detects? Know that you aren’t the first to feel it.

Four story ideas for $100 or less (but ask your editor for more!):
Lead paint hazards in public housing. ​For $100, you could test 10 window sills in infants’ rooms for
lead dust and establish whether lead hazards are going ignored and whether shoddy maintenance is
creating dangers. Any result > 40 ug/sq. ft. would be concerning, though the U.S. EPA’s window sill
and trough standard is higher. Remember: No amount of lead is safe in a child’s body.
Toxic histories​: The old smelter, junkyard or metal recycler across the street from today’s mixed­use
condo/retail complex may’ve contaminated dirt that residents are now tracking into their homes,
where kids crawl on the floor. Test the soil outside and the floors at doorways inside five nearby
homes. (And read USA Today’s amazing​ ​Ghost Factories investigation​ first.)
Dangerous redevelopment.​ That rundown house being torn down? Its demolition can spread lead
dust and asbestos for hundreds of feet nearby. Want to bet regulators aren’t paying any attention or
enforcing already on­the­books laws requiring dust suppression methods? Soil, surface and air testing
could help confirm this. (And read The Oregonian’s​ ​investigation of asbestos risks​ ​ignored in
demolitions.)

About that water fountain …​ Water testing agencies across the country are swamped. With good
reason. The country is waking up to the dangers of lead in the water. Your reporting can ring the
alarm in your community. For $25 or less per test, you can find out whether your kid’s water at school
is safe. Schools should be (but often aren’t) doing their own lead water tests. Offer to do it for free.
Also send a records request for all lead water tests for the last 15 years and make sure you
understand and vet the school’s methodology.

No money for testing in your newsroom budget?
Oregon Public Broadcasting conducted a successful​ ​investigation​ of historic heavy metals pollution
from pesticide use in orchards with the help of a grant from the Society of Environmental Journalists’
Fund for Environmental Journalism​ (FEJ). Similar grant programs exist nationwide and are helpful
tools if you have the time to spare.

