Loosen Lips:
A Tip Sheet for Investigative Interviews*
LET SOURCES KNOW YOUR PURPOSE, GENERALLY. They’re experts on
some part of your story, so help them understand why they are important and why their
information -- data, documents and background -- is critical. Help them grasp their
value. And remember that when you’re not truthful, you’re putting your work at risk.

ORGANIZE A STRATEGY. Background your subject through clip, court and tax
searches. Know your own data and documents, including how they support what you
think you know and disprove it. Know what you need to ask, confirm and have
explained. Write down your questions and prioritize them. Eric Nalder suggests oneword cues on the back of your notebook.

OM. Now for the Zen of interviewing. Be fully present. Ask one question at a time,
simply. Ask: “How do you know that?” Then, “How else do you know that?” Be smart,
but not too smart. (Sometimes demonstrating your knowledge shows you’ve got the
goods.) Be stupid, but not too stupid. Don’t be afraid to say you don’t understand, since
sources often want to help you get it right.

SPECIFIC V. OPEN-ENDED QUESTIONS. To capture the sound of people
thinking, explaining, justifying, open-ended questions typically work best. The question,
“Talk a little bit about…,” is an invitation to filibuster or share talking points. When you
need a specific answer, pose a yes-no question. That gets people on the record. And if
someone’s refusing to comment, get the exact wording – and use it – rather than saying
“declined comment” if, in fact, something else was said.

EMPATHIZE. Look for an opportunity to connect on a human level -- desks, walls,
trophies, photos, degrees, awards, tchotchkes, mementos and maps. You’re not trying
to be someone’s friend, just to understand what’s important to them, their values, their
way of thinking. Real people need a little TLC, a gentler approach to win trust. Be
trustworthy. Be empathetic -- but not patronizing – as you try to understand their
actions, beliefs and situation. What prompted them to write the memo -– a rivalry, a
sense of duty, anger?

NO SURPRISES. Disclose to sources what they need to know in order to
respond. The resulting story should contain nothing that surprises anyone in it. This is
actually a rule at some news organizations. It’s an integrity check on what you think
your data, documents and sources say, and it’s fundamental to fairness and accuracy.

LISTEN. Be civil. Be courteous. Be respectful. Be skeptical, not cynical. Challenge with
facts, data and documents. Seek clarity. Be engaged. Above all, be quiet and listen.
Don’t step on answers or rush in with the next question. Silence makes people
uncomfortable. They tend to want to fill it. Don’t verbalize. Instead, show your
confusion, skepticism, curiosity or interest with visual cues.

INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY IT. Check out what you’re told. Again, ask: “How do
you know that?” What sources of information demonstrate that? Just because
someone says it doesn’t mean it’s true. Go over your notes ASAP and fill in your
timeline. Create a record of responses so that you can spot shifts or inconsistencies.

PERSIST. If they won’t talk, tell them why they should. This ensures their perspectives
are included. Do they really want others defining the story? Remind them of your
findings, what the facts, data and documents say. Give them multiple opportunities to
respond. If they still won’t talk, ask for an explanation. It’s something every
reader/viewer/listener will wonder about.

SET GROUND RULES. What does “on background” mean? What does “off the
record” mean? What can and can’t be reported and attributed? These phrases mean
different things to different people, so it’s dangerous to assume you share the same
definitions. Be judicious about granting anonymity and honest about your ability to
protect sources. Know your newsroom’s policies and your state’s laws. Consider this
about anonymous sourcing – sometimes it’s the only way and it’s important enough to
do it. But journalists show up in some polls as down at the bottom of the list of trusted
professionals. (Yikes. We’re down there with used car salespeople.) When we use
anonymous sources, we may be feeding that suspicion and distrust. Be sure it’s the only
way to go and understand the risks to your credibility. Say as much as possible about
sourcing. Just saying, “NPR has learned…” is not enough. How? Who says that? Why
are they anonymous?

Judy Fahys jfahys@kuer.org
Howard Berkes hberkes@npr.org
10/28/16

*Hat tip to Eric Nalder

