BACKGROUNDER: INVESTIGATING OFFSHORE CASH
Michael Hudson / International Consortium of Investigative Journalists / mhudson@icij.org
PRO TIP: Don’t assume that financial stories are too complex for average readers.
If you find the human grain, even complex stories can resonate with your audience. Who are the
people involved in these deals? What are their backstories, quirks, passions? Who’s being hurt?
Trace the thread of financial transactions back to the real people who are being harmed:
borrowers, customers, taxpayers, employees pressured to break the law, etc.

Worth A Read
Articles
Kelly Carr and Brian Grow, “A little house of secrets on the Great Plains,” Reuters, 2011.
http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-shell-companies-idUSTRE75R20Z20110628

“A corporation is a legal person created by state statute that can be used as a fall guy, a servant, a
good friend or a decoy,” the company’s website boasts. “A person you control . . . yet cannot be
held accountable for its actions. Imagine the possibilities!”
Will Fitzgibbon, “Secret Offshore Deals Deprive Africa of Billions in Natural Resource
Dollars,” International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, 2016.
https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160725-natural-resource-africa-offshore.html

“Every dollar siphoned through dirty deals and corruption to offshore tax havens makes the
livelihood and survival of the average African more precarious.”
Tim Johnson, “Did this Panama Papers housekeeper really direct a North Korean arms deal?”
McClatchy, 2016. http://www.sacbee.com/news/nation-world/world/article76635047.html

The documents known as the Panama Papers teem with these zombie directors who sign
corporate papers at the bidding of unidentified owners. Such directors can oversee, at least on
paper, hundreds – and sometimes thousands – of corporations.
They are a crucial cog in the machinery of foreign law firms and registration agents who churn out
phantom corporations, stock them with proxy directors, slap a soothing name on them, and
register them on atolls or far-away nations.
Books
Nicholas Shaxson, Treasure Islands: Uncovering the Damage of Offshore Banking and Tax
Havens, 2012.

J.C. Sharman, The Money Laundry: Regulating Criminal Finance in the Global Economy, 2011.
Gabriel Zucman, The Hidden Wealth of Nations: The Scourge of Tax Havens, 2015

Offshore companies, trusts and foundations: a primer
The types of entities frequently involved in tax evasion and money laundering include:
Shell companies: The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development defines shell
companies as firms set up “solely to obscure the identity of their beneficial owners and
controllers.” Shells are “non-operational” companies. They have no employees. No furniture or
office equipment. No real business activities.
In some instances, they serve a legitimate function. For example, two companies that want to
merge will set up a third, “neutral” shell company. But when they are used in illicit ways, shell
companies can be used to disguise fraudsters’ ownership of bank accounts or other assets.
Because they have no employees to question and keep few records, they make it hard for
investigators to find out much information about them.
Shelf companies: Another type of shell corporation. Sometime know as an “aged company,” a
shelf company is a ready-made corporation, registered years before and then left “on the shelf” to
“season” and establish a sense of feeling of “solidity.” Later they’re sold to owners “looking for
a quick way to secure bank loans, bid on contracts, and project financial stability,” Reuters
noted. “To speed up business activity, shelf corporations can often be purchased with established
bank accounts, credit histories and tax returns filed with the Internal Revenue Service.”
Trusts: At its heart, what a trust does is “manipulate the ownership of an asset,” Nicholas
Shaxson explains in his book on offshore havens, Treasure Islands. “When a trust is set up, the
original owner of an asset in theory gives it away into a trust.” But “if you want to evade taxes or
hide money through a trust, the trick is to make it seem as if you have given your asset away,
while in reality you retain control of it.”
A “trustee” becomes the legal – or paper – owner of the asset, but he cannot take the assets for
himself; he must instead oversee and distribute the assets to beneficiaries based on the
stipulations of the “trust deed.” Traditionally, the original owner of the assets isn’t supposed to
have any control over the assets or be able to change the terms of the trust. But some offshore
refuges have rewritten the rules, in essence allowing the person who “gave away” the assets to
maintain control over them by having the authority to change the terms or distribution at any
time.
Some offshore go-betweens in the U.S. sell their clients “asset-protection trusts” in the Cook
Islands, a tiny chain in the South Pacific. The New York Times noted in a 2013 story
(http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/15/business/international/paradise-of-untouchable-

assets.html) that the Cooks usually ignored foreign court orders, making it easier to keep assets
safe from plaintiffs, creditors or ex-spouses: “Win a malpractice suit against your doctor? To
collect, you will have to go to the other side of the globe to plead your case again before a Cooks
court and under Cooks law. That is a big selling point for those who market Cook trusts to a
broad swath of wealthy Americans fearful of getting sued.”
Foundations: Foundations are a form of trust. They have no owners or shareholders, and are
best known in the U.S. as vehicles for nonprofit organizations or charitable giving. But some
jurisdictions, such as Panama, allow foundations to operation in a loose and secretive manner
that makes them perfect vehicles for concealing assets.

Key terms
Layering: Companies, trusts and foundations can be used alone or in combination to obscure the
money trail – by creating complexity and shadows and by limiting legal accountability for those
who are moving and receiving money. Often perpetrators of offshore schemes will use multiple
corporate vehicles based in multiple countries to create webs of corporate structures. It is this
“layering” of secrecy provisions and structures that makes the offshore world so hard to
penetrate.
Beneficial owner: The key question in investigations that try to pierce the veil of secrecy in
companies and other vehicles is this: Who really benefits? The term of art is “beneficial owner.”
Beneficial owners are the flesh-and-blood human beings who own an asset and can ultimately
benefit from it. They are the actual owners of the cash, lands or other assets in question. They
may not be “on the scene” and it appears on paper that the cash or land belongs to someone else.
But the evidence – if it can be uncovered – will show that the assets belong to them. But don’t
call them “beneficial owners” in your story, unless there’s some compelling reason to use this
piece of jargon. Just use plain language: “the actual owner,” “the real owner,” “the true owner.”
Nominee directors: AKA ghost directors, zombie directors, front men. They are paid a modest
fee to sign on as directors, but they know nothing about a company’s assets, operations or real
owners. Their main function is to be able to say “I have no idea” when investigators come
around to ask questions about the company and the real people behind it.
As one Panama-based offshore financial services firm told would-be clients, “It doesn't matter
who the front man for your corporation is, as long as it’s not you.” The firm promised that the
nominee directors it supplied would be “completely ignorant to the happenings of your
corporation.

