Tip Sheet – Covering Tax Havens and Shell Companies
Eryn Schornick, Global Witness
Why do we care about illicit financial flows through tax havens and secrecy jurisdictions?
Because of the secret nature of the financial flows, it is impossible to know precisely the amount of
money, but economist Gabriel Zucman estimates at least $7.6 trillion is in tax havens and secrecy
jurisdictions. The Boston Consulting Group estimates $11 trillion. And the Tax Justice Network
estimates between $21 and $32 trillion dollars.
More than $2.4 trillion is currently stashed offshore by the 500 largest U.S. companies, costing
American taxpayers nearly $700 billion in unpaid taxes. Indeed, the annual cost of offshore tax
avoidance by multinational companies is $94 billion to $135 billion, while overseas tax evasion
by individuals drains an additional $40 billion to $70 billion each year from the American public.
Click here for more information on ‘the problem’.
What is a tax haven?
Tax havens – also known as ‘secrecy jurisdictions’ or ‘offshore’ – provide any of the following:
 Escape from tax
 Secrecy, in various forms
 Avoidance of financial regulations
 Avoidance of criminal laws
 Escape from other rules of society, such an inheritance or corporate governance rules
What vehicles allow tax havens, secret jurisdictions and secretly owned companies?
Illicit financial flows are facilitated by a global shadow financial system which has been created by us
in the richer countries precisely to handle this flow. This system comprises a number of elements:













Tax havens. There were only four or five when I went into business at the beginning of the
1960s, and there are more than 60 today.
Secrecy jurisdictions. Almost all tax havens provide the infrastructure of lawyers and bankers
and accountants who can set up entities hiding behind nominee directors and officers, so that
the real owners remain unknown.
Disguised corporations in the millions around the world, more of them in the United States than
anywhere else.
Anonymous trust accounts.
Fake foundations. You can establish a charitable foundation, you can donate money to this
charitable foundation, and you can designate yourself as the beneficiary of the charity of this
foundation, of course, avoiding taxes at every step.
False documentation is used in all sorts of cross-border capital transactions.
Falsified pricing in international trade, usually the over-invoicing of imports and the underinvoicing of exports, is used in a significant percentage of commercial transactions and moves
more illicit money across borders than all other mechanisms combined.
Money laundering techniques to handle specialized needs.
Holes left in the laws of Western countries to facilitate the receipt of illicit money coming out of
other countries.
- Raymond Baker, Global Financial Integrity, June 4, 2014
Eryn Schornick, Policy Advisor, Anti-Money Laundering, Global Witness eschornick@globalwitness.org (202) 580 – 9711

How do you find tax haven and secrecy jurisdictions?
Tax Justice Network updates its Financial Secrecy Index every two years – see the results for 2015
here. The US is the third largest secrecy jurisdiction after Switze3rland and Hong Kong.
Resources:
Press

Reports

Blogs

Research

Expert
Organizations

 A little house of secrets on the Great Plains, Kelly Carr & Brian Grow, Reuters
 China’s short cut to Wall Street, Annette Byrnes & Lynnley Browning, Reuters
 How Delaware thrives as a corporate tax haven, Leslie Wayne, NYTimes
 Malaysia Scandal - 1MDB
 Mediscam: How criminals easily form fake companies to swindle millions from Medicare,
Brian Grow & Matthew Bigg, Reuters
 Tower of Secrecy: Piercing the shell companies, Louis Story & Stephanie Saul, NYTimes
 Undoing Obama, Planet Money
 Chancing it: How secret company ownership is a risk to investors
 Hidden Menace: How secret company owners are putting troops at risk and harming
American taxpayers
 Inside Malaysia’s shadow state
 Putting beneficial ownership transparency into practice
 The business case for ending anonymous companies
 The great rip off
 Anti-corruption summit sees bold moves in key areas but a glaring blind spot in the tax
havens
 Treasury Department releases new banking rules, proposed legislation to combat money
laundering, end US shell company secrecy: Do they add up?
 What does the UK beneficial ownership data show us? / A first look at the UK beneficial
ownership data
 www.OwneresipTransparency.com; www.OpenCorporates.com; www.OpenOwnership.com
 The Puppet Masters, Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative (StAR), The World Bank, the UN Office
of Drugs and Crime
 Global Shell Games: Testing money launders’ and terrorist financiers’ access to shell
companies, Michael Findley, Daniel Nielson * Jason Sharman
 Company Formations: Minimal ownership information is collected and available, GAO
 Undercover in New York; short film on undercover investigation, which aired on 60 Minutes
 How exposing anonymous companies could cut down on crime
 The Great Rip Off: Interactive Map
 Anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing measures, United States, Mutual
Evaluation Report, Financial Action Task Force
 Financial Transparency and Law Enforcement Assistance Act; More HERE, HERE and HERE
 FinCEN expands reach of real estate “Geographical Targeting Orders” beyond Manhattan and
Miami
 Citizens for Tax Justice
 Financial Transparency Coalition
 The Financial Transparency and Corporate Accountability (FACT) Coalition
 Global Financial Integrity
 Global Witness
 Tax Justice Network
 The B Team
 US Public Interest Research (US PIRG)

Eryn Schornick, Policy Advisor, Anti-Money Laundering, Global Witness eschornick@globalwitness.org (202) 580 – 9711

