IRE Workshop, Jan. 2017, Thomas Maier
- Why Write A Book?
- Improve Skills - Become a better writer and reporter.
- mastery of subject - beat, big story.
- Creativity, add to reputation. Not just Non-Fiction.
- Possible payment -- TV show!
Getting Ideas:
- Byproduct of reporting and conversations.
- Anthologies, old magazines and newspapers.
- Keep file of ideas. masters lasted 10 years.
- Contrarian, How-To, Why is That?
- Writers conference, IRE, other confabs.
Getting An Agent?
- Non-fiction agents: Writer’s Digest. Authors Guild.
- Look inside acknowledgments of prototype books.
- Do you need an agent?
- What is the Market?
Getting Published Successfully
- Proposal and Sample Chapter.
- Ever-Evolving Writing Outline.
- Build Chronology - Let Your Files Do Your Writing.
- Learn to Line-Edit, other careful readers.
- Contract language- do you pay photo, travel, etc?
- Excerpts -- multimedia translations.
- One-person PR bandwagon.
- The next book. Can you get your arms around it?

BOOKS TIME -- IDEAS

The Secret
Boozy Deals of
a Kennedy, a
Churchill, and a
Roosevelt
Thomas Maier
Oct 21, 2014
Thomas Maier is the author of When
Lions Roar: The Churchills and the Kennedys.
“We are past the point where being a capitalist is the only way of becoming
a politician, and we are dangerously near the point where being a politician
is much the quickest way of becoming a capitalist.”
—G. K. Chesterton
What for most married men would seem an indelicate travel arrangement—
cruising across the Atlantic with his wife and mistress—seemed nothing more
than a cozy accommodation for Joe Kennedy aboard the steam-driven ocean
liner, the SS Europa. Departing New York Harbor in late September 1933, the
Kennedy entourage included his wife, Rose; his latest flame, Kay Halle; and his
namesake eldest son, Joseph Jr. He also brought along the lynchpin for his
newest deal, James Roosevelt, the American president’s oldest son. Before
leaving, Jimmy, as he preferred to be called, had told the press that “his trip was
primarily for pleasure, but that he hoped to combine some business with it.”

Ever the opportunist, Kennedy also planned to mix business and pleasure. His
ultimate prize would be to gain the British rights to send Scotch whiskey, gin, and

other imported liquors to a thirsty United States, now that Prohibition appeared
almost over. As part of his secret strategy, Joe had enlisted the president’s 25year-old son to help organize a private visit with Winston Churchill that underlined
Kennedy’s clout with the new administration. In their own ways, Jimmy and Kay
impressed upon Churchill the importance of Joe Kennedy, which led to a
memorable visit at Churchill’s Chartwell home.
Churchill, by position and disposition, was a naturally ally for Joe Kennedy’s
plan to profit from the liquor trade. By September 26, 1933, the day he and the
president’s son left for Britain, Kennedy had created a new firm called Somerset
Importers (apparently named for Boston’s WASPy Somerset Club, which kept
Irishmen like him from joining) with an initial $118,000 investment. Somerset
became his piggy bank for cashing in on Prohibition’s demise. On this crossAtlantic boat ride, Kennedy carried with him the letter from Seton Porter, of
National Distillers Products Corp., appointing Somerset exclusive sales agent in
New England for its liquor products.
When they arrived in London, Joe complained to Kay Halle, a Churchill family
friend, that they needed to meet with “the very best people” during their stay.
Most historians have focused on Churchill’s chat with Jimmy Roosevelt, without
considering Joe Kennedy’s presence. But years later, in the early 1960s,
Randolph Churchill, Winston’s son, insisted Joe Kennedy came to Chartwell with
the rest of the Americans, including Kay Halle and Jimmy Roosevelt. Randolph
told New York Times columnist C. L. Sulzberger that he didn’t know the purpose
for this 1933 expedition underwritten by Kennedy, but quickly found out. Kennedy
“assure[d] them Prohibition would shortly end and he wished to line up contracts
to represent the best firms,” Randolph said. As a top fundraiser, Kennedy claimed
he gave fifty thousand dollars to the 1932 Roosevelt campaign, Randolph
recalled, and the presence of Jimmy Roosevelt on this trip seemed to underscore
that point.
Ultimately, Joe Kennedy pulled off an international coup that made him even
richer. He landed the lucrative British importation rights to distribute Haig & Haig
Scotch whiskey, Dewar’s, Gordon’s gin, and other imported drinks, all very
desirable to customers in the no-longer-dry United States. When Prohibition
finally ended two months later, in December 1933, Kennedy seized his chance.
With this new arrangement, Somerset saw its business in the United States soar,
selling 150,000 cases of Scotch whiskey in the first full year. “We have done
surprisingly well with contracts,” Joe wrote his oldest son. By the end of 1934,

National Distillers Products Corp., including its New England franchise run by
Kennedy, declared that its net profits had quadrupled in a year. When he sold the
Somerset franchise a decade later, Joe Kennedy earned $8.5 million (the
equivalent of more than $100 million in today’s currency).
Another set of finances surrounding this trip involved Winston Churchill. In
September 1933, as the Kennedy group prepared to leave for London, Winston
began a series of stock investments in two seemingly obscure American firms
tied directly to Joe Kennedy: Brooklyn Manhattan Transit and National Distillers
Products Corp. These Churchill stock investments were clustered around the
Kennedy trip—executed both shortly before the Chartwell visit and in the months
afterward—and were known only to a few, perhaps not even to Randolph. Where
Winston got the money for such investments is not clear from available
documents. On their face, however, these transactions seemed remarkably risky
for a man who had lost much of his fortune in bad investments, who feared he
might lose his beloved home, debt-ridden Chartwell Manor, and who had
previously relied on friends to bail him out financially.
Winston’s involvement with the American liquor industry emerged shortly after
Kennedy began selling British whiskey, archival records show. In March 1934,
Churchill was able to invest $5,850 (approximately $101,000 in today’s currency)
in National Distillers Products Corp. – the same American company that awarded
its New England franchise to Joe Kennedy. Later that year, Winston managed to
buy some more of the same stock for $4,375 (about $76,000 in today’s currency).
Soon after both purchases, Winston sold his National Distillers stock, earning a
neat little profit, records show. The paperwork for these transactions was handled
by the Vickers da Costa brokerage firm, which included Churchill’s brother, Jack,
as a stock broker and partner.
Winston’s stake in BMT—the private New York City subway line associated
with Kennedy, Baruch, and others in their speculative investment “pool”—was
even greater and proved more complex. In the two weeks before Kennedy left for
England, September 11–26, 1933, Winston repeatedly bought BMT in batches of
100 shares for a total purchase of $21,725 (approximately $380,000 in today’s
currency). Records show no other BMT exchanges for Churchill for another ten
days, not until after the visit of the Kennedy entourage to Chartwell. The following
day, however, Winston started cashing out. He quickly sold about two-thirds of
this stock by October 11, 1933, making a substantial 10 percent profit within just
a month of his investment.

The idea for Winston’s BMT stock transaction apparently came from Kennedy’s
friend and business associate Bernard Baruch. “I bought seven hundred Brooklyn
Manhattan T around 30, sold four hundred around 35, and am sitting on three
hundred,” Winston wrote to Baruch on October 15, 1933, shortly after entertaining
his American visitors at Chartwell. “Many thanks for the fruitful suggestion.”
Baruch, Kennedy and other “pool” speculators involved in BMT expected their
shares of private stock would boom if the subway company were merged into
New York City’s overall system. Back and forth throughout 1934, Winston sold
and bought BMT stock, at least some of which was purchased on margin with the
hope that it would go up. The amount was much more than Winston previously
said he’d ever invest on Wall Street.
In the months surrounding the Chartwell visit, Churchill managed to purchase a
total of more than $82,000 in BMT stock (about $1.4 million in today’s currency)
and sold a total of some $72,000, according to available archival records. The
BMT collection was among the biggest in his portfolio, which included a handful
of other stocks in 1934. It also far exceeded the overall $12,000 that Churchill told
his brother he was willing to wager in low-risk American overseas investments,
particularly after losing a bundle in the 1929 Wall Street crash. “The more I study
the stocks I know about,” he advised Jack’s brokerage firm prudently in 1931,
“the more sure I am that the only way to recover the losses is to acquire some
low priced solid securities without reference to any immediate dividends, and then
put them away for two, three or four years.”
Quite the contrary, Churchill’s large stake in BMT stock posed a tremendous
risk and broke every sensible rule of investing—unless someone had promised
him it’d be a sure bet. Increasingly, this risky stake in one stock left Winston
worrying that his anticipated bonanza might never happen. On November 18,
1933, he cabled Baruch: do you still like bwt [sic] kindest regards winston.
Baruch, like most speculators in discussing stocks, didn’t leave much
documentation. His telegram contained a one-word reply: yes.
Over the next year, Winston’s anxious messages continued, as the situation
surrounding BMT became only murkier. He wondered whether to cash out. are
you still pleased with b.m.t. around forty regard [sic] winston, he cabled Baruch
on October 27, 1934. That same day, he dropped a personal note to his brother,
Jack, about his stock account. “I telegraphed Baruch about Brooklyn,” he wrote,
assuring Jack that he expected to make more money from his investments in the
following year. But Baruch’s telegram reply was decidedly mixed: while

disappointed delayed transit consolidation feel brooklyn comparatively best thing
on list although affected by politico economic situation. bernie.
Increasingly, the BMT investment by Kennedy and Baruch would come under
greater scrutiny. Their dream of a big payday soon evaporated. Instead of a rapid
merger that would dramatically increase the stock’s value, the BMT took years to
be unified into a citywide system under municipal ownership. While Joe’s initial
half-million-dollar stake swiftly doubled in value, it is not clear how much he finally
earned. Most biographers say Joe Kennedy lost money in the BMT investment,
and presumably so did his partners.
How Churchill obtained money to invest in these two American stocks so
intricately linked to Joe Kennedy’s quick-hit investment strategy remained part of
the overall mystery shrouding this 1933 trip to Great Britain and its lucrative
alcohol deals. Winston’s subsequent note of thanks to Baruch about BMT
suggests Kennedy’s pal helped orchestrate the buying of this particular stock. For
much of his career, Churchill -- unencumbered by stock disclosure rules and
ethical “pay to play” restrictions that regulate much of twenty-first-century
government -- wasn’t inclined to refuse the helping hand of a friend. Earlier, in
1929, Baruch provided money to Churchill when the latter nearly lost his fortune
in Wall Street’s crash.
But how Churchill learned of National Distillers Products Corp. seems unlikely
to have been divined from any other source than Kennedy and his circle of
associates. Shortly after this trip, records show, Churchill also managed in June
1934 to buy shares in the distilling company of Sir James Calder—another of
Kennedy’s business partners, who provided Haig & Haig whiskey—which
Winston soon disposed of at a slight loss.
For a time, Jimmy Roosevelt’s role in Kennedy’s British venture would remain
hidden. Rather than sell booze directly as Joe’s business partner, Jimmy and his
insurance firm made a bundle by safeguarding the ships and their cargo of
Scotch whiskey and other liquors delivered from Great Britain. Jimmy’s tax
disclosures showed that his income more than doubled—from $21,714 in 1933 to
$49,167 in 1934 (about $850,000 in today’s currency), a huge sum during the
teeth of the Depression.
Emboldened by his coup in London with Kennedy, Jimmy Roosevelt came
home bragging about nabbing the National Distillers account. He tried a similar
strong-arm tactic with a Boston bank president, who learned that government
checks would be pulled from his bank unless young Roosevelt handled its

insurance coverage. “Your son James, engaged in the insurance business, is
diverting accounts to himself from old established Insurance Brokers on the
strength of not only the name of Roosevelt but implication that obtaining such
business, favors will be granted by the administration,” warned J. Henry Neale, a
lawyer and banker who supported FDR. “This is said particularly to apply to
National Distillers’ account.” After the White House received Neale’s private letter
about this “malicious rumor,” the president demanded an answer from his son.
In an August 28, 1934, “Dear Pa” letter sent to the President Roosevelt’s
private home in Hyde Park, New York, Jimmy apparently disclosed to his father
his deal with the Kennedy-connected firm for the first time. “You wanted a
statement of facts as to the National Distillers,” he acknowledged. “It is true that I
have this account, but I can’t understand why I shouldn’t have it.” Jimmy’s twopage letter explained how he had approached Seton Porter of National Distillers,
seeking his firm’s insurance contracts, after he “got the idea prior to the repeal of
Prohibition that when this was accomplished, the liquor industry would need to
make some changes in the way of insurance.”
Jimmy didn’t mention Joe Kennedy’s name, but he probably didn’t have to. He
described Seton Porter, Joe Kennedy’s partner in the liquor business, as his own
good friend. “I think Mr. Porter would be willing to say that I have his insurance
solely on the basis of merit, and I would only want it on that basis,” Jimmy
promised his father. “Also, I have never tried to do anything for them with the
Administration and never will. Mr. Porter understands that completely, as I think
he told you when he saw you” at the White House.
Jimmy seemed clueless about the political embarrassment the British liquor
deal might cause his father if it became public. In enlisting the president’s son as
his ally, however, Joe Kennedy displayed more than financial acumen. With a
rapier instinct, Joe could spot the fault lines in Franklin Roosevelt’s personal life—
in this case, the complex relationship between a great man and his son—and
exploited them for his own purposes, all under the guise of friendship. Kennedy
even described himself as “foster-father” to Jimmy, a young man only a few years
older than his own son Joe Jr.
“You know I’m still cutting my teeth in a business way,” Jimmy wrote gratefully
to Kennedy in 1933, around the time of their British trip. The president’s eldest
son expressed his determination to follow through “with these big concerns” and
show that he didn’t have to rely “on the old man’s reputation and have no guts of

my own.” In this deal, young Roosevelt agreed to Kennedy’s wishes, naively and
greedily, with the expectation of more benefits to come.
Ultimately, the secrecy surrounding Kennedy’s 1933 trip obscured the origins of
his relationship with Winston Churchill. Most historians say it began later in the
decade -- when Kennedy became FDR’s ambassador in London in 1938 -- and
was acrimonious almost from the start over differences leading to World War II.
However, earlier documents showing the two men’s shared friendship with
Bernard Baruch, their contacts with Kay Halle and the Roosevelts, their political
ambitions for profitable relations between their two countries, and their stake in
two companies involved in Kennedy’s business empire suggest a kindly alliance
between them. Certainly in private, Joe gave the impression that he had a friend
in Winston Churchill.
Only a few seemed to know of these initial friendly Churchill-Kennedy
exchanges before everything changed so dramatically. Joe’s granddaughter
Amanda, in her 2001 collection of his letters, noted that Churchill “had been one
of his earliest British political contacts, and had even suggested Kennedy’s name
for an award celebrating freedom and peace” in 1938. One of Joe’s few trusted
confidants, James A. Fayne, a Kennedy man in business and government,
declared that Joe’s “greatest friend in Europe” was Winston Churchill. “Before Mr.
Kennedy was appointed Ambassador, his chief world contact was highly personal
though it was Churchill,” recalled Fayne in 1968, “. . . and then they became
oceans apart."

Thomas Maier is the author of When Lions Roar: The Churchills and the
Kennedys, as well as four other books, including The Kennedys: America’s
Emerald Kings and Masters of Sex, the basis for the Showtime series.

