Investor Bulletin:
How to Read an 8-K

A company has just released its quarterly earnings.
Another company has auditor news that could raise a
red flag, and a third company is filing for bankruptcy.
Where can you find more facts? Information about
these events and many more are found in a document
called a current report on Form 8-K.

The rest of this Investor Bulletin highlights a number
of 8-K disclosures that investors may find particularly
relevant, including some red flags for investors. This
Investor Bulletin does not discuss all required 8-K
disclosures.

Form 8-K provides investors with current information
to enable them to make informed decisions. The
types of information required to be disclosed on
Form 8-K are generally considered to be “material.”
That means that, in general, there is a substantial
likelihood that a reasonable investor would consider
the information important in making an investment
decision.

Highlights of Disclosure Items in
Form 8-K

Companies typically provide a number of 8-Ks
throughout the year, whenever significant corporate
events take place that trigger a disclosure. Companies
must file 8-Ks promptly, rather than waiting until
their next periodic report, such as the quarterly
report (on Form 10-Q) or annual report (on Form
10-K). Companies are required to make most 8-K
disclosures within four business days of the triggering
event and in some cases even earlier. The public can
find 8-Ks on the SEC’s EDGAR website, available
at www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.
html. Please see Additional Information at the end of
this Investor Bulletin for more information on how to
use EDGAR.

Investor Assistance (800) 732-0330

Item 1.01 – Entry into a Material Definitive
Agreement
This item requires disclosure of certain material
agreements not made in the ordinary course of
business, or material amendments to those agreements.
For example, if a company takes out a five-year loan
with a bank or signs a long-term lease, and the loan or
lease is material to the company, the agreement must
be reported here. But if a retailer already has a chain
of stores and signs a lease for one more, the new lease
generally would be in the ordinary course of business
and would not be reported here.
Item 1.02 – Termination of a Material Definitive
Agreement
Under this item, a company generally must disclose
the termination of a material agreement. If the
agreement simply expires according to its terms,
that termination would not need to be reported on
Form 8-K. For example, if a widget company made

www.investor.gov

1

most of its sales under a long-term supply agreement
with one significant customer, and that customer
terminates the agreement prior to the date on which
it would otherwise expire, that event would need to be
reported under this item.
Item 1.03 – Bankruptcy or Receivership
If a company becomes the subject of a bankruptcy
or receivership court filing, that must be disclosed.
Future 8-Ks may outline the company’s plan for
reorganization (under Chapter 11) or liquidation
(under Chapter 7) and the court’s confirmation of
the plan. Investors should look at the reorganization
plan for information about whether the company’s
common stock is likely to be canceled and when the
company expects to emerge from bankruptcy.
Item 2.01 – Completion of Acquisition or
Disposition of Assets
If a company acquires or disposes of a significant
amount of assets, the company must file an 8-K to
describe the terms of the transaction. Examples
include buying or merging with another company, or
selling a business unit. A company that is no longer
a “shell company” as a result of a merger would also
use this item to provide investors with comprehensive
information about the other merging company. A
shell company is a company that either has little or no
operations or has little or no assets other than cash and
cash equivalents.
Item 2.02 – Results of Operations and Financial
Condition
Many companies announce their quarterly and annual
results simultaneously in a press release and an 8-K
(which includes the press release as an exhibit). The
documents often include an announcement that the
company will hold a conference call (sometimes called
an analyst or earnings call) shortly after the release
to discuss the results. The financial disclosures in the
8-K typically summarize the full financial statements,
which will appear later in the company’s quarterly
report (on Form 10-Q) or annual report (on Form
10-K).

Investor Assistance (800) 732-0330

Item 2.03 – Creation of a Direct Financial
Obligation or an Obligation under an Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangement of a Registrant
The basic terms of material financial obligations
that the company takes on must be reported. These
financial obligations include any long-term debt,
capital or operating lease, and short-term debt outside
the ordinary course of business. This item also requires
disclosure of material financial obligations, whether
direct or contingent, that arise out of off-balance sheet
arrangements.
Item 2.04 – Triggering Events That Accelerate
or Increase a Direct Financial Obligation or
an Obligation under an Off-Balance Sheet
Arrangement
Defaults on loans or other events that trigger the
acceleration or increase of a financial obligation must
be disclosed in an 8-K if the consequences of the
event are material to the company. For example, if a
company defaults on a loan, its creditors typically have
the right to demand immediate payment of the entire
amount owed. In such a case, if immediate repayment
would be material, the company must disclose the
amount to be repaid, the repayment terms and other
financial obligations that might have to be repaid on an
accelerated basis as a result of the initial default. Crossdefault provisions may allow other creditors to demand
immediate repayment of amounts owed to them.
Item 2.05 – Costs Associated with Exit or
Disposal Activities
This item requires disclosure of restructuring plans
under which the company will incur material
charges. For example, the 8-K may report the
company’s decision to close some of its plants or
stores or to lay off workers. The company also must
disclose its estimates of the costs involved, once it is
able to determine them. These costs could include,
for example, total severance benefits for all laid-off
employees.
Item 2.06 – Material Impairments
A company must disclose certain material writedowns (also called impairments) in an 8-K. (If the
company determines the impairment when routinely
preparing its financial statements for its periodic

www.investor.gov

2

report, the company may make the disclosure in the
periodic report rather than in an 8-K.) A writedown may occur when a company significantly lowers
its estimate of the value of certain assets, such as the
value of its brand or of a business it has acquired.
The write-down hits the financial statements in two
places—as a decrease in assets on the balance sheet and
as an expense on the income statement.
Item 3.01 – Notice of Delisting or Failure to
Satisfy a Continued Listing Rule or Standard;
Transfer of Listing
If a stock exchange notifies a company that it no
longer satisfies the requirements for continued
listing, this must be disclosed. For example, the
stock may have been trading below the minimum
price requirement for a certain period of time. The
company may have a grace period to return to
compliance, and will have to disclose any steps it
intends to take to avoid delisting.
Item 3.02 – Unregistered Sales of Equity
Securities
Private sales of securities exceeding 1 percent of
a company’s outstanding shares of that class (or 5
percent for smaller reporting companies) would be
reported under this item. Public offerings registered
with the SEC need not be disclosed under this item.
Investors can use the information provided under this
item to determine the amount of capital raised by
the company as well as the potential dilutive effect of
reported private sales.
Item 3.03 – Material Modification to Rights of
Security Holders
Under this item, companies must disclose material
changes to instruments that define the rights
of shareholders (such as a company’s governing
documents) or material limitations on the rights
of security holders that result from the issuance or
modification of another class of securities. Examples
of such changes could include loan terms restricting
dividend payments, the adoption of an antitakeover
device or the issuance of preferred stock.

Investor Assistance (800) 732-0330

Item 4.01 – Changes in Registrant’s Certifying
Accountant
Companies must disclose if they dismiss their
independent auditor, if the auditor resigns or declines
to stand for re-appointment, and if the company hires
a new auditor.
A change of auditors is sometimes, but not always, a
cause for concern. It depends on the reasons for the
change. The following circumstances are widely seen
as red flags, and companies must disclose them if they
occurred over the previous two fiscal years.
First, companies must disclose whether the departing
auditor gave an adverse or qualified opinion on the
company’s financial statements. These indicate that the
financial statements are not prepared in conformity
with generally accepted accounting principles.
Second, the company must report certain
disagreements it had with its departing auditor over
accounting principles or practices, financial statements,
or the scope or procedure of the audit.
Third, whether or not it led to a disagreement
between the company and its auditor, companies must
disclose whether its former auditor advised it that:
•

the necessary internal controls to prepare
reliable financial statements do not exist,

•

the auditor can no longer rely on
management’s representations or is unwilling
to be associated with the financial statements
prepared by management,

•

the auditor believed it should further
investigate a matter or significantly expand the
scope of its audit, and the auditor did not do
so, or

•

the auditor has found new information that
materially impacts the fairness or reliability of
current or prior financial statements, and the
issue has not been resolved to the auditor’s
satisfaction.

www.investor.gov

3

Item 4.02 – Non-Reliance on Previously Issued
Financial Statements or a Related Audit Report
or Completed Interim Review
This item requires disclosure if the company believes
that previously issued financial statements should not
be relied upon because of an error in the statements.
Disclosure is also required if the auditor believes that
its previously issued audit reports or interim reviews
on financial statements should not be relied upon. In
both cases, the company also must disclose whether its
audit committee, full board or authorized executive
officers have discussed these matters with its auditor.
Investors should pay attention to these disclosures,
which could affect the company’s previously reported
earnings. Companies generally restate their financial
statements after the 8-K disclosure. The restatement
could come at a much later date.
Item 5.01 – Changes in Control of Registrant
If there is a change of control of the company, the
company must identify the persons who have acquired
control and the percentage of voting securities that
they beneficially own, as well as any arrangements
between the old and new control groups regarding the
election of directors or other matters.
Item 5.02 – Departure of Directors or Certain
Officers; Election of Directors; Appointment of
Certain Officers; Compensatory Arrangements
of Certain Officers
If a board member resigns or refuses to stand for reelection because of a disagreement with the company
relating to the company’s operations, policies or
practices, or a director is removed for cause from
the board, the company must briefly describe the
circumstances of the disagreement. If the director
provides a letter regarding her resignation, refusal or
removal, the company must file the letter as an exhibit
to the 8-K.

The company also must disclose the appointment of
any new director or high-level officers and briefly
describe any related compensation arrangements. In
addition, the company must disclose any changes to
the compensation of current high-level officers.
Item 5.03 – Amendments to Articles of
Incorporation or Bylaws; Change in Fiscal Year
This item generally requires disclosure if a company
amends its articles of incorporation or bylaws, or
changes its fiscal year, unless the company already
disclosed the proposed amendment or fiscal year
change in a proxy statement or information statement.
Companies that issue only debt securities are typically
not required to comply with this item.
Item 5.05 – Amendments to the Registrant’s
Code of Ethics, or Waiver of a Provision of the
Code of Ethics
Companies must generally report changes to their
code of ethics that apply to the chief executive officer,
chief financial officer, chief accounting officer or
controller, or others performing similar functions.
The company also must disclose any waivers granted
to any of these persons. Many investors consider
ethics waivers to be a red flag. Please note that a
company may elect to provide these disclosures on the
company’s website instead of filing an 8-K.
Item 5.07 – Submission of Matters to a Vote of
Security Holders
Within four business days of the end of an annual or
special meeting, companies must file the results of
shareholder votes in director elections and on all other
matters put to a vote. If the company is only able to
report preliminary results at that time, it must file an
amended 8-K to report the final vote results within
four business days after those results are known.

If a high-level executive officer—such as the chief
executive officer, president, chief financial officer, chief
accounting officer or chief operating officer—retires,
resigns or is terminated, the company must disclose
that fact.

Investor Assistance (800) 732-0330

www.investor.gov

4

Item 7.01 – Regulation FD
The purpose of Regulation FD—for “fair
disclosure”—is to prevent companies from selectively
disclosing material, non-public information.
Regulation FD is intended to level the playing field:
companies generally must give material information to
the public at the same time they provide it to others,
such as securities market professionals.
Companies may submit an 8-K under this item or
Item 8.01 as one method of complying with the
public disclosure requirement of Regulation FD.
Actual examples of 8-Ks filed under this item address
a wide range of topics, such as announcements of
dividends, quarterly sales figures, or other business
developments.
Item 8.01 – Other Events
This is the place where companies may report
anything that they believe is important but is not
specifically required elsewhere in the 8-K.
Item 9.01 – Financial Statements and Exhibits
Under this item, a company must file certain financial
statements and list the exhibits that it has filed as part
of the 8-K. For example, if a company discloses in
Item 2.01 that it has acquired a business, Item 9.01
would require the company to provide the financial
statements of the business acquired in the same or a
later-filed amended 8-K. In addition, the company
must also present “pro forma” financial statements that
show what the company’s financial results might have
been if the transaction had been completed earlier.
Likewise, if the company discloses in Item 1.01 that it
has entered into a material agreement, that agreement
may be filed as an exhibit in the 8-K.

Investor Assistance (800) 732-0330

Additional Information
For our Using Edgar - Researching Public
Companies, providing information on how
to search for company documents, such as
Forms 8-K, in the SEC’s EDGAR database,
visit investor.gov/researching-managinginvestments/researching-investments/usingedgar-researching-public-companies.
For our Researching Public Companies
Through EDGAR: A Guide for Investors,
another resource for using EDGAR, visit
www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/edgarguide.htm.
For Form 8-K, which lists all items and has
instructions on how to complete it, visit
www.sec.gov/about/forms/form8-k.pdf.
For the 2004 Final Rule: Additional
Form 8-K Disclosure Requirements and
Acceleration of Filing Date, see
www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8400.htm.
For How to Read a 10-K, visit www.
investor.gov/news-alerts/investor-bulletins/
how-read-10-k.
For additional educational information for
investors, see the SEC’s Office of Investor
Education and Advocacy’s website at www.
investor.gov.

The Office of Investor Education and Advocacy
has provided this information as a service to
investors. It is neither a legal interpretation nor
a statement of SEC policy. If you have questions
concerning the meaning or application of a
particular law or rule, please consult with an
attorney who specializes in securities law.

May 2012

5

