Good Cigars, but a Lot of Smoke
By DIANA B. HENRIQUES APRIL 7, 1996
THE Culbro Corporation has long been a quiet company.
Its premium cigars, led by the popular Garcia y Vega and Macanudo brands, are puffed
at Wall Street gatherings, and it is a big landowner in popular Wall Street getaways like
rural Connecticut and Florida. But with a stock market value of less than $300 million,
and with half of its shares in insiders' hands, it has never attracted much attention,
despite ties to a fabled tobacco dynasty and a board studded with business celebrities.
Anyone who was curious about this New York-based holding company, which also
owns a commercial nursery and an industrial packaging company, could consult
Culbro's annual report, which this year hails the sales growth and rising stock price
generated by "the link that now exists" between premium cigars and wealthy
consumers. "Every gathering of cigar smokers is a cause for warm companionship,"
says the chairman, Edgar M. Cullman, 78, in his genial letter to shareholders.
But forget the graceful annual report. The really juicy news cannot be found there this
year -- it is all tucked away in the frumpy Form 10-K filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission last month.
There, you can read about the 3,000 pounds of marijuana seized by Customs agents at
a company plant in Alabama last spring; about the internal investigation that stumbled
across a crooked invoicing scheme that defrauded the company of about $1 million
over four to five years; about a senior executive, dismissed last year, who has filed a
lawsuit accusing the company of bribing foreign officials and cheating on Federal
campaign laws.
In this jaw-dropper of a report, you can even read the company's prediction that this
former employee will himself be indicted soon, and you can learn that since May the
S.E.C. has been informally looking into trading in the company's shares before Culbro
announced plans, later dropped, to sell half its General Cigar subsidiary to a Spanish
conglomerate.
The company's annual shareholder meeting, normally a quiet affair, is scheduled for
Thursday in New York. "They will certainly have a lot to talk about this year," one
investor said…

They will indeed. Since last spring -- when a customer found a brick of marijuana in a
shipment of company cigars -- executives and directors have been caught up in a reallife mystery that makes Wall Street's usual fare look tame. And their experience offers a
warning to all corporate officers and directors who assume that crime could never
infect their own tidy, tautly managed companies.
"No one ever thinks it can happen to them," said Edgar Cullman Jr., 50, Culbro's
president and his father's chosen successor as chief executive, in an interview last
week. And he felt confident that his company had taken steps to protect itself. "Ever
since my father has been in business, we have practiced the highest possible ethical
standards."
But corporate watchdogs say there is another lesson here: beware the ties that blind.
For as strong as Culbro's response has been, these experts say, it is flawed because the
board left the investigation to the in-house counsel rather than putting it in the hands
of independent directors. One possible reason? An "incestuous web of conflicts" that
links board members to one another and to the company, said Prof. John C. Coffee Jr.
of the Columbia University School of Law.
"This is less than the textbook example of how you should conduct an investigation of
this sort," said Professor Coffee, an S.E.C. adviser and specialist in corporate and
securities law.
Mr. Cullman Jr. begs to differ. "Maybe it looks better" if outside directors run an
investigation, he said, "but nobody from our board can spend the time that we have
spent and will continue to spend to track all of these things down." As for the close ties
among board members, he said, "There is a lot of collegiality, no question about it -but that goes two ways. They want to see us protected as much as they want to be sure
that we are not blindsided."
He can understand his critics' point of view, he added. "It may appear to have a certain
smell about it," Mr. Cullman Jr. said. "But when you get below the surface, you see that
these are quality people and it is really a good process."
He noted that James D. Harmon Jr., a former executive director and chief counsel of
the President's Commission on Organized Crime, was hired as investigative counsel at
the first sign of trouble last spring, and former Federal Judge Kenneth Conboy, a
widely respected jurist and now a partner at the law firm of Latham & Watkins, was
hired in February to look into the former employee's allegations. In addition, the
company has tightened its audit controls and has improved security at its operations.
Thomas C. Israel, a Culbro director and chairman of the audit committee, also
defended the company's response. "Management feels very free and open, and we
discuss everything," he said. "This is a lot more than a rubber-stamp board." He added,
"By knowing senior management as well as we do, we feel very confident that they have
paid great attention to detail. They are the most moral, highly ethical people in the
world. We are comfortable that, with the exception of one or two bad apples, everyone
is doing what they're supposed to do."
It certainly looked that way until the news about these spreading scandals broke last
month.

The Cullman family has been in the tobacco industry for generations: Mr. Cullman Sr.'s
father and uncle were in the cigar business, and the family firm, Cullman Brothers,
owned the Benson & Hedges cigarette line until it was sold to Philip Morris in the mid1950's. Edgar Cullman's brother, Joseph, joined Philip Morris, helping shape it into a
national giant before retiring as chairman and chief executive in 1978.
Mr. Cullman Sr., who is married to an heiress of the Bloomingdale retailing fortune,
stayed at the family firm. In 1961, he bought a controlling stake in the General Cigar
Company, which had been listed on the New York Stock Exchange since 1906. In 1976,
General Cigar changed its name to Culbro, an echo of the family firm name. A
diversification into wholesale grocery distribution lifted revenue in the 1980's, but
rarely produced strong profits. Two years ago, the company cut its stake in that
business to concentrate on cigars "and related affluent market segments."
The shift was well timed, for that was when cigars began to shed their politico-gangster
image and become stylish. Mario Gabelli, the high-profile investment adviser and a
cigar-puffer of long standing, noticed it early last spring when he was unable to get a
reservation at the annual dinner sponsored by Cigar Aficionado magazine. Mr. Gabelli
had been a Culbro investor for years. But the cigar boom increased his appetite, and he
began to build up his stake, as the stock began to climb toward $20 a share from
around $12.
CULBRO'S stock now stands at $65.50, and 1995 profits were $11.2 million, or $2.52 a
share, up almost tenfold over the results of 1994. First-quarter profits, announced last
week, continued to be robust, with cigar division earnings up 55 percent over the same
period last year -- driven not only by the emerging cigar culture but by innovative
company marketing of its cigars, lighters and related products.
For example, Culbro has set up a cigar-centered Web site on the Internet. It sells
Macanudo and Partagas bomber jackets and sportswear. And next month it will open
its own Manhattan cigar bar, Club Macanudo, with a decor by Cullman & Kravis, the
decorating firm owned by Elissa Cullman, Mr. Cullman Jr.'s wife, and Hedi Kravis,
former wife of Henry Kravis, the leveraged buyout specialist. Consulting on the menu
is the chef-proprietor of a small New York restaurant in which the Cullmans have a
stake.
As those assignments indicate, Culbro has a close-knit board where even ostensible
outsiders may be closely involved with company life and with each other.
Its 11 members include Francis T. Vincent Jr., whose career has ranged from the
S.E.C.'s corporate finance division to the executive suites of Columbia Pictures and
Coca-Cola to being Major League Baseball commissioner; Dan W. Lufkin, an active
private investor and a founder of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, and Peter J. Solomon,
the feisty former Lehman Brothers partner immortalized in Ken Auletta's book, "Greed
and Glory on Wall Street," who also served as deputy mayor of New York City under Ed
Koch.
Mr. Solomon's firm, Peter J. Solomon & Company, earned a $75,000 fee for advising
the company on financial strategies last year and stands to get a much larger fee for
handling the pending sale of CMS Gilbreth Packaging Systems, a Culbro subsidiary.
From 1992 to 1994, Mr. Vincent was a senior adviser to Mr. Solomon's firm, and in the
late 1970's, he and Mr. Lufkin worked together at Columbia Pictures, on whose board

Mr. Lufkin served. Another outside director is Graham V. Sherren, chief executive of
Centaur Communications Ltd., a British business magazine publisher in which Culbro
has a substantial stake.
Other outsiders on the board are John L. Bernbach, the retired vice chairman of DDB
Needham Worldwide, and Bruce A. Barnet, chief executive of Cowles Magazines.
Besides the elder Mr. Cullman, the board also includes his son, Mr. Cullman Jr.; his
son-in-law Frederick M. Danziger, a partner at Latham & Watkins, Culbro's outside
counsel; and his nephew John L. Ernst, whose Bloomingdale Properties manages the
company's headquarters building on Park Avenue South in New York. These family
members and their various trust accounts control 50.1 percent of Culbro's stock. In
addition, Mr. Danziger's son David became an officer and vice president last year.
Even the largest outside investor, Mr. Gabelli, who controls 20 percent, has a company
"job": One of his affiliated companies manages the Culbro pension fund.
UNTIL now, these close ties -- all meticulously disclosed in proxy reports -- have raised
few eyebrows among investors. But when a company finds itself in Culbro's situation,
only a convincingly independent investigation can preserve the company's credibility
with prosecutors and regulators, said Neil Getnick, an anti-corruption specialist and
president of the International Association of Independent Private-Sector Inspectors
General, a standard-setting group for lawyers and investigators serving as corporate
watchdogs.
And Culbro's arrangement, "while not improper, is just not preferable," Mr. Getnick
said. "And to some extent it is self-defeating: when you go to those lengths to bring in
counsel with a reputation of skill and integrity and independence, it makes little sense
to structure it in a fashion that is not truly independent."
The views of legal experts were the last thing on the mind of A. Ross Wollen, Culbro's
in-house counsel, on the day last spring when he interrupted a Florida trial to take a
call from Austin T. McNamara, the president of the General Cigar subsidiary in
Bloomfield, Conn. The news was a shocker: a customer "had opened what should have
been a box of cigars, and in it, he found a brick of marijuana," Mr. Wollen said.
The lawyer immediately sought out a friend and former West Point classmate, Jim
Harmon, a one-time Federal prosecutor now in private practice in New York. Mr.
Wollen laughed ruefully when he recalled what he told his friend so many billable
hours ago: "This won't take too many hours of your time, but you know better than we
do how to report this to the proper authorities."
Mr. Harmon did two things: He immediately got in touch with Federal Customs
officials and law enforcement agents in Alabama, and he hired Willis Krebs, a retired
New York City police detective experienced in narcotics cases. As Mr. Krebs devised
ways to strengthen the company's physical security, Mr. Harmon asked Customs
agents to watch the company's shipping containers entering the Port of Miami.
"Customs agents found one of the company's containers had been used to ship
marijuana," Mr. Harmon said. With the knowledge of Mr. Harmon and Mr. Krebs, who
agreed not to inform the company, Customs agents conducted what Mr. Harmon called

"a controlled delivery: following the container from Miami to wherever it was going to
go."
It wound up at a General Cigar plant in Dothan, Ala. The plant was swiftly raided and
agents seized 3,000 pounds of marijuana from the container. Two employees were
arrested and later indicted; they have pleaded not guilty and have denied any
knowledge of how the drug got to Dothan.
INDEED, while a local Federal grand jury continues to investigate, Mr. Wollen said the
company is still in the dark about how the drugs arrived and where they were bound.
But Mr. Harmon did stumble across a curious pattern in certain invoices submitted by
a local trucking firm used to cart materials to and from the plant. In a civil lawsuit later
filed in Montgomery, Ala., General Cigar accused the trucker of billing for about $1
million of shipments that were never made. The checks that paid those invoices were
all cashed, rather than deposited into the trucking company's bank accounts, Mr.
Wollen said, and the bills had all been approved by General Cigar's senior vice
president for manufacturing, Paul T. Cleveland. Mr. Cleveland, 41, based in
Connecticut but responsible for the Dothan plant, was dismissed; he has been added as
a defendant in the company's civil suit against the trucking line.
Mr. Cleveland, in a telephone interview on Thursday, denied that he had done anything
wrong at Culbro, but declined to comment further. "I've got a lot of legal issues to deal
with in Alabama and Connecticut," he said.
After being dismissed, Mr. Cleveland sued Culbro in state court in Connecticut,
contending wrongful termination. In that lawsuit, Mr. Cleveland said he was dismissed
because he was aware of, and had objected to, certain actions that he contended were
taken by General Cigar: paying bribes to foreign politicians and kickbacks to
distributors, for example, and pressuring executives to make political donations.
The company denies Mr. Cleveland's accusations, Mr. Wollen said.
In the lawsuit, Mr. Cleveland also said General Cigar's president, Mr. McNamara, had
told him that a senior Culbro executive had tipped a friend in advance to Culbro's plan
last spring to sell a stake to Tabacalera S. A., a Spanish tobacco company. The lawsuit
does not identify who may have received such a tip.
The S.E.C. has been informally investigating trading in Culbro shares in advance of the
Tabacalera deal since May. Mr. Wollen said that investigation did not involve any
company executives, and that he did not know its current status. Among the people the
S.E.C. has interviewed is Mr. Gabelli, who said he was confident that nothing untoward
would be found. "We operate in a goldfish bowl," he said. "It is a flagrant abuse to
connect our firm with allegations of using inside information." The S.E.C. does not
comment on pending investigations.
It was after Mr. Cleveland's allegations were made in court that Culbro's handling of its
troubles began to fray, in the view of several governance experts. Culbro's board seems
to have dismissed the charges out of hand. Mr. Harmon continued to devote his
attention to the Alabama situation. "It just seemed to be a disgruntled ex-employee,
trying to throw up a lot of chaff," one director said, speaking on condition of
anonymity.

Mr. Vincent said, "Nothing we saw in his complaint impressed us very much."
But on Feb. 7, a subpoena issued by a Federal grand jury in Connecticut was served on
General Cigar, seeking company documents "relevant to many of the charges contained
in the lawsuit" by Mr. Cleveland, who had sent the complaint to Federal prosecutors
after he filed it.
Faced with a new set of troubles, Mr. Wollen immediately hired Mr. Conboy as special
counsel to investigate the Cleveland allegations.
It turned out that several General Cigar executives had made personal political
donations, totaling about $11,000 and including gifts to the Presidential campaign of
Senator Bob Dole, and had been reimbursed by the subsidiary -- a violation of Federal
campaign laws. Mr. Cullman Jr., though, said he believed the executives who solicited
the gifts did not realize their actions were improper.
Mr. Conboy said the political campaigns had refunded the gifts and the company was
negotiating a settlement with the Federal Election Commission. As for the subpoenas
in the Cleveland case, Mr. Conboy said, "We appreciate that they have a duty to
investigate, and we will be presenting all of the documents that are germane. I expect,
when all of the documents are examined and interviews are completed, that there will
be no basis for prosecutors to proceed with a criminal charge."
His confidence is bolstered by an affirmation, submitted in Federal court in Alabama
by Charles Niven, an assistant United States Attorney. In that filing, dated Feb. 6, Mr.
Niven explained that a Federal grand jury was investigating the accusations filed in
General Cigar's civil racketeering suit against Mr. Cleveland and the local trucking
company.
"Upon consideration of the law and the evidence, I reasonably expect the grand jury to
return an indictment against defendants named in" that civil suit within 60 to 90 days,
Mr. Niven continued, "including defendant Paul Cleveland."
Mr. Cleveland declined to comment.
Were shareholders told any of this? None of Culbro's adventures in the land of law
enforcement were disclosed during the year or are mentioned in the annual report. Mr.
Wollen said he felt "disclosure was made when appropriate and where appropriate,"
since none of it was deemed to be financially material.
Mr. Gabelli has no qualms about the company's handling of its investigation. "These
are the creme de la creme," he said, "so you don't worry about whether this is an issue
of corporate governance." He and his senior aide, Douglas Jamieson, acknowledge a bit
of chagrin, however: they held a meeting to introduce Culbro to Wall Street analysts at
the end of October, and none of these issues came up. "Maybe we just didn't ask the
right questions," Mr. Jamieson said.
Those questions are sure to be asked now, and the answers will test how well this board
has learned the lessons of the 1990's, when company directors, from the Cooper
Companies to Morrison Knudsen, found to their mortification that a board room is no
place to pull your punches

