Watchdogging on the Beat
Tips from the AJC Newsroom
Know the oversight agencies or systems (yes, plural) for the government or topic you
cover and find out the kinds of reports and data they are to collect.
--Lois Norder, investigations editor











It may seem simple, but on day one of covering a beat begin the search for
small, manageable watchdog/accountability stories that allow you to plant your
flag. It hangs a shingle to sources and lets them know you are open for business.
Most reporters don’t do this so when you go about questioning the system it will
stand out with sources and potential sources on your beat. That will lead to
bigger stories and bigger investigations. If possible, don’t be trapped by the
pursuit of access. You will never get great investigative stories worrying about
that. You will get great investigative stories by questioning the system, which will
lead sources that actually know stuff.
Most organizations are fractured bodies where people have rivalries, they don’t
like their boss, are jealous of co-workers, etc. Try to understand these human
dimensions of the organization or organizations on your beat. It will lead to
sources and help you penetrate the organization, which will lead to big stories.
You want them talking about you internally. It will shake loose sources.
Try to think about your beat as a system. Find the problems in that system and
connect the dots. Treat daily stories on your beat as a search for system failures
or bigger stories that impact readers or the public. If a daycare in your town is
shut down or dinged by regulators for dangerous behavior ask the question: How
often does this happen? What’s the worse stuff that happens in daycares? Tailor
record requests to get that sort of information. You’d be surprised what you may
find.
Ask sources you meet about problems in the community, issues they’ve been
seeing, stuff that needs to be investigated.
Join IRE. Read tips sheets about your subject area. It will get you in an
investigative mindset.
Put in regular public records requests.
Again, the best way to find investigative stories is to start doing investigative
stories.
--Brad Schrade, investigative reporter

When I was an ACE at The Oklahoman, I used to make sure my reporters spent time
every week doing some basic background research on their beat — who are the
players, who are their friends, who do they do business with, where do they own
property, where were they buying or selling property, who are their career political
supporters, and even where do the eat lunch and who with. That made it more likely

that they would recognize a good watchdog story when some innocuous thing came up
on an agenda or was mentioned at a meeting.
I also made sure that they made regular records requests, even if they didn’t need
anything for any specific story they were working on, just to train the political officials to
expect it and to treat the requests casually, since most of them didn’t result in some
expose, or even a story — but also to let officials know that whenever they made a
statement, we would ask for the documents to back up what they said.
These were things I learned from a great city hall reporter, who called this "tilling the
ground.”
--John Perry, News apps developer and data journalism coach
Be wary of people on your beat, such as elected officials or their top staffers, who are
eager to dish on their colleagues. Often, they have something to hide and
they're befriending you to throw you off course.
Don't be overly obsessed about what your competitors are doing. Focus on the highimpact stories, even if you have to forego the little stuff. That's how you get ahead of the
pack.
When obtaining records, insist on spreadsheet format, when applicable. Too often, beat
reporters facing deadlines settle for PDFs.
--Johnny Edwards, investigative reporter
Court cases provide fertile ground for investigative reporting.
In a recent public corruption trial, DeKalb County’s chief executive was accused of
threatening contractors that resisted his requests for campaign contributions. But the
trial didn’t reveal whether he followed through on those threats. A couple of open
records requests sought payment records from the county to contractors, and those
records revealed that a contractor was in fact cut off from receiving county work after
refusing to donate: http://www.myajc.com/news/news/local-govt-politics/company-lostdekalb-work-after-rebuffing-ceo-ellis/nhfNB/#11410461.3783601.735541
Another place to look for stories is tax records. A quick investigation this summer
showed that even though property values and tax revenue were rising, counties weren’t
cutting tax rates. Once I requested tax assessments in several jurisdictions for the
current year compared to the previous year, I had a story:
http://www.myajc.com/news/news/local-govt-politics/tax-hikes-hit-as-homes-gainvalue/ngYZT/#9dce3e0b.3783601.735541
--Mark Nisse, DeKalb County watchdog reporter

Go to the meetings.
Staffers start to think of you as part of their culture. Board members start to think of you
as someone they have to deal with. You learn the language, see the tensions. Talk to
everyone there. Collect phone numbers, distribute yours. Take the lobbyists to lunch.
Collect string as you go.
You're working story A and you hear something that could eventually fit into story K.
Harvest and store, in a way you can find it quickly later.
--Ariel Hart, enterprise reporter

I think the most important (and maybe most difficult) thing for a beat reporter is to
maintain the emotional distance necessary to do investigative reporting about the
people he or she covers day after day. Beat reporting tends to inadvertently encourage
writing for the sources, and that sometimes makes it difficult for a reporter to examine
issues with a critical eye. Being able to ask why? – sometimes again and again – even if
it irritates your sources is essential.
---Alan Judd, investigative reporter
File public records requests for every story when possible. Even if you don’t use the
records for the immediate story or get them in time, you can go through them later and
may find an even better story. (For example, this story about lapses in APS’s ethics
program came from a records request I filed for an earlier profile of the former APS
superintendent.)
--Molly Bloom, education watchdog reporter
Read the agenda before meetings. All of it. Don’t settle for the one-page agenda
summary. If not provided, ask for supplemental documents, supporting research or any
information that supports action items. Take the time to read all of it before every
meeting. You may not find a story right away, but you will gain a familiarity with routine
documents and proceedings so that when something out-of-the ordinary comes up, you
will be able to spot it. Also, know your open meeting laws and press for details on what
business was handled during executive session.
--Jaime Sarrio, education reporting coach

Check out local records in national databases.
Ebola is a killer in Africa, but the infections you can acquire while undergoing treatment
in America’s hospitals are a bigger threat here. Use the CDC’s National Healthcare

Safety Network data to assess how well your local hospitals are doing when it comes to
controlling infections within their walls.
This data is published on the CMS website Hospital Compare. There are lots of other
variables here worth exploring too!
A quick look at hospital compare reveals that some Jackson-area hospitals may have
some serious patient safety issues.
http://www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare/compare.html
Check out how the AJC has analyzed this information for our readers:
http://hospitals.myajc.com/#infections
Link to a recent AJC story using this information:
http://www.myajc.com/news/news/state-regional/georgia-patients-at-risk-from-hospitalacquired-in/ngJt6/#83132867.233085.735541
---Carrie Teegardin, investigative reporter
It’s an old trick, but a good one. Request copies of every blank forms from the offices
you cover. It will give you an idea of the data they collect and ideas for quick-hit
watchdog/enterprise pieces. For municipalities, it might be something like water meter
complaint forms which could show areas of the city where water is poorly metered,
usually because the meters are old.
If you cover schools, take a look at the contracts of the top tier of leaders
(superintendent, assistant and associate superintendents) and pay attention to the
riders on them. Do they get a take-home car? A car and gas? How much for
professional association memberships and conferences? Sometimes the fine print in the
contracts can add tens of thousands in value to an educators’ salary. Good for budget
season.
--Chris Joyner, watchdog columnist

