What the Hell is R?
And all the other questions you’re afraid to ask
NICAR 2017 Jacksonville
Tisha Thompson
NBC4/WRC-TV
tisha.thompson@nbcuni.com​
@TishaOnTV

Sisi Wei
ProPublica
​sisi.wei@propublica.org
@sisiwei

Basic Terms
CMS
Content Management System, aka what do you use to “manage” content on your website? Every
newsroom has a CMS and many times they’re called different things. Ex: Wordpress
Command Line
A place to type (extremely powerful) commands to your computer. On Macs, it can look like the
picture below. Some programming requires you to use the command line.

Scraping
Using a computer script to extract information from websites. Think of it as a more complicated way
to copy and paste things off the Internet. ​Selenium​ is a program that pretends to be a human and
interacts with a browser, and journalists often use it to scrape websites.
Modeling
Usually refers to statistical or mathematical modeling. Models are usually developed by scientists or
researchers to help us understand how a system works.

AWS
Short for Amazon Web Services. You can pay to have Amazon host your website.
Machine Learning
It’s literally machines learning on their own. Okay, so we give them a little help. But think of this as
artificial intelligence. We teach a computer how to process new data, so that without explicit
instructions, it knows how to process that information. Ex: Netflix’s recommendations for you
Algorithm
Machine learning, math and computer science use a lot of algorithms. They’re basically fancy to-do
lists for computers. Imagine instructions on a recipe that tell you what to do in what order. That’s an
algorithm. For computers, this just means that instead of beating eggs, it compares two numbers.
OpSec
OpSec is short for Operational Security. As a journalist, what should you be doing to make sure your
sources are protected from a software digital privacy perspective?
Hash
A hash looks something like this “DFCD 3454 BAED 1029 CFDF 2019.” It’s a jumble of unreadable text
that, using the right computer program, can turn into real text, like “Hi there Sisi!”
PGP Key/Fingerprint
Using a hash, people can get a PGP Key or personal electronic “fingerprint” that lets you sign, encrypt
and decrypt emails (and other digital stuff) so you can communicate privately but securely.

Coding
Code is just a way for us to talk to computers. Just as there are many languages in real life for us to
talk to each other, there are many programming languages that can talk to computers.
If a website is just made out of boxes of text and images...
HTML​ Is how many boxes are on the page (a box for headlines, a box for each paragraph, etc.)
CSS​ is how those boxes should look (what’s the background color? how tall should the box be?)
JS/Javascript​ - is how and when those boxes should move or change (clicking next on a slideshow
animates the next picture into view)
● jQuery​ - A very popular javascript library that helps you write Javascript more quickly and
efficiently
Ruby, Python
Two very common programming languages. Unlike HTML/CSS/JS, neither Ruby or Python have a focus
on websites. Instead, you can almost use them to program anything you want.

RubyGems, pip
A standard way to manage and install Ruby and Python “packages” that other programmers have
written. Think of packages like a neat little program someone else has written. For example, the NYT
has written a Ruby gem that converts dates into their house style.
NodeJS
Very similar to Ruby and Python, but it uses Javascript syntax.
Rails, Django
These are called “frameworks.” They help you use Ruby and Python to build templates that can
generate hundreds or thousands (or millions) of webpages on the Internet.
API
An easier way for computers to read a website. Many companies make APIs for their websites so that
other programmers can use their company data to make cool projects. Ex: Twitter
Grunt
A program that helps you preview and test the HTML, CSS and Javascript you write, to make sure
everything works and that you’re writing good code.

Data Types
There are many different computer formats that data can come in. Usually these are interchangeable
and data can be converted from one format to another.
CSV -- where commas separate each one data point from another
XML -- where <tags><that><look><like><this> separate data points from each other
JSON -- how Javascript likes its data structured
KML -- same as XML, but with specific ways of defining geographic data
GeoJSON -- same as JSON, but with specific ways of defining geographic data

Visualization
Tableau
Websites or computer programs you can use to make data visualizations. No coding necessary.
D3/d3.js
A javascript library that lets users manipulate data easily. Usually this means people use it to visualize
data.

Mapping
GIS
Stands for “Geographic information system.” A way for computers to understand data as it relates to
a location on Earth.
ESRI
The company that owns ArcGIS.
ArcGIS
A very popular, powerful, and expensive computer program that allows you to make maps.
QGIS
An open-source and free mapping program.
Tilemill
Software that helps you make and publish maps to the Internet.
Leaflet
Two javascript libraries that help you make maps online.
Mapbox
The company behind Tilemill and Leaflet.
Fusion Tables
A google service that allows you to upload data and make maps using Google Maps.
CartoDB
A website where you can make your own maps and publish them online. Has free and paid tiers.
ShapeFile
A file that uses points, lines and polygons to represent a shape. We then use these files to create
maps or shapes on top of maps, from scratch. Ex: county lines, boundaries of a lake

Data Analysis
SQL
A label for any language that is built specifically for managing databases.
MySQL
A very popular database management system.

SQLite
Software that creates an embeddable SQL database, allowing you to make a database without a
server.
PostgreSQL
An even more advanced SQL database management system.
pgAdmin
The admin interface for PostgreSQL
Regular Expressions
Find and replace on steroids. A sequence of characters that that forms a search pattern. You can
search for anything, such as “five characters in a row that are all numbers.”
OpenRefine
Free and powerful software used to clean messy data.

Websites/Services/Products
DocumentCloud
A website that allows you to upload, share and annotate PDFs online. Created by journalists!
Google Analytics
A website created by Google that helps anyone analyze traffic to their website.
CodePen, JSFiddle
Two websites that let you preview and test out HTML, CSS and Javascript, and save and share your
code online.
Tabula
Free software that helps you extract data out of PDFs.
GitHub
A website that allows you to share, track changes, and collaborate on code.
StackOverflow
A popular Q&A website focused on questions specifically about programming.

Statistics
Regression
A statistical technique that estimates the relationship between variables

SPSS
Software you can purchase that does statistical analysis.
R
A free programming language and environment for statistical computing and graphics.
R Studio
Free software that provides a nice environment around R to help you use it better.

