Packaging data stories for digital
Ashlyn Still, Richard Watkins, Brittany Mayes and Sarah Hutchins

Making scientific data
consumable
Brittany Mayes
NPR Visuals
@BritRenee_

Usual daily tasks:
●
●
●

Quickturn daily graphics
Mid-range chart posts
Data analysis

Top tips:
●
●

If you’re not on a visuals team: Loop in your viz
team (and any other relevant teams) early!
If you are on a visuals (or similar) team: take a
proper amount of time to do a quick but in depth
data exploration to familiarize yourself with what
you have.

Find Out What New Viruses Are Emerging In Your
Backyard
http://n.pr/2lkZn30

Looking for a unique visual
approach
Richard (Ric) Watkins
Atlanta Journal-Constitution
@ricwatkins

AJC investigation required a different visual style

●
●

Visually anchoring the series, editors wanted a different look to appeal to a younger
audience. The graphic novel approach was the best way to visually depict real events.
It would be difficult to tell this story entirely through photos.
○ There were legal issues, concern for victim’s privacy,
on going police investigations, etc.

●

Investigative illustration authenticity, each graphic novel-style illustration had to be as
accurate as possible. No artistic liberties could be taken.
○ Illustrations had to be as hyper accurate as possible or it had
to represent a scene not meant to depict a specific person(s).
○ Lots of research! Court documents, victim and police
interviews, as well as my own personal experience.

Visually representing facts

Visualizing police shootings
One topic, multiple approaches
Ashlyn Still
Reuters Graphics
@ashlynstill

How the AJC covered police shootings in Georgia
●

●
●

Database, both public-facing and internal. Reporters entered incident data
into MySQL database via a Django admin, and a data app is baked out from
the database for users to explore every shooting
Interactive data visualizations, both stand-alone and embedded within
featured stories, to walk users through data conclusions via visualization
Visuals and cohesive experience to give the whole project a specific look
and feel

How have other news orgs covered this?
●

Washington Post
○
○
○

●

Seattle Times
○
○

●

One main story page, with animated explainer as a lead in, visualizing the conclusions from
the data
Using questions to explore the data

The Guardian
○
○

●

Database of shooting incidents paired with graphics
Graphics embedded in stories
End of year “conclusions” graphics story - “what we learned”

“The Counted” database of shooting incidents
Social media element

Texas Tribune
○
○

Tracks every incident where police shot a gun at a person
“Scrollytelling” format uses both visuals and text to tell the story

Activity: How would you visualize this dataset?
Topic and background: English language learners are 10% of U.S. public school
students are learning English in schools.
You can think of this data as a starting point or as a compiled dataset from a
reporter.
Questions to ask:
●
●

How might readers want to interact with this data?
How can you make the audience care about this data?

Underlying data: http://bit.ly/2lQb9pk

Email your ideas to:

sarah@ire.org

How NPR handled it...
NPR’s story: http://n.pr/2mg4vXw
Chart post
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Language distribution: maps
○ One larger map and small multiples
Nativity status: column chart
ELL distribution: flip column chart
Identification: simple, designed table
Graduation rate: bullet chart
Teacher shortages: timeline
Gifted: scatter plot

Audience Ideas!

Have a map of the US with an illustration of a student on each state.
By clicking on that illustration, we get the total number in each state,
plus the percent of those learners within the state. I would use a voice
over for the numbers just to keep it interesting.
Then the information can be broken down further by state. And
depending on what the story is or what problems student face, I will
rank the states.

Coming from a perspective where I’m the main data person on our
investigative reporting team, and often create a lot of the interactives for said
stories for the web:
I’d work out of Tableau – my fastest & easiest way to do this.
Take the list of ELLs per state, turn that into a map – rollover gives you the
raw number & percentage, and graduation rates.
Clicking a state activates a secondary table – showing the top languages for
that state
Can activate another table as well – showing data on teacher shortages.
If I’m feeling adventurous, would build it as a Tableau story – with secondary
tabs showing some of the explanatory info.

1 - Select a language and see the distribution of that language in each
state in a map
2 - Show the percentage of non-english speakers for each state.

I'd think about showing what the "average" ELL looks like in
each state — what's their primary language, what grade or
grade range are they most likely to be in, are they foreign or
native born (if that's available at a state level), will they be
more or less likely to graduate than their peers (and will most
of their peers even graduate)?
You could present this as a graph or two of text for each state,
making this an easy option even for newsrooms that don't
have many data-visualization tools at their disposal.

I very quickly
dropped the
learners-per-state
data in a map I
made last week that
had another dataset
in a similar format.
Turned out the real
thing had a
cartogram but hey,
and I remain team
geographic map. :)

1) Choropleth map w/ each state's opacity proportional to its
percentage of ELL students. upon hovering over a state, maybe a
tooltip showing a pie chart of the breakdown of languages for that
state?
2) Based on extremely quick glance it looks like there might be a
correlation between reported teacher shortages and graduation rates of
ELL students (in proportion w/ graduation rates of regular students), so
perhaps a map comparing avg # shortages w/ % graduation rates of
ELL students?

Since we don't have a visuals team on my newsroom, I would use
Tableau or another free tool to create this data visualization:
1. A map to show how are the ELL learners distributed by state (by the
percentage they represent of the student population)
2. When the user clicks on the state it would show the number of
students grouped by their mother language and their citizenship.
3. Create another column chart to show where there are teacher
shortages (this would be another map).

1. State by state maps by percent.
2. Citizenship bar charts.

