Tell me a story I won’t forget
Ellen Gabler, investigative reporter & deputy investigations editor, Milwaukee
Journal Sentinel

Use narrative writing to wind readers through your story
Your job is to tell a story, not write a research paper. Don’t bore people. Build suspense.
Be descriptive but never flowery. Heed the advice of “show, don’t tell.”
Find perfect examples and characters to tell the story
A flawed example or one with limited details will ruin a great story.
Gather mountains of information
Great stories are built through great details. Detail comes from many sources. Ask for
police reports, autopsies, medical records, diaries, old photos, emails and more. You will
use these to build a narrative and pull the reader through a complex topic. If you’re
having trouble writing, you probably don’t have enough information.
Show up
An obvious tip but often ignored. Go there so you can see what’s happening. Report with
your eyes, ears, nose, hands. Sources tend to open up when you meet them in person.
This is especially important when you are writing about something complex or esoteric.
Squeeze details out of your sources
Exhaustively interview people. Don’t be a burden or a weirdo, but ask questions to
download a source’s brain onto your notebook. Ask about thoughts, feelings,
conversations. Ask “What happened next?” “How did you feel when he said that?” Get
comfortable saying, “I don’t understand what you mean.” Don’t be too shy or too lazy to
pick up the phone and ask another question or check a fact.
Stay organized. Think before you write
Do an outline. Arrange how characters, examples and scenes will tell the larger story.
Be disciplined in your writing
Be creative, not predictable. Write simply. Think in scenes. Think like a screenwriter.
Use quotes sparingly, choosing only those that are perfect. Kill clichés and overused
phrases.
Don’t be such a baby about editing
You’re first crack at a story is not perfect and probably isn’t even all that good. Ask
someone to read your work. If they are confused, fix it.

