Requesting records and data under open records law
Ellen Gabler | Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
egabler@jrn.com | @egabler
First, find out what exists
You have to know what exists before you request it. This is often a huge pain but doing work up
front can save you days on the backend of your reporting. It can be confusing and difficult,
especially if government officials are trying to block your path. Do not give up. Some tips:
● Talk to humans. Meet them in person or insist on speaking with them on the phone. Ask
them to walk you through the process of whatever you are reporting. “What happens
during an inspection of the nursing home? Where is the information recorded? What is
that form called? Is information entered into a database? What is it called?
● Read reports - and the footnotes. Reports often explain the paper trail -- what forms
must be submitted or how problems are documented. They also list databases and
records you wouldn’t know exist. My favorites: Anything from the Government
Accountability Office (GAO), Office of Inspector General, articles in medical journals,
Congressional reports, audits.
● Look at forms and online databases. Information collected on a form is likely entered into
a database so you can figure out which fields exist. Caution: What’s available to the
public online might not be all the data fields that exist.
● Ask for a record layout. It explains the structure and complete contents of a relational
database. You’ll be able to see which fields exist, meaning what information is collected,
and can request data accordingly.
Crafting the request
● Ask for media expediting
● Consider breaking up your entire request into smaller pieces
● Understand/ask what can speed your request -- redacting info you might not need. For
example, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission speeds requests if you allow
them to redact company names. There is a ridiculous law that allows companies to be
alerted about your FOIA request, and gives them 60-90 days to respond as to why their
name should not be released. If a company name isn’t important to your story, this is a
major time saver.
● Find out what records have already been released before and request those
Go beyond your initial source
For any story, you should make a list of all the potential documents, datasets and sources that
might help in your reporting. If a particular agency is refusing to release data, see if another
source might have it (county, state or federal government.)
● Agencies often have to report their data to a higher body. Find out who that would be.
● Don’t be afraid to go over someone’s head. Often the person calling the shots for a
records request has more at stake with that particular request. Call their boss and
explain why release of the information is important.

● Get legislators, county board or city council members on your side. Surely they support
an open and accountable government ...
● Apply some peer pressure by broadening your request. If one city or county won’t
release information, request it from all others in your state. Or, go nationwide. You’ll
often receive vastly different responses.
They claim it’s confidential (or offer some other excuse)
Certainly there are records or data that should remain protected but “confidentiality” is an
overused excuse. Educate yourself on the law, find comparable data or records that has been
released by that agency or one similar, and don’t give up just because someone says, “No.”
● Ask to swap “protected” information like names with a unique identifier. Example: I did an
analysis of patients frequenting Milwaukee County’s psychiatric emergency room,
specifically to quantify repeat patients. Surely the county couldn’t release names of
individuals, but we got the same result with unique identifiers.
● Use their own data or records against them. Search the agency’s site and reports to see
if they’ve released similar data. Use that in your reply. I pointed out to a state health
department that it seemed strange they would report incidence of sexually transmitted
infections in specific, small Native American populations yet they refused to report the
number of births at specific hospitals. They released the data the next day.
● Report on their denial and reasoning, especially if it’s ridiculous. For a story on delays in
newborn screening, health officials told me releasing the information would be
“adversarial” to hospitals.

