Zillow Real Estate & Rental Data Products
Real Estate Market Reports
The Zillow Real Estate Market Reports are a monthly overview of national and local real
estate and rental markets. The reports are compiled by Zillow Real Estate Research and
are released on the second-to-last Thursday of every month. The reports include home
values, rents, for-sale inventory, forecasts and foreclosure data at the metro level. For more
information, visit www.zillow.com/research/local-market-reports.
The following metrics and more are also produced monthly and are available for free
download at www.zillow.com/data. Most data is available at the national, state, metropolitan
area, county, city, ZIP code and neighborhood levels.

• List prices (for-sale and for-rent)
• Sale prices
• Home sales
• Sale-to-list price ratio
• Percent of listings with price cuts
• Percent of homes sold for loss/gain
• Percent of homes increasing/decreasing in value
• Percent of homes sold in the past year (turnover)
• Price-to-rent ratio
• Home values and rents per square foot
• Foreclosures
• Mortgage rates
• And many more
Below are more detailed descriptions of our most popular indices and metrics:
Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI)
The Zillow Home Value Index is the median home value for a given area on a monthly basis,
and it includes single-family, condominium and cooperative homes, regardless of whether
they sold within the given month. It is expressed in dollars and is seasonally adjusted.
Zillow Rent Index (ZRI)
The Zillow Rent Index is the median estimated monthly rental price for a given area, and it
covers multifamily, single-family, condominium and cooperative homes in Zillow’s database,
regardless of whether they are currently listed for rent. It is expressed in dollars and is
seasonally adjusted.

Zillow.com/research

For-Sale Inventory
Zillow Research produces raw and smoothed, seasonally adjusted time series of the for-sale
inventory of homes. Each week, the number of single-family, condominium and cooperative
housing units listed for sale on Zillow are counted. This listing count includes standard, real
estate owned (REO) and for-sale-by-owner (FSBO) listings, but excludes pending, auction
and new construction, as well as Zillow’s Make Me Move and Coming Soon listings. The
median of these counts within a month is calculated as the monthly value, and a seasonally
adjusted value is reported. This seasonally adjusted series is then smoothed using a threemonth rolling average.
Negative Equity
The Zillow Negative Equity Report calculates the share and number of mortgaged
homeowners in an area who are underwater on their mortgage, owing more than the value
of their home. The data in the report incorporates mortgage data from TransUnion. The
report includes, but is not limited to, negative equity rates, “effective” negative equity rates
(homeowners with less than 20 percent equity in their home), loan-to-value ratios and
delinquency rates.
Affordability
Zillow’s affordability research measures the share of income needed to purchase or rent
a typical home nationwide and in hundreds of metro markets. Produced quarterly, our
affordability analyses compare the share of income needed to afford an area’s median
housing costs, both currently and compared to long-term, historical averages. For-sale
affordability assumes a buyer making an area’s median income and purchasing the medianvalued home, with 20 percent down and at prevailing interest rates. Rental affordability
assumes a renter making an area’s median income and renting the median-priced rental
property. Affordability metrics are published both as standalone analyses and in combination
with homeownership rates, employment rates, measures of confidence and more to
determine how affordability—or lack thereof—is impacting local housing markets.
Zillow Home Value Forecast
The Zillow Home Value Forecast uses past home value trends and data on current market
conditions, including home sales, months of housing inventory supply and unemployment, to
predict home values over the next 12 months for the country and for more than 250 markets
nationwide.
Breakeven Horizon (Rent vs. Buy)
Zillow’s breakeven horizon calculates the point, in years, at which buying a home becomes
less expensive than renting the same home. It incorporates all costs associated with buying
and renting, including upfront payments, closing costs, anticipated monthly rent and
mortgage payments, insurance, taxes, utilities and maintenance costs. It then factors in
historic and anticipated home value appreciation rates, rental prices and rental appreciation
rates.

Buyer-Seller Index
The Zillow Buyer-Seller Index combines the sale-to-list price ratio, the percent of homes
subjected to a price cut and the time properties spend on the market (measured by days on
Zillow). In this analysis, a sellers’ market is not necessarily one where home values are rising,
but rather one in which homes are on the market for a shorter time, price cuts occur less
frequently and homes are sold at prices very close to (or greater than) their last listing price.
In buyers’ markets, homes for sale stay on the market longer, price cuts occur more frequently
and homes are sold for less relative to their listing price.
Zillow Home Price Expectations Survey
The quarterly Zillow Home Price Expectations Survey is sponsored by Zillow and conducted by
Pulsenomics LLC. The survey asks more than 100 leading economists, real estate experts and
investment and market strategists to predict the path of the U.S. Zillow Home Value Index over
the next five years. The survey also asks the panel to weigh in on current economic trends.
Case-Shiller Forecast
Zillow Real Estate Research forecasts the S&P/Case-Shiller National, 10- and 20-City Home
Price Indices one month before the numbers are officially released. A few hours after CaseShiller releases new data, we forecast data for the next month, with a current median absolute
error of 0.2 percent.
Zillow Group Consumer Housing Trends Report
The largest-ever survey of U.S. home buyers, sellers, owners and renters, this report asked
more than 13,000 U.S. residents aged 18 to 75 about their homes, including how they search
for, pay for, maintain and improve them, and what frustrations and aspirations impact their
decisions. It reveals the major demographic and economic trends of real estate consumers.
The full report is freely available at www.zillowgroupreport.com.

Zillow Research
Zillow® is the leading real estate and rental marketplace dedicated to empowering consumers with data, inspiration
and knowledge around the place they call home, and connecting them with the best local professionals who can help.
In addition, Zillow operates an industry-leading economics and analytics bureau led by Zillow’s Chief Economist Dr.
Svenja Gudell. Dr. Gudell and her team of economists and data analysts produce extensive housing data and research
covering more than 450 markets at Zillow Real Estate Research. Zillow also sponsors the quarterly Zillow Home Price
Expectations Survey, which asks more than 100 leading economists, real estate experts and investment and market
strategists to predict the path of the Zillow Home Value Index over the next five years. Launched in 2006, Zillow is
owned and operated by Zillow Group, and headquartered in Seattle.
Contact Us
For custom data or analysis, email: press@zillow.com
Sign up to receive Zillow press releases: http://zillow.mediaroom.com/press-releases-by-email
Sign up for a biweekly preview of Zillow reports: http://zillow.mediaroom.com/newsletter-signup

Zillow.com/research

