USING SOCIAL MEDIA
AND INTERNET IN REPORTING
Lynda Cohen — BreakingAC.com

Social media can be an amazing place to cull sources, find story ideas and earn your readers’
trust. It’s not just about tweeting and posting links to your stories. It allows interaction and a
more comfortable place for potential sources to speak with you. While it doesn’t replace
footwork, it can help find the right path in getting the story.
Know the basics: In an ever-changing social media world, there are some mainstays. You can
always add on, but you need to have these.
 Facebook allows the most personal interaction. Rather than a page people can like,
have a public friend page that also allows followers. When someone is your friend —
rather than a “like” on you page — you can see their non-public posts. This can help in
finding out what’s going on. It also makes it easier to privately message people when
you’re trying to get help on a story.
 Twitter limits the message, but sometimes 140 characters is just enough — or too
much. Keep it short and interesting. If you’re covering an event, don’t be afraid to tweet a
lot. But don’t just tweet anything. Tweet the interesting tidbits that give color to what
you’re covering and spark people’s interest to read the full story later. Bonus: When
you’re done, you now have easily readable notes, with a timestamp.
 Instagram lets you put out an interesting picture or tidbit of video that can spark interest.
But it’s also a great place to find stories, since there are people out there trying to tell the
untold stories this way.
 YouTube may not be thought of in the social media realm, but it can be a great place to
find stories — and others telling them. Everyone picks up their phone and records these
days, so crazy moments are there. And those get attention when reported about. But
there are also those who have channels because they see stories that need to be told
and aren’t. Look for them to find not only the missed issues, but for great on-the-street
sources that expand you view.

Read the comments: Yes, it goes against everything you’re told or want to do. But, even the
“trolls” may have valid questions that others lurking in the background genuinely want to know.
It’s a way to report more of the story and, in many cases, earns readers’ trust and respect.

Have your own personality: Don’t be afraid to put who you are out there. It’s “social” media.
People don’t want to share their stories with a newspapers, or a site, or a TV station. They want
to share it with a human being.

Build online relationships/partnerships: Is there a Twitter page with lots of followers who
tweets about topics you’re reporting on? Tag them. Tweet to them. Get them to notice you.
Their audience can quickly become your audience — and sources. They also can alert you to
issues/stories/people.
Answer the questions that aren’t asked of you: See a rumor posted or people just wondering
in their own posts about something? Find out what’s going on, and let them know. It could be a
story for you. Or, it could just put an end to an untrue rumor. Either way, people will trust a
reporter they know looks for the facts and gets true information out there.

Social media can be a messy place. From behind a keyboard people are bolder and sometimes
not who they say. The quickness of it can mean wrong information posted once can grow
quickly and become fact to many. But it can also be a place where you see firsthand the impact
of your stories, and how others’ stories can affect the ones you tell.

