COVERING LOCAL GOVERNMENT
IRE WATCHDOG WORKSHOP
STONY BROOK UNIVERSITY
By Keith Herbert, Newsday
APRIL 1, 2017

INSIDE THE OFFICE - Be your own project manager/executive producer when it
comes to your stories and story pitches: Think ahead and from a very early stage
about the "added value" elements beyond the main trunk of your story. These need to
be multi-media included, (sidebars, profile pieces, video, links to earlier stories in
same/related subjects, document hyperlinks, etc). These add the bells and whistles
that help you interest your editor in your concept, make her/his job easier to sell it up
the chain and enable you to have a broader, ideas-sharing, thoughtful conversation
which you want in order to yield the best journalism possible on your chosen topic.
OUTSIDE THE OFFICE - Sometimes we need to be our own PR/reputation
managers when dealing outside the office, not just to get a story, or a fact established,
but to educate sources on the expectation of transparency and accountability. This is
particularly important when it comes to establishing a beat. An early-on round of
public records requests sends a vital message: you're there to check on the integrity of
the process you're reporting on. This is vital when it come to local municipal
reporting where smaller-time bureaucrats are less familiar with (or willfully ignorant
about) open records. You send FOIs and you make it plain, it's just part of the way
you get information and do your work.
BUILD YOU OWN DATABASES – Once you’ve got a handled on the paperwork
flow of the beat, start building your own databases. If you’re on a police beat, turn the
incident reports, crash reports and overtime records into a database that down the road
could turn into an enterprise story. Mundane things like time, location and likely
cause of bike crashes, for example, don’t seem interesting in one or two instances, but
gather 00 or 200 and put them into an Excel spreadsheet and you’ll begin to see
trends that most likely will tell a story.

