Carto basics
the tipsheet
By CJ Sinner, @cjsinner, StarTribune

FIRST:
If you are an IRE member, you get a free upgraded account.​ ​More info here​.

Prep your data
-

-

-

-

You’ll need some form of location field or a plan to merge it with another file that has
locations or polygon shapes.
Helpful to have your datapoints geocoded into lat/longs before uploading. We use a
handy Excel macro at the Star Tribune that uses Bing to geocode. ​Directions and
downloads in our Github repo here​.
Carto georeferences best based on Lat/Long
- Should be in separate columns. Naming them “Lat” or “Latitude” and “Long” or
“Longitude” will help the software recognize what they are.
Addresses can be finicky in Carto, and the free version of the software will only geocode
so many rows for you before it will ask you to pay.
- If you do need to go the address route, keep your street addresses, cities and
states all in different columns.
- You may still get mistake, but you can manually move points or update the data
pulling into an individual cell.
Will also georeference by zip code or administrative region.
If you plan to merge your dataset with a polygon region, make sure they have a column
in common to join/merge on.

Major drawbacks to the FREE version:
- If you have to ask Carto to georeference your data, you may run out of “credits” in a
given time frame (usually a month).
- The size of data storage and vector uploads it will allow. If it throws an error at you for a
filetype that it should take, it could be because you’re going beyond your free capacity.
This makes Carto great for a local newsroom and local stories, but less scalable for
bigger stories or more complex data.

What’s the difference between “Datasets” and “Maps”?
Datasets
- Upload your raw data
- Geocode your data
- Merge with other datasets
- Preview maps
Maps
- Polish maps
- Layer maps
- Publish maps
Both have a “Data View” tab and a “Map View” tab. This can get a little confusing.

Datasets
Upload data
- Filetypes: .xls or .xlsx, .csv, .kml, .zip, .txt, .geojson
- Excel files tend to upload slower
- CSV works best
- KML or zipped shapefiles work well for polygon data (it will not just take the .shp
filetype, for instance, it needs to be the whole zip file collection.)
- Can connect to Google Drive, Twitter, Dropbox, etc. to collect outside data
- Will sometimes require you to use “credits” on your account
- Find shape/polygon data in their “Data Library”
- The library isn’t huge, and is mostly national or international. Don’t be surprised if
you can’t find anything for your state or region. But they do have some larger US
polygons, like states and counties.
- Beware that syncing some of these larger files will count against your allotment
for the month.
Make sure your datatypes have been coded correctly
- If not, there’s a dropdown menu at the label that will allow you to change it to a string,
number, date or boolean. You can also rename your columns in that dropdown.
- It’s not great at treating numbers-as-text columns (like with leading zeroes) as actual
text, even when stored as text. BUT before you upload, if you think this could be a
problem, ​un​check the box that says “Let Carto automatically guess data types and
content on import.” Then it will keep leading zeroes and you can manually select whether
the data type is text, number, date, or boolean.

-

If you’re going to want your percent data to show up as a whole number rather than a
decimal, import it as the whole number -- you cannot do calculated fields in Carto and it
won’t let you move a decimal point for presentation. I sometimes create a “for display”
field in my data with the whole number or percent purely for displaying in the tooltip.

It will also add a column called “the_geom.” This is either the column in your data that it thinks
you want to map (so, it might automatically identify your lats and longs), or it will be left blank
and you’ll have to tell it which column you want to georeference. If you upload or merge with a
shape file, it will just say “polygon.”
Merge datasets! The easiest way is to merge on a common column, but you can also do a
spatial join. The column-based merge operates in a very similar way to Fusion Tables. Go up to
the “Edit” dropdown in the upper right corner, and select “merge with dataset.” Tell Carto which
table you want to combine it with and which column they have in common. Make sure you select
which dataset (probably the shapefile) you want to use “the_geom.” It will generate a new table
to start mapping.

Start building your map
Toggle from “data view” to “map view” to start mapping. Carto will attempt to suggest maps for
you. Sometimes these are right, sometimes they’re not.
Use the “Wizards” panel to look through your options for different types of maps. It will select
numerical columns to map, but you can change those if it’s picking ones that are completely
arbitrary.
There are some customization limits to some maps. For example, cluster maps can’t have
infoboxes. Torque maps only work with point data, not polygons.
Try toggling to </> icon to custom edit infoboxes and legends with basic HTML.
Try the CSS tab to edit the color palettes with custom hex codes or to alter where your
choropleth buckets break.
Change the basemap design in the upper lefthand corner.
Use the SQL or Filter tabs to filter out certain data, and it can create a new table based on that
query. I have done this when I want to isolate, say, a group of neighborhood boundaries in a
new map.

Get your map (more) ready to publish
If you want to publish this thing or add another layer, this is where you need to toggle to
“Visualize.”
This will import your dataset into the “Maps” section. You can still make any changes to the map
here in terms of style, basemap, editing the infoboxes and legends, etc.
Add another layer by hitting the blue plus sign at the top of the editing panel.
Try adding annotations and text boxes, and previewing for mobile. (top left)
An “Options” button in the lower window gives even more options for things like a search box or
scroll wheel zoom.
Then, when you feel you’re happy with it, select “Publish” to get an embed code.
The embed code will inherit whatever zoom level and center point you have left it on (and it auto
saves periodically)

Did you make updates after publish?
Sometimes I can’t know until it’s on the page whether my zoom level was quite right or whether
the center point I’ve chosen means some of the map will get cut off by the legend. Luckily, if you
go back into the map file and make any edits, it will automatically save and you won’t need to
grab a new embed code; it should just update automatically!

