How to Bulletproof Your Data Story

Questions Editors Can Ask
Reporters on Data Stories
• How can I be sure that you didn’t double count fields? (The
reporter should be able to show you how he or she checked for
this.)
• Do we have the universe or just a subset? If just a subset, how
did we choose it and how to we know it is representative of the
whole?
• You have a percentage or total in the story, but how many
people (or companies, etc.) is that calculation based on? (66%
looks less impressive if you realize the reporter only talked to 3
companies.)
• If you used data from a source other than the original, how do
you know if it’s up-to-date? Can we check it with the original
source? (For example, Open Secrets data can be behind FEC
data.)
• Was the data self-reported? If so, was rigorous vetting of the
data enforced? How do you know?
• You matched names, but didn’t have birthdates or social
security numbers. How did you verify the matches? Did you
verify every single match or just spot check?

Double Trouble

Education Data: College Scorecard
The ID number is for each CAMPUS but there is also a ID number for each
system. Note that the loan repayment rate is the same number for all campuses.

Name Matching Peril
Which One is Jenn?
• Jennifer S. Forsyth
• Age: 50
• White, Female
• Resume: journalist,
former law editor
• Graduate school:
1990 (Columbia
University)
• Address: Clifton,
NJ; Dallas; New
York

• Jennifer C. Forsyth
• Age: 53
• White, Female
• Resume: lawyer,
former legal editor
• Law school: 1990
(University of Wisc.Eau Claire)
• Address: San
Francisco,
Washington,
Denver

Showing Your Homework
• Did you have to do any data entry yourself and, if so,
who checked it behind you?
• Have you talked about the data with the agency that
produced it? Do you understand how it was collected,
and for how long, and what its purpose was?
• Did you run your data analysis by an expert in the
field? How did you find and vet the expert? Was the
expert already familiar with this data?
• Did you ask the expert: “What am I missing? What
could I have done wrong?”
• Have you thoroughly explained your data analysis to
the subject(s) of your investigation? Did they push
back? If so, how?

When Subjects of Stories Push Back
(photo credit: Getty Images)

Baltimore Felony Conviction Rates Fall Under
State’s Attorney Marilyn Mosby
Felony convictions in Baltimore dropped soon after the city’s top
prosecutor took office in January 2015, and the lower rate has
persisted at a time of increased violent crime, an exclusive data
analysis by The Wall Street Journal found.
Under State’s Attorney Marilyn Mosby, Baltimore has posted quarterly
felony conviction rates that have been lower than those under her
predecessor, Gregg Bernstein, who served from 2011 through 2014, an
analysis of court records shows.
About 53% of felony cases closed since Ms. Mosby took office have ended in
conviction, compared with 67% the previous four years, the Journal found.
The result is similar when comparing just cases involving violent crimes,
such as assault or robbery.

The Journal examined all closed felony cases from 2011 through August
2016. It counted cases that ended in verdicts or guilty pleas as well as those
in which prosecutors dropped or set aside charges. That approach mirrors a
method commonly used by criminologists and the U.S. Justice Department. If
a defendant was found guilty of any charge—not just the most serious ones—
it counted as a conviction. …

Ms. Mosby… said her office has won convictions in more than
90% of felony cases, but her methodology excludes cases her
office dropped. She said some other district attorney’s offices
calculate conviction rates that way. Ms. Mosby’s numbers
nonetheless indicate her conviction rate on that basis is slightly
lower than previous Baltimore state’s attorneys since 2008.

https://www.wsj.com/articles/baltimore-felony-conviction-rates-fall-under-states-attorney-marilyn-mosby-1479834018

When Data Are Cherry Picked
(Photo credit: Emma Allen, Marlborough Express)

Cities Grapple With Rising Murder Rates
March 12, 2016 -A continuing rise in homicides in some U.S. cities during the first
two months of 2016 is rattling officials hoping last year’s surge
was an aberration in the decadeslong decline in the country’s
murder rate.
This year, Chicago has seen 109 murders through March 11,
almost double last year’s total during the period. Los Angeles has
tallied 51 murders through March 9, a 21% increase from 2015.
The growing body count appears to be driven by renewed gang
feuds and surging violence linked to the drug trade, lawenforcement officials said.
In other cities, the upward trend has reversed. New York City
homicides dropped to 48 this year through March 9 from 64 in
2015.

When Official Data Suck
(Photo Credit: Getty Images)

Common Bugaboos in Collecting
Your Own Data
• Sample isn’t big enough. (How many cities, colleges,
school districts, etc. is enough?)
• Data sample isn’t the entire universe or
representative of the universe.
• Time period isn’t long enough. We don’t have enough
data to look at meaningful change over time.
• Data we’ve gathered is cherry picked and is
influencing the outcome.
• The data was self-reported or has too many holes.

Hundreds of Police Killings Are
Uncounted in Federal Stats
WASHINGTON—When 24-year-old Albert Jermaine
Payton wielded a knife in front of the police in this city’s
southeast corner, officers opened fire and killed him.

Yet according to national statistics intended to track police
killings, Mr. Payton’s death in August 2012 never happened.
It is one of hundreds of homicides by law-enforcement
agencies between 2007 and 2012 that aren’t included in
records kept by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
A Wall Street Journal analysis of the latest data from 105
of the country’s largest police agencies found more than 550
police killings during those years were missing from the
national tally or, in a few dozen cases, not attributed to the
agency involved. The result: It is nearly impossible to
determine how many people are killed by the police each
year….

To analyze the accuracy of the FBI data, the Journal
requested internal records on killings by officers from the
nation’s 110 largest police departments. One-hundred-five of
them provided figures.
Those internal figures show at least 1,800 police killings in
those 105 departments between 2007 and 2012, about 45%
more than the FBI’s tally for justifiable homicides in those
departments’ jurisdictions, which was 1,242, according to the
Journal’s analysis. Nearly all police killings are deemed by the
departments or other authorities to be justifiable.
The full national scope of the underreporting can’t be
quantified. In the period analyzed by the Journal, 753 police
entities reported about 2,400 killings by police. The large
majority of the nation’s roughly 18,000 law-enforcement
agencies didn’t report any.

https://www.wsj.com/articles/hundreds-of-police-killings-areuncounted-in-federal-statistics-1417577504

When Verification is Challenging

Verification Tips
• Cleanup can teach you about
your data.
• Seek backup sources.
• Report it out.

Best practices for data stories
• Sit by the reporter and make him or her show you the
spreadsheets and calculations. Even if you aren’t a
programmer, you’ll be surprised at the questions you find
yourself asking.
• Ask reporters to send in a detailed explanation of their
methodology early in the process. Edit it at that point as if it
were being published immediately, both for clarity and for
logic. If you don’t understand it, the story itself isn’t ready
for editing.
• Ask the reporter for the record layout so you know what
fields she chose and what the whole data set had in it.
• Resist the urge to “write around” what is inconvenient in
the findings or what is not easily explained. Point out
problems with the data and your unknowns—or your
readers and critics will.
• Ask IRE members for help, including from NICAR-L
• Don’t publish complex data stories on deadline. Don’t.

How to reach us
• Joel Engelhardt, investigations editor, The Palm Beach Post
(561) 820-4732
jengelhardt@pbpost.com
@JoelEpbpost
• Jennifer Forsyth, deputy investigations chief, The Wall
Street Journal
(212) 416-3741
jennifer.forsyth@wsj.com
@ForsythJenn

(Photo credit for front slide: Oliver Peterson)

