Social media sleuthing

Techniques depend on your goal...

bit.ly/nicar17socialsleuthing
Steve Myers, The Lens, ​@myersnews

Breaking news:
● Is this a real person?
● Are they who they say they are?
● Do they live in the place where this happened?
● Would they be in a position to witness this event?
● Do they have a track record on social media?
● Do they have a record of hoaxes or jokes? Do they demonstrate news literacy?
General source backgrounding:
● Where do they live?
● Where do they work?
● What do they look like?
● Married or single? Children?
● Where did they grow up?
● Where did they go to high school and college?
● Liberal, conservative or something else?
● Religious?
● Rent or own?
Investigative:
● Who are their business partners?
● Who are their political allies?
● Who do they talk to?
● Where do they get their money?
● Where do they get their ideas?
● Who do they owe money to?
● Who have they been involved in a conflict with?
Cross-reference social and online database searches. (​Example​ in Lens story)
Take notes on connections, interests, favorite locations (e.g. “John Doe mentioned Jane Doe in
this tweet; he posted a photo with her here”), with links and screenshots
● Awesome Screenshot
● Twitter Collections

●

DownThemAll​: downloads all links and images on a page

Collect clues, but don’t read too much into them. Sometimes a retweet is just a retweet. A photo
of two people together could mean more.
Record your reporting so you know what you’ve done. Everything leads to something else, and
it’s easy to forget what you were doing 10 minutes ago.
These tools change all the time, and there are bits of incorrect information everywhere. Use
these as leads, not confirmed facts.
Work your way in from the outer circles. Don’t just start at the center by looking for your target.

Looking to research a hashtag or assess how people feel about a given topic? Read this Knight
Lab post: “​Six social search tools to help journalists find and analyze trends on Twitter​”

Who are they?
“​Who is John Doe and where to get the paper on him​” - good reminder of different types of
information available based on things that have happened to them (been arrested, been sued,
etc.)
Spokeo​ (paid) - look up by name, email address (cc’s on emails), address, phone number
Pipl
Peekyou
Facebook member directory
Standard Facebook search (scroll down to “see all results for XXX” to filter by location,
connections
Spydialer
VIN lookup
Facesaerch​ (hasn’t worked for me)

Once you have a name
Rapportive​: Gmail plugin that looks up LinkedIn profiles (suggest entering possible email
addresses and hovering over them
Paul Myers’ social network search
Addict-o-matic​: General overview from variety of sources
Socialmention
Who’s Talkin
LinkedIn advanced search​: who they work with and used to work with
Prisoner lookup

Obituaries are great places to learn who’s related to whom.

Targeting with Twitter
Basic Twitter search: See who mentioned them and how
Snap Bird​: search user’s tweets for particular keyword (Can also do with ​All My Tweets​, which
puts all tweets of user on a single web page)
InteleTechniques’ Custom Twitter Tools​ (some of these available with ​advanced Twitter search​;
here’s a ​tutorial​)
● Incoming tweets: who sent @ replies (not just mentions)
● Media posts- photos, videos (also: https://twitter.com/USERNAME/media/ )
● “Friends” (they follow one another)
○ And then see what they say to one another with ​advanced Twitter search​: tweets
from @X account to @Y account
● Friends in common-see who runs in the same circles
Use private Twitter lists if you don’t want to follow them publicly

Targeting with Facebook
What groups are they part of?
Facebook Graph searches​ (depends on privacy settings; need to first enter user’s Facebook
URL: facebook.com/USERNAME)
● Posts they commented on
● Photos of the person
● Photos tagged with the person
● Locations visited
Same thing but much more extensive: ​IntelTechniques’ Facebook search​ (choose “Facebook”
from menu on the left; same search method as above)
● Employers
● Groups
● Coworkers
● Followers
● Relatives
● Multiple variables:
○ Current/past employer
○ Current/previous location

○
○
○

School
Places visited
Where born

Things I don’t know how to do
See which Twitter user has mentioned another user the most
Cross-reference companies and connections on LinkedIn (People directly connected to John
Doe who used to work at Company X)
Others?

