Investigating
Troubled Schools

DeVos and Detroit
Or how one powerful family helped create the nation’s
worst-performing schools

Betsy DeVos
• What we knew: The DeVos family paid for the cabinet position by way
of campaign contributions. The DeVos education and political
activism is the major reason school reform was the most significant –
and failing – education reform movement in Michigan over the past
20 years
• What we had to do: a story for local and national audience

Step one: rinse and repeat
• DPS: lowest NAEP scores in history, closed two-thirds of schools since
2005, lost more than 100,000 students while charter schools grew to
100 schools educating majority of Detroit’s children; inner ring
suburbs gained Detroit’s students while white suburbanites fled
further away
• Bridge had already defined the impact school reform (specifically
choice) has had on Detroit’s school system:
http://www.bridgemi.com/talent-education/betsy-devos-andsegregation-school-choice
• Key: charts and moving parts (maps, graphics, video w/DJC)

KEEP it SIMPLE:
data and impact
• http://www.bridgemi.com/talent-education/betsy-devoss-michigan-legacy
• We explained Detroit before and after school reform (specifically charters)
• And the DeVos philosophy and impact, including donations to local and
national political parties, critics and allies
• Also, DeVos’ big recent move: killed an accountability bill for Detroit
because it would’ve required additional oversight of charter schools
• The Big reveal: DeVos on Detroit – she didn’t have any connection or
familiarity with Detroit, the city most affected by the DeVos education
activism

EASY TRICK$
At the beginning of each fiscal year, get these documents/data for your beat dashboard:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

Personnel database or list of every school employee by name, title, work site and salary. Also try for
database of every student (if available)
The check register shows every penny that is spent, who gets money and the reason; it also details
spending by department and fund (Title I, etc) . https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/detroit/pressreleases/2011/former-detroit-public-schools-official-sentenced
The purchasing database or list of contractors (same story)
Annual district-generated info: annual report because it provides an overview of what the district
accomplished and its plans for the coming years – something to hold the district accountable to. Annual
audit, Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR), expulsion database, FRL by building, School
Improvement Plan or Curriculum Overview.
Complaint log. If your district has a complaint line or ombudsman FOIA the complaint log. Regularly. It is a
goldmine that should also include names and contact info of the complainant
Poll the teachers. The ultimate in crowd sourcing. Be sure to have a open-ended comment section – this
is gold. (2011, Detroit Free Press used Survey Monkey to poll teachers and found 8 percent of educators
in Michigan said they changed grades inappropriately within the last school year. Some admitted to
unknowingly cheating on state tests)

Really EASY TRICK$:
• Show up off the grid! Leave the notebook in the car. Be a person “of” the
community, not “in” the community.
• Where’s the watering hole? Become a regular (this may require an ambassador)
• Major sports championship games, popular events (Evening of Fine Arts, 3.5 GPA
banquet). Show up. Bring your kids. No kids? Borrow some. For real.
• Union meetings. When a big issue such as a contract vote happens, just go to the
meeting. You might get in… and insight. http://www.bridgemi.com/talenteducation/echoing-state-detroit-schools-cut-back-standardized-tests
• Exit interview key figures who depart. Now is the time to ask them for
documents or stories they refused to give you otherwise.
• Volunteer. For real. Read to some kids for “Reading” month. Go to Career Day.
With treats. Off-the-grid face time is priceless for sourcing.

