TIPSHEET

Going long on middleform
http://bit.ly/middleform
Tom Cardoso
Graphics Editor, The Globe and Mail
@tom_cardoso
Darla Cameron
Interactive Graphics Editor, The Washington Post
@darlacameron
Maureen Linke
Digital News Developer, The Associated Press
@maureenlinke
Sarah E. Frostenson
Graphics Reporter, Vox
@sfrostenson
Stuart A. Thompson
Graphics Director, The Wall Street Journal
@stuartathompson

What is middleform, even?
Storytelling that takes longer than a day but less than a month to produce.

Why middleform?
It’s a really useful format for graphic storytelling: gives a visual journalist enough time to research,
develop and build a bespoke graphics/visual package, but with a quick enough turnaround time that
they won’t burn out or lose their news peg.

Middleform graphics at The Washington Post
The places in America most exposed to a trade war
Time to publish:​ one week
● Ana Swanson, who is a particularly visually-savvy business reporter, got the data for this and
asked for our help making a story out of it. She wrote the text, Ted Mellnik crunched the data
and I created the graphics and published the piece in our template. Later, two of the graphics
ran separately in print and AI2HTML made that conversion process simple.
How sanctuary cities work, and how Trump’s executive order might affect them
Time to publish:​ three weeks
● The idea for this came about during the transition as a reporter and I were brainstorming how
cities might push back against Trump's policies. I ended up working solo on this, gathering
data and doing interviews to build a diagram showing how the deportation process plays out.

Tips
●

●
●

●
●

●

We've found that narrowing project so the reporting, drawing and publication process only
lasts a week or two is a great way to produce our own visual explainers and analysis in the
graphics department.
AI2HTML and ArchieML are key tools for producing and publishing middleform graphics
quickly.
Our editing team holds daily office hours- 30-minute meetings where we can sign up for a
review session to pitch a new project, show a working prototype or submit a graphic for a final
visual edit. This has been key for working quickly and still producing pieces with depth.
When measuring success in these pieces, we pay attention to engagement — do readers
scroll through the entire graphic? — and recirculation.
We add interactivity when it can add to the story — for example, in a graphic where
geolocating the reader could provide important local context, or when search and sorting
would be helpful. We try to stay away from tooltips and animation when it's not adding to the
story.
Sometimes these graphics don't need a specific news peg, but we aren't afraid of publishing
something that will be quickly made obsolete by the news if it's a recurring coverage area. A
good example are graphics explaining the president's immigration executive actions — these
are dense topics that benefit from a visual approach, whether or not the story will change
later.

Middleform graphics at the AP
Instagram Inauguration parade
Total time:​ 2 weeks (1 week development)
● Part of the time was spent training reporters on Instagram and coordinating with the rest of
the newsroom, while the rest was spent on development.
● This came together rather quickly after the holidays and was successful because it was
focused and well-communicated.
● The map of the route ran in print.

Tracking Trump's first 100 days
Total time:​ 1 week
● I created this based on Trump's contract with voters that he released while he was on the
campaign trail as a way to see how much he could accomplish in 100 days but also hold him
accountable.
● I knew this would be used multiple times and that reporters would right a series of 100 day
stories
Tips
●
●
●
●
●

Pick a focus for the project. It should do or explain one thing well.
Choose a technical approach that you know you can execute in a short period of time. It
doesn't always have to be interactive.
Be selective about how many other people are involved.This makes it easier to complete the
project on a quicker timeline.
Ideas which are off the news, but not breaking, can lend themselves to middleform
(examining something from a different angle).
If possible, do something that will continue to be of use. Doesn't have to be evergreen but
should have legs.

Middleform graphics at Vox
Slides​:
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1kCnd3Jz5Zb7j0e2xdk9dx2fEnTsmH9og0IHKx8FrsEs/edit#sli
de=id.g210c7ea3a5_0_0
Thoughts on my middleform approach to graphics at Vox:
1) Build reproducible workflows that allow for experimentation, but also the ability to generate
multiple in-depth graphic stories without always requiring a heavy lift
Big insurers have quit Obamacare. That means more shoppers only get one choice.
Time to publish:​ 4 days
This was an editorial app I built (with a technical assist from my colleague Soo Oh), and reporting
from Sarah Kliff. The app itself was not a huge traffic driver, but it allowed us to experiment with form
and really over deliver visually on the story of insurers pulling out of the ACA marketplace.
So in retrospect, what was most important about this project is that it gave me an opportunity to
become familiar with ACA marketplace data and build a ​reproducible workflow​ so I could quickly
generate updated graphics when new data was made available. Plus, we open sourced our data so
other reporters could use it (official government data was only made public in the fall).
Additionally, this longer middleform piece generated smaller pieces I could deliver on quickly.
●

●

I used the data Sarah and I collected (published about a week later) that looked at insurers
pulling out of rural counties
http://www.vox.com/2016/8/31/12646348/insurers-quit-obamacare-rural-america
And this is what Sarah and I published the day Healthcare.gov released their marketplace
data in the fall:
http://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/10/26/13407610/obamacare-counties-one-insur
er

2) Building up to middleform graphics sometimes requires expertise in a subject area, so not
everything you produce will be experimental in form or award-winning. And that's ok.
At Vox, they prioritize each of us being a subject matter expert on a particular beat, which means
trade-offs are involved when it comes to graphics. As a result, I now often approach stories and ideas
more incrementally, building towards longer middleform pieces where I can experiment more with
form and presentation.
An example of this is the work Julia Belluz and I have done on why Americans are dying younger.
We're approaching it from a bunch of different angles and are working towards a larger piece that
explores this question in depth, but in order to get to that larger experimental piece, we have to first do
smaller pieces that better acquaint us with the research.
Two examples of more "middleform-esque" pieces I did are a story on m
​ aternal mortality in the US
and another story on the increasing ​polarization of public health.

And then here are three examples of the quicker turn-around pieces that have helped to inform our
understanding and will ultimately shape our more in-depth tackling of the question of why Americans
are dying younger:
http://www.vox.com/2016/12/13/13926618/mortality-trends-america-causes-death-by-county
http://www.vox.com/2017/2/21/14684686/america-south-korea-life-expectancy
http://www.vox.com/2016/12/8/13875150/life-expectancy-us-dropped-first-time-decade

Middleform graphics at The Wall Street Journal
Examples:
http://graphics.wsj.com/infectious-diseases-and-vaccines/
Time to publish:​ three days
Two designer-developers worked on this for a few days to convert the data and build the chart using
Highcharts library. It won "Data Viz of the Year" at the Data Visualization Awards
http://graphics.wsj.com/supreme-court-diversity/
A designer-developer and a data journalist worked together for about two weeks on this concept.
Storyboarded it and wrote it independently of the rest of the newsroom.
Tips
●

●

●

●

●

Have a clear pitch process that includes clear "no"s and enthusiastic "yes"es. We start with a
form that includes: headline, tweet text, summary, sketch (if available), news peg, and time to
complete
Dedicate specific efforts to producing this kind of work. That means holding visual story
meetings weekly and looking for opportunities to tell new stories and explain the news in a
visual way. This bypasses many structures in traditional newsroom that make this work
tertiary. When you try to specifically do visual journalism, you choose different stories that are
better suited to it.
Decide who your stakeholders are and who you shouldn't listen to. Define at the start of a
project who has a say and who doesn't. Do this by weighing their power in the newsroom and
stake in the project you're working on. Desk editors and bureau chiefs have higher power and
high concern for your project, while maybe web editors or social team has lower power and
lower stakes. Vet your projects through only the people who matter to avoid over-editing.
Focus on the story. Cut anything that's not in service of the story, like flashy interactivity.
Avoid programming anything if you can help it (ai2html helps with this). When you do program
something, think about making it a tool or repeatable piece of code you can use next time.
Avoid "evergreen" projects. Readers don't use the internet this way. The exception: if you can
specifically resurface it later with a writethru or update that makes it relevant again.

