Google Trends: Understanding the Data
What is Google Trends?

Google Trends allows you to see the topics people are—or aren’t—following, in real time. Journalists can
use this information to explore potential story ideas, and can also feature Trends data within news stories
to illustrate a general level of interest in, say, a political candidate, social issue or event.
Google Trends is a powerful dataset to use in reporting because:
1. It draws from an ​extraordinary scale ​with over 3 billion searches a day on Google Search
2. Google Search data is an ​honest ​reflection of user interest, with people candidly typing their
questions or curiosities into their search bar
3. The data offers ​immediacy​ in gauging the pulse of the people, with data fresh as of the last 3-5
minutes

Anatomy of Google Trends

When you go to ​google.com/trends​, you’ll immediately see three different portions on the landing
page:

1. Featured Insights
a. Each of the stories on the carousel have been curated by our News Lab curation
team.
b. The goal of these stories is to offer a starting place for a user to see the possibilities
with Google data.
c. All data on a featured insights page is embeddable by clicking on the upper right
hand corner of each graph and copying the HTML snippet.
2. Stories Trending Now
a. Stories trending now” offers a live feed of algorithmically trending stories.
b. These stories can be filtered to see trending stories across different countries or for
specific topics, such as business or entertainment.
c. This feed updates dynamically using three detection signals from Google Search,
YouTube, and News.
d. The trending stories are presented as a collection of topics that are being searched
in tandem across these platforms.
e. For each story, we show a sparkline that shows where in the lifecycle a story is.
3. Explore Toolbar
a. The Explore toolbar is where you can experiment with your own analysis.
b. When typing a term into the toolbar, a dropdown will appear showing either the
specific search term or a topic.
i.
We recommend using the topic when possible. The topic encompasses all
the different ways someone might search, including different spellings or
different languages.
c. You can filter for data starting from 2004.
i.
For any data within the last 7 days, you’ll see results up to the last 3-5
minutes.
ii.
If the data goes back further than the last 7 days (i.e. last 30 days, from 2004
to now, etc.), there will be a 36 hour lag.
d. Geographically, data is available worldwide up to metropolitan areas.
e. On the “interest over time” graph, the numbers represent search interest relative to
the highest point on the chart for the given region and time. A value of 100 is the
peak popularity for that term. A value of 50 means that term is half as popular. All
data is normalized.
f. The “interest by region” chart shows where a term or topic was most popular during
the specified time frame. Values are calculated on a scale from 0 to 100, where 100 is
the location with the most popularity as a fraction of total searches in that location.
g. Rising queries and topics show searches with the biggest increase in search interest
since the time prior. “Breakout” searches had a tremendous increase, because these
queries were new and had few, if any, prior searches.
h. Top queries and topics show the most popular searches. Scoring is on a relative scale
where a value of 100 is the most commonly searched query.
i. All data on an Explore page is embeddable by clicking on the upper right hand corner
of each chart and copying the HTML snippet.

