QGIS I - workshop, Nicar 2017
Christine Jeavans & John Walton
@chrisjeavans @walt_jw
QGIS is a powerful and complex piece of software but journalists can get excellent
results from a couple of relatively simple functions. It’s useful for data exploration as well
as for producing data maps for publication, and it’s free!
These are the full follow-along instructions from the NICAR session with a worked
example.
Download the example data for this session
Opening QGIS
Latest download ​http://www.qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html
Earlier versions, inc the one we are using today
http://download.osgeo.org/qgis/windows/
And earlier versions for Mac ​http://www.kyngchaos.com/software/archive
There are lots of versions as it is frequently updated. The version we are using here is
2.14 ​or ​Essen, ​it's not the newest version but it should be robust.
TIP​ Be aware that QGIS projects are not always backwards-compatible so when you
update, you may have to rebuild old projects.
Finding your way around
Your QGIS should look something like this. It may not be exactly the same, depending
on the edition and whether the panels and toolbars have been moved around but it
should have these functions. The version for Mac looks slightly different.

You need two basic ingredients for most QGIS maps 1) a ​shapefile ​which is the map on which you will display your data.
2​) a ​data file​, usually a CSV, which contains the information you want to display
There are other options - for example you can bring in a highly detailed aerial
photograph.

Adding a shapefile
When people talk about a shapefile, or you go looking for one, you actually need a
collection of files which all correspond to each other. They are often found in zip files.
In the folder for this workshop, find the sub-folder called U
​ S county shapefiles

There are eight files in there including:
● .shp ​the geometry drawing file. It's a "​vector​" file
● .dbf​ a database file with all the text based information such as the name of a
county or the ID code
● .shx​ an index file which ties the two together
● .prj​ contains the projection information
You need to keep these files in the same folder so QGIS can reference them and they
must all keep the same prefix as each other.

Go back to QGIS and click the button which looks like a V with dots on it - this will ​open
a vector​ ​layer
Browse to the folder we were just looking at and select the shapefile itself
tl_2015_us_county.shp
Hit ​open ​and you should see a map forming and you have a layer in your layers panel
(​You could also ​add a shapefile by ​using the dropdown in the Layer menu, or by
dragging and dropping from the folder​)
Save your project!
TIP​ - QGIS works in projects which are temporary arrangements of the files which you
have told it to look at. This means that if you move or rename a file then it will no longer
appear in your QGIS project. For this reason it is a good idea to keep your files for a
map all in one folder. Your map is not a permanent object until you export it in some
form. Beware having some files on pen drive only!

Finding your way around the shapefile
You should have now have a map of all of the counties in the US, including overseas
territories, so we are very zoomed out.
But you can easily zoom in, either with the mouse wheel when the touch zoom button is
selected (PC only) or with the other zoom buttons at the top.
Avoid using the trackpad on a Mac as you will skeeter all over the place.

Pan

​to grab and move around

Zoom​

use in normal way or draw rectangle of the view you wish to zoom to

Full extent​

is useful if you get lost in the map. It resets to the original view

Forward & back​

zoom levels step you back/forwards through previous views

Notice as you zoom in and out the lines stay crisp. That's because a vector file is
generated mathematically, rather than being an image. So in theory you could magnify
this to any size and it would stay true.
This also means that you can project the map in different ways - ​more about projections
here​.

TIP ​if you have a very detailed shapefile and moving around is slowing you down, toggle
off the render button at the bottom right, perform your move or zoom, then switch it back
on. It means QGIS is not trying to constantly draw.
Identify features
Zoom into the Florida area using the zoom buttons or mouse wheel.

This button
area or a point.

is ​identify features​, which reveals the information attached to an

If you click on one of the counties you will see the ​Identify results panel​ open. ​On
some versions this is a tab, with the Layers panel, on others it is a separate floating
panel.

The panel shows the information which the shapefile already holds about this county​: the
county name, it tells you the state id code which is 12 for Florida and it has a field called
GEOID which will be important later. Other info in there includes land area and water
area.
Attribute table
And we can look at this information another way by viewing the attribute table.
It will show all the data in the shapefile as a table with, in this case, one row per county.

Styling
Final thing before we add some data - you may want to change the background colour.
Double click on the layer name in your Layers panel and it will bring you up a menu.
Select the second item: ​Style

Several ways to change the colour ● Simple: the dropdown next to Color gives you recent and standard colours
● Full: clicking on the colour itself, gives you a full range of options.
● Or click on simple fill and you can also change the colour there

TIP​ When you use QGIS regularly you can set your own colour palettes and save them
as style files which can be shared with colleagues or reused by you. Eg house mapping
style, political parties' colours.
Choose one which you like, hit apply and OK
Save your project

ADDING DATA
There are two main ways of adding data - adding point data and joining area data.
Your data needs to be a ​delimited text file​ - most often this will be a CSV file. You can't
import an excel workbook.
In your data:
● Make sure your first row has column headers
● Keep column headers short and single words or use underscore _ and no
spaces
● Do not have notes in columns, it should just be the data
● Try to make sure that your data is as clean and consistent as possible,
sometimes text in a numbers column can mean QGIS thinks the whole
column is text.
● Keep symbols out of the data - eg don't have 100% in a cell, just use 100

The data set we have are two cuts of a not very cheery data set - fatal road traffic
accidents in Florida in 2015.
It comes from a massive data set of all the fatal road traffic accidents in the US and it is
very detailed so we are using a cut down version here.
Adding area data via a join
Now we will look at the first key way of entering data - joining it to your map.
We do this by using a common ID shared by the shapefile and the data, and we will display
the results by county. Often called a heatmap but it's properly called a ​chloropleth​.

●
●
●
●
●

Use the ​add delimited text layer ​button
Browse in ​Fatals_fl_county_pop
It’s a CSV so keep that button checked
Discard 0 lines and the first record has field names
There is nothing inherent in the file which tells you how to map it straight away so
choose ​No geometry

You get a preview of the data - it shows the total number of road accident deaths ​per
county

●
●

●
●
●

First column is the county code
Then a FIPS code which is a ​unique ID​ for each county - it's the county number
prefixed by 12 which is the Florida state code - this is what we are going to be using
to join the data to the shapefile
County name
Sum of fatalities over the year
And then we have population and a rate too

Hit OK
Joining data
We’ve now imported the data but nothing will show up until we integrate it with the shape file.
We do that with a join.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Highlight your ​shapefile ​in layers
Double click to open the Layer properties
Go to ​joins
Click the green plus at the bottom
Join layer - ​fatals_fl_county_pop​ .
Join field​ - this is where you have to tell it which column to use in the ​data​ - the
FIPS​ column.
Target field​ - this is the corresponding column in the shapefile. It's called ​GEOID
OK

Now hit apply and OK.

Nothing has changed.... or rather it ​looks ​as though nothing has changed but if you use the
identify features ​button again, this time you will see that it gives you some extra fields in
your results panel which come from the data so we know the join has worked.
Next we need to style it.
Styling the area data
This is where you will tell the shape file how to display the data it now contains
●
●

Open Layer properties > Style
Pick the third dropdown option: ​Graduated

●

Column​ - it offers you the columns which it thinks are numbers. NB if you hadn't
have done the join, it would not see the two options starting fatals_fl_ in there as your
shapefile wouldn't know about them.
Choose ​fatals_fl_county_pop_FATALS_SUM
Colour ramp​ keep as blue for now but there are lots of options in there
Mode​: This is where you decide on a way of splitting it up - see below for more info
on these options. It defaults to ​Equal Interval. ​And just above it, you can set the
number of classes.
Hit Classify, Apply, OK

●
●
●

●

Now your map should colour up.

You'll notice that we're now looking only at Florida. That's because they were the only
counties which we joined. The rest of the shapefile is still there, we're just not seeing it.
TIP​ It sometimes can be hard to find data with codes already attached. Often it will have
county name but not the code. You may have to do some wrangling to get your data in a
format which can join to your shapefile. It is *possible* to join on name but really not
recommended as punctuation and abbreviation etc can cause problems. Eg "City of London"
is the same as "London, City of" but QGIS won't spot that.
The dark coloured county is Miami Dade which is by far the most populous area so it's no
great surprise that it has the most fatalities.
But we can also see different things in this data by breaking it in different ways.
Changing the break points
Experiment with the other breaks by opening up the Layer properties menu again and
choosing one of the other options. They are all algorithms
● Equal Interval​ - creates classes which have the same range as each other. So in
this case, the maximum number of deaths in one county is 340. If you have 5 classes
then they will each have a range of one fifth of 340 = 68. Class one is 0-68, class two
is 68-136 and so on
● Quantile​ - This method will put an equal number of counties into each class. There
are 67 counties so if you have five classes you will find 13 or 14 counties in each
class. You could try it with 10 classes to add greater detail
● Natural Breaks (Jenks)​ - This tries to group data in clusters with the biggest
variance between the classes
● Standard Deviation​ - This method will calculate the mean of the data, and create
classes based on standard deviation from the mean.
● Pretty Breaks​ - Creates class boundaries in whole numbers
You can also edit the breaks yourself.
In Layer properties, double click on the first value and change the upper value to 50.
Do the same with the next and change the upper value to 100 and carry on

You will end up with more detail spread throughout apart from the top category.
You can also change the legend in the same way
And in the same way that we could change the colour for the base map, we can edit these
colours too by double clicking on the colour in the layers panel or in the Layers
properties>Style menu.
TIP ​as with the project itself, the join is temporary. If you delete the data layer, the join will
disappear. You can save the map as a new shapefile (using Save As) but be aware that your
column headers may change.

Adding point data
A second common form of data for mapping is point data using Lat Long.
Import the data in the same way: Add delimited text layer - and bring in ​accident_florida
This is the same dataset as before but this time it shows the individual crashes, not the
totals. It has a lot more variables to explore.
Keep all the options as default apart from this time we DO have ​Geometry definition​ because this data has something in it which means it could be plotted on a map: Lat
Long
MEGA TIP!​ - ​X is LONGITUDE and Y is LATITUDE!
Easy way to remember is it is the opposite way of how you say it.
OR - The X-axis is horizontal so you need the figure that will tell you how far round the
globe you are. Y-axis is vertical so you need the figure that will tell you how far up or
down you are.

TIP ​If you find all your points all bunched up in one spot or you map looks otherwise
wrong, check that you have the X&Y fields pointing to the right columns
Use the dropdowns to tell QGIS that the ​X field is Long and the Y field is Lat​. Click OK
In the new window QGIS wants to know the ​CRS
This is the Co-ordinate Reference System and it tells QGIS how to plot the points
Choose ​WGS 84
If you don't see it then search ​4326
And now you SHOULD have a whole lot of points on your map. Quite likely in garish
colours but as with the shapefile that is easy to fix.
You can use the ​identify features​ button to click on your circles - make sure you have
the data layer highlighted in your layers panel. Click on the attribute table to see the data
as a table.
Styling your data
Currently all the accidents have the same symbol so let's change that to something more
useful.
Double click on the layer name in your layers panel to bring up the menu and choose
style. You get options to change the symbol and colour but we will look at those later.
Scaling the points
One of the columns in your data is how many people were killed in each crash. So
instead of having all the symbols the same size we can scale them, showing the crashes
with the biggest loss of life.

●
●
●
●

In Style, Single Symbol, click the
button next to the size
Navigate to Field type and it brings up a list of your columns
Choose FATALS
It's also a good idea to make the symbols slightly transparent so that they
don't blot each other out.
● You can do that on the transparency scale, go for 20%.
● Apply and OK
Now you should have a range of dot sizes
Again zoom in and out to see how they change
Use ​identify features​ to look at some you are interested in
Note that you can end up with several points highlighted at once when you use identify
features. The expanders in the features panel allow you to look at each one.
TIP​ in some other versions of QGIS the option to scale by the value of a field is in an
advanced setting at the bottom of the style window
Categorising
Another way of looking at your data is by using categories
Open your data attribute table again and look along the top you'll see a column header
called
DRUNK_DR

That is the number of drunk drivers involved in the crash. Does not denote blame but
obviously a potential factor. Sometimes this will be a code but here it's a simple count: 0,
1 or 2.
Go back to styling and this time instead of ​Single symbol​ choose ​Categorized

Now go to the Column dropdown and you will see it offers you all the possible columns
which we just looked at in the attribute table
● Choose DRUNK_DR
● Hit Classify and you should get four symbols with different colours and values
● Uncheck or delete the bottom one, that's no data.
The colours are probably a bit strange but we'll sort that out in a mo but first let's see
how it looks so hit apply then OK

Now you've got a big old mess but if you click the ​plus symbol​ next to your
accident_florida ​layer in the layers panel, you can see that each number now has a
checkbox by it.
Experiment with turning them on and off
Change colour
Just like with the map, the colours of these points are easy to change
● Either double click on the layer name to bring up the style panel again, then
change the colours in a similar way to the shapefile, by clicking on the symbol
and choosing a colour there. Note that there are preset colour ramps which
you could choose to use.
● Or you can double click on the symbol directly in your layers panel. This
brings you straight to colour editing that symbol.
● You can copy and paste a colour - so if for eg you wanted a colour difference
simply between any drunk drivers or no drunk drivers, you could copy and
paste the same colour for categories 1 and 2. And choose a different colour
for category 0.
Different category
You could look at any categorisable column this way - eg you could use the column
which shows days of the week (1=Sunday, 2=Monday etc) to see if there are any
different patterns on a weekend.

Labels - optional
To label your county map, either bring up the Layer properties menu again or use the
abc​ button on a yellow background

● Choose Show labels for this layer
● Label with - and choose what you want to show eg: Name, Values
● You can change the font, size, colour - again you can match this to house
style
● Buffer tab can be useful to make the text stand out from the background

If you have chosen county names, you will see that they don't all show up on the map,
because they won’t all fit. There are ways to manually change the placing - ​more details
here
Saving as image and exporting
Simplest way of getting a map out is ​Project>Save As Image​ which saves the main
window as a png. Quick and easy but lacks the legend and is quite small.
Better option: ​Project>New Print Composer
It prompts you for a title and brings you to this window

● Click add map and then draw a rectangle with the cursor on the blank page.
● Map will appear
● Click on Add legend and Add scale and drop them where you want them
Finally you may want to add a title
● Still in the print composer - use the ​Add label button​ or from layout menu
● Draw a fairly big box and it will put the word “QGIS” in tiny font on your page
● Go to​ Item Properties​ and edit the text, set the font and colour

To export your map
● Composer>export as image​ to save as PNG
● Or ​export as SVG​ to save as vector graphic for Adobe Illustrator or similar
● Or ​export as pdf

You're done!
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Useful links
Original full US Fatal Accident 2015dataset
Context
And the ​manual​ to explain the column headers
FIPS codes
Text version ​http://www2.census.gov/geo/docs/reference/codes/files/st12_fl_cou.txt
Florida population

