Marrying documents and data
(aka Investigative Reporting)
Tom McGinty, Wall Street Journal
tom.mcginty@wsj.com
2017 CAR Conference
Jacksonville, FL

The District of Columbia's Metropolitan Police Department have shot and killed more people per resident in the 1990s than
any other large American city police force.
Many shootings by Washington police officers were acts of courage and even heroism. But internal police files and court
records reveal a pattern of reckless and indiscriminate gunplay by officers sent into the streets with inadequate training and
little oversight, an eight-month Washington Post investigation has found.
Washington's officers fire their weapons at more than double the rate of police in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago or
Miami. Deaths and injuries in D.C. police shooting cases have resulted in nearly $8 million in court settlements and
judgments against the District in the last six months alone.
"We shoot too often, and we shoot too much when we do shoot," said Executive Assistant Chief of Police Terrance W.
Gainer, who became the department's second in command in May.

Data led the Washington Post to the story,
but that was just the start
To examine shooting trends in the District and individual cases involving D.C.
officers, The Post obtained a computerized database from the department's Use
of Service Weapon Review Board listing incidents from 1994 through May 1998.
Missing details and cases were discovered through internal police reports, court
files, press releases, news articles and records from the U.S. attorney's office and
the D.C. corporation counsel. The Post obtained internal police investigative files
for more than two dozen shootings, as well as internal police records tracking
hundreds of citizen complaints.

News Release

Some things never change?
How This Series Was Put Together (excerpt)
Some criminologists have questioned the
accuracy of the data. The Post found that the
FBI was missing data on fatal police shootings
in several cities. The Post chose to survey
police departments directly about their
shootings, focusing on the 27 U.S. cities that
had at least a half-million residents at any time
from 1990 to 1996. The Post compared the
results to FBI figures, news articles, scholarly
studies and information from other law
enforcement agencies. Small discrepancies
were common; when substantial differences
appeared, police departments were asked to
clarify their numbers.

By CHRISTOPHER WEAVER, ANNA WILDE MATHEWS and TOM MCGINTY
Feb. 17, 2015

The Journal interviewed
16 people who have
worked at facilities
operated by Kindred
Healthcare Inc. or rival
for-profit system Select
Medical Corp. in 10 states,
including former hospital
administrators, doctors
and case managers who
oversaw discharges.
Those two publicly traded
companies billed
Medicare for 42% of all
long-term-hospital claims
it processed during the
period the Journal
studied.

For story examining top executives’ use of their
companies’ aircraft, we:
• Mined FOIAed data from FAA covering all flights
originating or ending in the U.S. over four-year
period, identifying corporate-style jets whose
itineraries frequently took them to popular vacation
destinations.
• Obtained FAA registration and regulatory
documents that allowed us to determine the true
operators of jets registered to shell LLCs.
• Read SEC proxy filings to learn the companies’
policies for executives private use of company
aircraft and if the executives were charged for any
private use.
• Used public records to determine where executives
owned homes.
In 2009, Leucadia National Corp., a New York City-based conglomerate, reported less than $30,000 on
personal flying for Chairman Ian Cumming. FAA records show Leucadia's four jets that year spent 220
hours flying to or from Jackson Hole, Wyo., and New York's Hamptons, both locations where Mr.
Cumming owns homes. Those flights alone would have cost $708,000, according to Journal calculations
using hourly operating-cost estimates provided by Conklin & de Decker Aviation Information, a
consulting firm.

A Times computer analysis of government records found that
from 1999 through 2003, there were at least 400 grade-crossing
accidents in which signals either did not activate or were alleged
to have malfunctioned. At least 45 people were killed and 130
injured in those accidents, according to the records, although in
most cases the role of signal malfunctions was unclear. Federal
rules require that railroads maintain signals on tracks they own.
The accident reports, all prepared by the railroads, also raise
questions in many cases about whether unsafe behavior by
drivers contributed to the accidents. In addition, since 2000,
railroads filed about 2,300 reports of the most serious types of
signal malfunctions: short signals or no signals at all. Most of
these malfunctions did not involve accidents.

Government data is often available at the click of a mouse. In many cases, the documents that
explain the data points in more detail and nuance are available online, too.

