Tip sheet
2017 CAR Conference
Jacksonville, Florida. March 3, 2017.
Jorge Luis Sierra
ICFJ Knight Fellow
@latinointx
Securing data and communications
I am trying to bring my own experiences and security resources created during
previous fellowships in Latin America, the Middle East and Africa to help U.S.
investigative reporters and newsrooms. Although we don’t have adversaries in the
U.S. willing to kill, disappear, kidnap o torture journalists, investigative reporters
are concerned about the security of their data, and communications with sources
and editors when working on sensitive stories.
They would need to protect their data at rest and in transit. These are some advices
for investigative journalists who need to increase security in their operations and
protect their data, communications and sources’ identity.
1. Use the Salama application to conduct a risk assessment. Salama offers two
kinds of risk assessments: one for individual journalists and a second one for
media organizations. With Salama, media organizations may assess the
probability and proximity of threats and measure the potential financial,
physical or reputational damage. It can help organizations customize staff
training opportunities and evaluate what resources they should allocate to
increase the safety of their operations.
2. Encrypt your computer. If you have a Mac computer, use FileVault to encrypt
your entire hard drive and prevent unauthorized access to information in
your start-up disk. If you have a computer running Windows operating
system, you can use Bitlocker, a full disk encryption feature included in some
versions of Windows 8, 7 or later. You can also use Veracrypt, a free open
source tool to encrypt a hard drive or to hide an encrypted folder.
3. Use antivirus software in all devices, including desktop computers, laptop
computers and mobile devices. I recommend Avira, Avast, Symantec, and
AVG. There are free versions available although it is advisable to pay a fee for
a full antivirus software capability. It is also advisable to use software that
can be updated in the background.
4. Update regularly all applications in your desktop and laptops computers, as
well in your mobile phones and tablets, as updates regularly fix security
flaws.

5. Use only strong passwords or passphrases. Use diceware passphrases to get
maximum entropy. Never recycle passwords or passphrases in accounts with
sensitive information. Add more strength with a 2-step of verification to
reduce the chances of intrusion into your accounts.
6. If your work is under threat from repressive regimes or non-state actors
such as private intelligence corporations or criminal organizations, make
sure you use all security features of Facebook, Skype or Google Hangout, and
do not exchange sensitive information through them. Remember
that Facebook, Skype and Google Hangout messages are permanently stored
in their servers, and repressive government can access them through judicial
orders.
7. Use OpenPGP to encrypt data files and send encrypted messages. There is
practically no way for an adversary to crack and read a message carefully
encrypted with OpenPGP. Once installed, it is pretty easy to use.
8. Open a free account at Protonmail. This is a free tool with highly protected
servers in Switzerland. Emails are secured with end-to-end encryption. You
can create an account anonymously without putting your personal
information to open an account. There is no need to download
software. ProtonMail does not have access to users’ decryption keys. It uses
open source PGP encryption standard. It is easy to use.
9. If you use a popular email service provider like Gmail, use Mailvelope to
encrypt information. This is a browser extension that allows users to
exchange encrypted emails following the OpenPGP encryption standard. It is
an open-source free tool. Encryption is strong. You will need to create a pair
of keys, one private and one public. You may share your public key with your
contacts and keep the private one secret, just for yourself. It is recommended
to use a strong passphrase to decrypt messages.
10. If you don’t want to use PGP encryption, you still can use an easier interfase
to encrypt information. Use Peerio. It is an easy-to-use open-source software
that offers a high-level encryption system. Peerio creates a pair of keys, one
public, and one private and use them automatically for the user to send or
read encrypted messages. Users can also encrypt files and send them
securely over Peerio. The platform can be used as a repository of encrypted
files. Files are not only encrypted to travel securely from end to end, but are
also encrypted specifically to the receiver’s public key. This way, nobody else
but the intended recipient could decrypt and read it.
11. If you want to anonymize your Internet navigation use the Tor Browser. You
an increase your communications security by using Tails to anonymize your
navigation, leave no trace and encrypt files, emails and instant messaging.

12. Sources can contact you by using WhatsApp or Signal. The New York Times
and Propublica dedicate a mobile phone number to receive tips via those
applications. Sources can also use Mailvelope to send encrypted messages to
those media organizations. If you need to add privacy, use SecureDrop. The
Post mail is also a secure means of communication. The New York Times
recommends using a public mailbox, not a post office.
Resources:
Risk assessment and security library: http://salama.io/
Cybersecurity for journalists: http://www.livebinders.com/play/play?id=2018008&backurl=/shelf/my
Digital security toolkit for journalists
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Dll__0tobjWQz4iUua8qytJpgaalv6YhpVajo2dLshc/edit?usp=sha
ring
Some useful resources:
https://ssd.eff.org/
https://securityinabox.org/
Look for my blog posts on digital security:
IJnet.org
ICFJ Knight Fellows Toolkit:
http://bit.ly/ICFJKnightNicar17

