REPORTER’S GUIDE
TO USING EMMA
For reporters covering state or local news, the
Electronic Municipal Market Access (EMMA®) website
provides free access to a wealth of information about the
financial health of states, cities and counties, plus many
hospitals, universities and other ventures financed by
public debt. This guide to EMMA can help you along the
trail to a good story.

Meet EMMA®
EMMA is the free online home for detailed financial documents about
state and local governments that are not readily available elsewhere. The
EMMA website is operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board
(MSRB), the regulatory agency charged by Congress with promoting a
fair, efficient and transparent municipal securities market. While EMMA’s
primary purpose is to help investors make informed decisions when buying
or selling a municipal bond, the website also serves as a powerful search
engine for statehouse and local reporters, as well as journalists on the
health, higher education and transportation beats.

Information Available on EMMA
The bond disclosure documents on EMMA are full of useful data for
reporters. The official statement, which is like a prospectus for a new bond
issue, can contain economic and demographic information about the local
area and projections for the future. EMMA contains hundreds of thousands
of official statements for bonds
issued by states, cities and other
authorities across the country.

Dig through an
official statement
and you might
learn:

Who are the largest
taxpayers in the district?
How many students are
expected to enroll in area
schools in coming years?
What are the
retirement expenses for
government employees?

December 2015

In addition to the official
statement, each year, state
and local governments submit
audited financial statements
and other updated financial and
operating information to EMMA.
Many hospitals, universities,
sports stadiums and other
private enterprises also make
these documents available on
EMMA if they have received
bond financing.

EMMA Data Takes Flight
“Because Branson
Airport used tax-exempt
municipal bonds to finance
its construction, reports
documenting the airport’s
finances are required
to be publicly posted at
the Municipal Securities
Rulemaking Board’s
Electronic Municipal
Market Access website.”

A reporter for the Springfield
News-Leader used EMMA
for a story on new flight
destinations and carrier
service at Branson Airport.

more >>

msrb.org | emma.msrb.org

REPORTER’S GUIDE TO USING EMMA

!

Credit ratings from Moody’s
Investors Service, Kroll Bond
Rating Agency, Fitch Ratings
and Standard & Poor’s all
appear for free on EMMA.
Monitor notices posted on
EMMA for news of credit
rating changes, late payments,
bankruptcy and other
newsworthy financial events.

Sign up for
MyEMMA alerts
to get an email
as soon as any new
documents are posted to
EMMA for a bond issued
by a municipality or state
that interests you.

Check Up on a Hospital’s
Financial Health
“The hospital also
disclosed on the Electronic
Municipal Market Access
website it revised its
2013 financial statement
after discovering it had
significantly overstated
previously reported
amounts.”

EMMA is more than a library of financial documents. Check out the
Market Statistics area to explore trends in different bond sectors like
healthcare, education and transportation. EMMA also displays realtime trade prices for all bonds bought and sold, with interactive tools
available to help investors evaluate the prices they are getting from their
brokers.

Navigating EMMA
There are a few ways to find information on EMMA. The Browse Issuers
function is a map-based search that leads to a unique homepage for any
state, city, county or authority that has issued bonds. Here you can find
all disclosure documents and recent trade data.

The Syracuse Post-Standard
reported on big losses at an
area hospital using EMMA
financial data.

If you know the unique nine-digit identifier for a particular bond, you can
use the Quick Search to jump directly to detailed information about that
bond. If you know certain characteristics about a bond and its issuer, you
can use EMMA’s Advanced Search filters.

RESOURCES FOR REPORTERS
The MSRB is available to assist reporters with finding information on EMMA and developing stories.
Contact the MSRB at 202-838-1500 or email MSRBCommunications@msrb.org.

Learn about the municipal
securities market in the
MSRB Education Center.

Follow the MSRB on
Twitter @MSRB_News.

Sign up for email
updates from the MSRB.

ABOUT THE MSRB
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) protects investors, state and local governments and other municipal
entities, and the public interest by promoting a fair and efficient municipal securities market. The MSRB fulfills this
mission by regulating the municipal securities firms, banks and municipal advisors that engage in municipal securities and
advisory activities. To further protect market participants, the MSRB provides market transparency through its Electronic
Municipal Market Access (EMMA®) website, the official repository for information on virtually all municipal bonds. The
MSRB also serves as an objective resource on the municipal market, conducts extensive education and outreach to
market stakeholders, and provides market leadership on key issues. The MSRB is a Congressionally-chartered, selfregulatory organization governed by a 21-member board of directors that has a majority of public members, in addition
to representatives of regulated entities. The MSRB is subject to oversight by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
msrb.org | emma.msrb.org

