Negotiating For The Records
IRE 2017 NICAR Conference - Jacksonville
TIP SHEET
Jim Ross, Investigator, James Hoyer, P.A., 813-397-2230
jross@jameshoyer.com

Be careful what you ask for




Research the topic you’re asking about so that you can target the request. Develop a reasonable
understanding of the system you’re investigating. It will help you target the request, speed up
the response and reduce the cost.
o One poorly constructed request for electronic data required the entire driver’s license
database to be provided. The tab? $36 million.
o Another asked for safety inspections on the space shuttle. The result? A warehouse of
boxes stuffed with paper.
o A third produced hundreds of pages of PDFs printed from Excel spreadsheets.
Research techniques:
o Lawsuits: the lawyers, their investigators or their experts
o Software user manuals: These manuals often detail regularly run reports and describe a
system’s capabilities. They can help draft a request.
o What does the government entity have to provide to others? Bosses, financial
institutions, auditors, the feds?
o Ask the people in the trenches what information they keep and how they keep it
o IT staff love to talk and often hand over valuable info when talking about technology.

What’s public? What’s not?



Know what’s public, what’s not and where it’s kept.
Investigate whether the information you’re looking for is kept by more than one government
entity. For example:
o Medical malpractice claims in Florida are reported to both health agencies and the
Office of Insurance Regulation. They’re confidential at the health agencies. They’re
public at the Office of Insurance Regulation.
o Complaints are kept by multiple state agencies with differing public records exemptions.
The names of students complaining about for-profit schools, for example, are
confidential if received by most state regulators. They’re often public if made to other
state complaint sites.

Asking for what you want








Cite the public records law in the request
Include a sentence that instructs the agency to contact you if the cost to fulfill the request
exceeds a certain amount. This sentence should clearly say that you will not pay more than $XXX
to fulfill the request without prior approval.
Include a sentence that asks the agency to state in writing the basis for withholding documents
that it considers exempt, including the statutory citation. This language may vary depending on
your location.
Include a sentence that asks the agency to provide Excel spreadsheets in their native format
(.xls, .xlsx) Otherwise, you’ll end up with printed Adobe pages that are useless.
Once sent, verify that your request was received. Recently, two of my e-mail public records
requests found their way to the spam filter. The agency claimed they were never received.

Nibble


Consider making a narrow initial request for information. Information from that request then
can be used to specifically target what you’re looking for. Generally, it speeds up the response
and keeps costs down. For example:
o In a recent case against a large hospital, we asked for another, unrelated health care
provider’s request to waive Medicaid rules and the state’s response to that request.
The public records response took a week, produced 27 pages and cost about $10. The
document included: the names, e-mail addresses and positions of the state officials who
evaluated and decided not to waive the rule as well as the outside parties who tried to
intervene. It also showed that a lobbying effort was taking place.
o We used that information to target requests to the specific state officials who dealt with
the rule, identified former employees who could help our investigation and the third
party who was lobbying, with the help of one of the individuals central to our
investigation, to change the rule.
o The resulting requests were completed in less than a month, produced about 300 pages
of particularly useful information and cost $30 or $40.

Document everything and expect to argue




Keep a contemporaneous log
o Verification of receipt
o Agreed upon changes to the request, date and summary
o Oral and written responses from the subject of the request
o Who you spoke with, date, a brief summary
Cost
o Note what the statute allows
o Electronic production versus the cost of producing paper

o



Make sure the lowest cost employee gathered and produced the information
 One agency tried to charge us for the general counsel reviewing the material;
billing at the paralegal rate saved 1/3 the cost of the request
o Are the hours reasonable?
o Is the material routinely produced to others in the form of reports?
o Has it previously been produced?
Mediate
o Walk up the chain of command
o Some states have mediation procedures
o Pressure from other sources:
 legislative or congressional staff
 legislators themselves
 Other ongoing investigations

Helpful resources:
http://brechner.org/publications.asp
https://www.rcfp.org/
http://floridafaf.org/
Sample FOIA request: http://www.rcfp.org/foia?op=show_form&type=fed_request&state=-Sample FOIA appeal: http://www.rcfp.org/foia?op=show_form&type=fed_appeal&state=-Sample Florida request: http://floridafaf.org/files/2012/12/Chapter-119.-State-Agencies-and-LocalGovernments-Requesting-Public-Records.pdf

