Tips to convert PDFs in bulk
NICAR 2017 - Jacksonville
March 4, 2017
Todd Wallack, Boston Globe
twallack@bostonglobe.com @twallack
617-929-2069
What is a PDF?
A file format designed by Adobe Acrobat. PDFs are designed to be printed and displayed - not
analyzed.
What type of PDF?
Is it already searchable? If so, you can usually highlight a section of the document or search for
key words. If not, it is probably scanned from a printout. If that the case, it usually cannot be
searched without first running it through an OCR - optical character recognition - program.
Some common problems:
* OCR lots of PDFs to make them searchable or extract text
* Extract data from lots of PDFs
* Extract tables from lots of PDFs
General note about software:
Most of the programs to convert PDFs in bulk either a) cost money or b) require a little technical
skill (such as programming). Some programs, like Adobe Acrobat Reader Pro, just require you
to click different options. Others require you to use Python or another program and a PDF
library to unlock the files.
Some general tips:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Ask agency if they can give you the data in the original, native format (like Excel or
Microsoft Word) or a CSV before spending time converting the PDFs yourself.
Figure out what type of program you need. Do you need to OCR the document? Grab
tables?
Try different tools. Every PDF is a little different and some work better than others.
Read the documentation for some of the tools. You may find pointers for how to be more
precise
When it doubt, try Google. Odds are someone else has run into the same issue.
If you don’t program, you might want to beg or borrow a copy of Adobe Acrobat Pro or
another program that converts PDFs without coding. Odds are someone in your
organization already has a copy - or you know someone who does. Your company may
also have extra licenses, particularly if there have been layoffs or buyouts.

Examples of paid tools to convert documents
Adobe Acrobat Pro DC ($24/month without a commitment, or $15/month with commitment
Abbyy Finereader 14 $400 (Includes ability to extract tables)
Nuance Power PDF Advanced ($150)
Cometdocs API. costs $10 + $0.01-$0.05 per PDF. (may be able to convert some for free by
combining PDfs into zipfile and uploading them in one batch.)
There are also dozens of free libraries available to convert PDFs in Python, R and other
languages.
Examples of Python libraries to convert documents
PDFPlumber
PyPDF2
PDFMiner
Tesseract
pdftables.six
Examples of R libraries
tabulizer (better for tables)
pdftools (good all around tool

Bonus:
copy * txt newfile.txt [PCs]
cat *.txt > /newfolder/merged-file.txt [linux/Macs]

