#NICAR17
Putting your town under a microscope -and keeping it there
Kate Howard
Matt Kiefer - @matt_kiefer
Andrew Mollica

Getting started on a new beat
Flood the zone
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Read the archives. Seriously. Every time you have a bright idea.
Employee list with salary data
Ask for emails even if you don't necessarily need them
Get a list of record retention schedules.
Request a list of internal audits completed and planned. Find external audits, too,
such as state or federal.
Annual reports
Utilize your resources - IRE/NICAR tipsheets and colleagues
FOIA the FOIA? Gauche, perhaps, but you find gadflies this way.
Pick a time, such as FOIA Friday, to send out a request - ANY request, any size.

By this point, you probably know a lot about your town. Now what?
● Go further. Follow-ups are crucial, and do not skip the reaction story even if it’s
awkward.
● Don’t hide from criticism. Own it and earn respect.
● Don’t be satisfied with breaking that story. Who’s fault is it? Who is in charge of that
person?

Big investigations and how to follow up
Follow the money
If a local government fails to provide a service, it may complain it's too cash-strapped to fix the
problem. In which case, pull the budget and expenses to see if their story adds up.
Case in point: ​Mooney Cemetery investigation

Research at the local level
Census reporting for custom geographies
The Census offers tons of demographic information but you may find the geographies limiting.
For instance, your city may have well-defined neighborhoods but the Census doesn't recognize
them so you can't generate reports on them. Right? Actually, there's a trick to getting Census
data out of custom geographies. As an example, let's take a look at poverty rates in each of
Chicago's ​77 community areas​. Here are the steps:
● Get a list of all the census tracts in Chicago and their assigned community area
● For each community area, sum up the estimated number of households living under the
federal poverty line in each tract.
● Divide that by the total number of households in the community area's tracts. That's the
estimated local poverty rate.
● Repeat for all 77 community areas.
A few caveats:
● If your geography splits census tracts, you'll have to figure out what to do with those
tracts. You can choose to assign them to the geography where the centroid lies, or the
one with the most tract area. Or you can assign the tract to both geographies and weight
their data based on their proportional area.
● You'll also have to recalculate the new margin of error (it should go down the more tracts
you add). The calculation is pretty straightforward: take the square root of the sum of the
squared MOEs. (Try to report just things under 20% MOE.)
You could do this kind of analysis in Excel, SQL or preferably in a script.
Example case: ​Closed schools still burden distressed Chicago neighborhoods

Tracking changes over time
Census tracts change over time. As population grows and declines in a given area the Census
will split tracts in two, combine multiples tracts and shift borders. This makes it difficult to track
changes in the characteristics of small neighborhoods over long periods of time. Here are a few
techniques for dealing with these problems:
- Aggregate tracts to the point where the borders are steady over time.
- Use the ​Longitudinal Tract Data Base (LTDB)​ which lets you normalize data from 1970 2000 tract borders to the 2010 tract borders. (You can also apply its methodology other
geographic boundaries, e.g., combining voting ward or police district-level data with
tract-level data)
Other tips for finding and combining local geographic data

Tools to monitor your beat
●
●
●

Klaxon​ by The Marshall Project
RSS feeds
Write a ​scraper

Publishing data
Before you commit to doing a web app, think about whether you intend to keep the data up to
date. This is usually a good idea because the upfront work of developing the app is behind you,
and you may only have marginal work to do in collecting and deploying new data.
A few thoughts on this:
● Budget for costs of upkeep. Over the long term, this could cost you more resources than
the initial launch.
● Consider hiring interns to do data updates. They'll get more out of it than your reporters.
● Automate as much as possible.
● Document everything.
Example case: ​Settling for Misconduct

