Getting Data Into Microsoft Access
Tracy Greer
2017 CAR Conference
Microsoft Access is a database management system (dbms), often shortened to “database” or
“database software.” A database is a collection of related tables, and a database management
system is the interface.

Why Use Microsoft Access?
●
●
●
●
●
●

More muscle than Excel but more user-friendly than mySQL
Want to generate individual records
Have multiple data tables that need to work together
Useful for quickly filtering/analyzing data in separate tables
Can be browser-based or desktop-based
May be the only database software your newsroom has!

How To Access Access
Used to be routine part of old Microsoft Office package, but now it’s only with select desktop or
cloud-based Office packages, so double-check. In a newsroom, you may be working with
Access 2013, 2010, 2007 or 2003, and it may be on only a few computers.
Access is not available for Macs, so either use a compatible open-source program, Parallels or
a different database management software.

Access Basics
Access has four types of objects: Tables, Forms, Queries, Reports
Think of your database like a folder of objects. A database can have multiple objects, and each
can be created, modified and saved individually.
●
●
●
●

Tables are lists of data with multiple columns and rows (called records), and there can
be multiple tables in a database.
Forms are user-friendly ways to add data into tables.
Queries are where the power lies in Access. You can create a query to quickly pull data
from multiple tables.
Reports are a pretty way to display or export query results.

Getting Data Into Access
There are two ways: Manual Entry (boo!) and Import Existing Files (yay!)
To import, make sure your data is clean and in an approved file format.
With .txt, .asc, .xml and .html files, these work best when exported from another source instead
of scraped from a web page or written as plain text. Get that data into .csv or .xls for easy
import.

File Extension

File Type

Import into Access?

.mdb or .accdb

Microsoft Access

Yes

.dbf

database file

Yes

.xls

Microsoft Excel

Yes

.csv

comma-separated values

Yes

.txt or .asc

plain text files

Conditional

.xml

Extensible Markup Language

Conditional

.html

Hypertext Markup Language

Conditional

.pdf

Portable Document Format

No

.doc

Microsoft Word

No

When you import a .accdb, .mdb or .dbf file, you’re looking for at least one table, and there may
be existing forms, queries and reports. Go to Access Home > Open > [file name]
When you are starting out with any other type of file format, you need to import that file into an
existing database. Go to Access Home > File > New > Blank Database to create that initial
database. Save As an .accdb or .mdb file.
To add new tables to an existing database, go to External Tables and select the file type to be
imported. Use the Wizard to make things easy.

Some things to look for with the Wizard:
● Data Type - property that determines what type of info a field will store and display
● Delimited/Fixed Width - determines how the data is separated into columns, you may
need to play around with these options before import
● Primary Key - unique identifier for each record, choose if one is already included in the
data or if Access should generate one
● Save Your Steps - creates a macro if you have multiple files to import

Add Data To Existing Tables
Three ways to add data to a table that already exists within a database:
● Manually entering new records
● Importing a file into existing table
● Creating a form tied to existing table
Manual Entry: open the table (OK to be in Datasheets View), skip to last record using tools at
bottom of table, add data to each column using the tab key (unique identifier will generate for
each new record)
Import Into Table: Is data clean, do fields line up? Go to External Data > Import Excel, browse
for file in Wizard, select table to append records to, run the Wizard, double-check your new
records in table
Create A Form: go to Create > Form Wizard, choose target table, select fields to enter, choose
layout style, give form a title, choose “modify form design,” in Design View select Design Tab,
add buttons for functions like Record Operations > Add New Record and Save Record, back to
Form View for data entry

Tables Made From Scratch
When you have an existing database but need to create a new table within, but don’t have
anything to import, you’ll need to create a table from scratch.
Go to Create > Table > Design View, set fields and field type and save, switch to Datasheet
View, manually enter content

