IRE CONFERENCE
May 2017
Questions & Answers
-Harvey Cashore and Kathryn Gretsinger

Interviews are as much about gathering information as they are about suppressing it.
When you go to ask questions be sure to carefully consider what you are trying to
accomplish. Figure out what you want to know. Remain open to being surprised. Ask
follow up questions throughout. Be aware of tone, silence, body language...
Always: Stop Think then Ask
Listen
The role of listening cannot be overstated. Deep, active, present, critical listening = hard
working follow up questions:

What are questions for ?
Who: Character, Subject, Person, People, Relationships, Titles, Association, Humanity
Where: Setting, Scene, Location, Memory, Geography
When: Time, Chronology, Context, Scenes, Moments, Memory (Reflection) Perspective,
Dates, Vision (Possibilities) Turning Points
What: Description, Event, Action, Happening, Explains
Why: Reason, Meaning, Motivation, Truth (subjective)
How: Process, Description, Interaction
Three interview functions
 Information
 Accountability
 Emotion
Various interview forms:
 Research (Input)
 Performance (Output)
Ask yourself -- What is the purpose of the interview I am conducting?
Try to determine whether you are conducting an INPUT interview (ie/fact, story
gathering) or an OUTPUT interview (performative, descriptive, exploratory)

INPUT Gathering Facts, Information & Story
Research only. (No quotation)
Informational. (Facts, facts, facts)
-Use open ended questions
-Consider CHRONOLOGY: What happened when?
-Avoid trigger words [tax planning versus tax evasion]
-Avoid double-barrelled
-The less you say the better

-Make the interviewee feel in charge
-ask for help rather than demand answers to questions
-World’s best question: ”How did it come to happen”
-World’s second best question: “Tell me about yourself and how you came to
first
be involved in ______”?
Responsible Communication (On the record questions - sometimes written.)
Pre-interview. (Convincing someone to talk in the first place) Think Page assaulted by
Gerald Regan.

Ask The Basics




How did this come to happen?
Tell me a bit about yourself and how you first got involved in this?
What happened next?

This simple series of questions can/will give you all of the context/depth you need to
surface great stories and create moments of tension and intrigue in your stories.

Do’s & Dont’s










Don’t try to prove your thesis (don’t direct your questions to prove your theory)
Don’t grill your interviewees (remain curious, open, neutral)
Don’t argue
Don’t say too much
Don’t pay one source off another
Do ask for help (Be collaborative)
Do give the interviewee the power
Don’t quote (ie/ the more you can conduct background interview the more
background interviews)
Do tape everything (accuracy is key)

A variation on these tips will serve you well in a performative interview as well.

OUTPUT Telling stories through narrative interviewing
(Performance)
Types of interviews
Accountability: Trish Wood: “What do you mean the boss is protected?”
Making a point: Gillian Findlay: “You have never apologized to him. Why not?
Impact (or emotional): Mark Kelley: “That’s what parents want to know - will their
children get
injured in a hitting league”

Consider the SHAPE of an interview
What is the narrative you are working through?
*Beginning Middle End

Where do you insert context?
*What must we know to understand?
*What details are key?
What are the points of tension in the story?
*Are there pivotal moments? Key relationships?
When do you reveal the climax?
*Action or Emotional moments
How do you explore motivation/meaning?
*What to ask to ensure your audience understands the ‘story beyond the
story’
What is the role of the end of your story?
-Is this about conclusion or resolution or looking forward?

Tone is Key
We rarely talk about the role of tone in interviews. It can be the difference
between a good and a great interview. Interviewers ought to pay attention to the
way the subject speaks; the pauses he/she/they take; the inflection. The more
the interviewer can neutralize (by being curious rather than probing, demanding,
confrontational) the more likely the guest will be to open up.

Extras:
Avoid trigger words
Avoid top loading your questions (don’t make statements prior to asking)
Ask one question at a time
Use the language your sources use (indicate to the guest that you are hearing
them)

John Sawatsky’s
Top TEN - Off the Shelf Questions
1. What happened?
2. What do you mean?
3. Why is that?
4. What are/were the options?
5. How would you characterize that?
6. What was the turning point?
7. What did he/she/they say?
8. What is/was it like?
9. What went through your mind at the time?
10. What's an example?
One of JS’s keys...Always start with what and move towards why.

Harvey and I are still students of the interview. We were joking that we learn every single
time we’re involved in asking, answering or listening to questions. That is our key take away.
Listen - a lot. Try to take apart what you hear and figure out what is actually going on.
Thank you for listening to us...and do let us know if we can help you out!
KG & HC

Contact:
Harvey Cashore, Senior Producer, CBC The Fifth Estate
Harvey.Cashore@cbc.ca
Kathryn Gretsinger, Senior Instructor, UBC Graduate School of Journalism
Kathryn.Gretsinger@ubc.ca
And, in case you missed it:
The White House Correspondents Association just released this. It seems like
something we may want to include somehow...just a way of reminding people (not that
this group needs reminding) that questions and answers matter
https://twitter.com/jeffmason1/status/863066035892756482

