Tip Sheet for Cross-Border Immigration Reporting
from Nina Shapiro, Seattle Times, nshapiro@seattletimes.com

1) If there is a U.S. federal case, go to the courthouse to make sure you have
all the documents. Even if some documents are available online through
PACER, others might only be available by getting them in person.
2) Look for arrest reports by ICE or Border Patrol. They will have details that
are hard to get elsewhere. If there is no federal case that has them in the
record, see if you can get them from defendants’ lawyers.
3) If local law enforcement officers are involved, get their records. You may
see discrepancies between their account of arrests and that of immigration
officers.
4) If you request information by FOIA and get turned down, appeal.
5) Look skeptically at the supposed reason for stopping immigrants.
Immigration officers have been known to use pretexts—like a broken tail
light—to stop people and then question them about their immigration
status. Officers are required to have “reasonable suspicion” that a specific
individual has broken the law.
6) Showing undocumented immigrants photos you want to use of them—
especially if you’ve promised they can’t be identified—may make them
more comfortable. Even so, be sure they actually can’t be identified when
you get back to the office. Sometimes, identifying details you didn’t initially
see can be visible when enlarged.
7) Don’t assume everyone in detention centers are illegally here. Some may
even be citizens.
8) Although the U.S. immigration system makes very little information publicly
available, some aggregated data can be found in the online TRAC system.
You can, for instance, find out how many people immigration courts in your
state deported.
http://trac.syr.edu/phptools/reports/reports.php?layer=immigration&repo
rt_type=tool
9) Know the system: U.S. immigration courts are run by the Justice
Department. Initial appeals must be made to the Board of Immigration

Appeals, also run by the Justice Department. After that, cases can go to the
regular federal court system, through the appellate circuits. U.S. District
courts may bypass this track by taking a “habeas” case, but that’s an
exception to normal procedures.

