Investigative Journalism Tip Sheet: Human Trafficking
Topline Statistics:
● More than 31,000 cases of human trafficking have been reported to the National Hotline since
2007. The Hotline receives more than 130 calls per day.
● In 2016 alone, the National Human Trafficking Hotline received multiple reports of human
trafficking cases in all 50 states and D.C. The National Hotline experienced a 35 percent jump in
reported cases from 2015 to 2016, with more survivors than ever directly reaching out for help.
● Worldwide, the International Labor Organization estimates that there are 20.9 million victims of
human trafficking, 5.5 million of those are children, 14.2 million are victims of labor exploitation.
● In 2014, the International Labor Organization estimated that forced labor generates $150 billion
in profits a year worldwide.
● For more data in the U.S from the National Human Trafficking Hotline, visit
www.humantraffickinghotline.org.
Polaris Reports/Resources:
● The Typology of Modern Slavery: Defining Sex & Labor Trafficking in the United States (PDF)
● More Than Drinks for Sale: Sex Trafficking in U.S. Cantinas and Bars (PDF)
● Knocking at Your Door: Labor Trafficking on Sales Crews (PDF)
● Labor Trafficking in the U.S.: A Closer Look at Temporary Work Visas (PDF)
● Sex Trafficking in the U.S.: A Closer Look at U.S. Citizen Victims (PDF)
● About Human Trafficking (Human Trafficking “101”)
● National Human Trafficking Hotline Statistics (U.S. Only)
Academic & Other Research & Reports:
● Estimating the Size and Structure of the Underground Commercial Sex Economy in Eight Major
US Cities
● Surviving the Streets of New York: Experiences of LGBTQ Youth, YMSM, and YWSW Engaged in
Survival Sex (PDF)
● The Human Trafficking of Domestic Workers in the United States: Findings from the Beyond
Survival Campaign (PDF)
● Coalition Immokalee Workers
● No Piece of the Pie: U.S. Food Workers in 2016 (PDF)
● Restaurant Opportunities Center (ROC) United
○ Behind The Kitchen Door, by: Saru Jayaraman
● A Six-year Analysis of Sex Traffickers of Minors: Exploring Characteristics and Sex Trafficking
Patterns
● Centro de los Derechos del Migrante
○ Taken for a Ride: Migrant Workers in the U.S. Fair & Carnival Industry (PDF)
○ Picked Apart: The Hidden Struggles of Migrant Worker Women in the Maryland Crab
Industry (PDF)

Working with Survivors
● Photos or names of human trafficking victims should not be published without their consent.
● Minors should only be interviewed in special/rare circumstances, ensuring their anonymity
throughout the process without leading to retraumatization. A victim specialist, parent, and/or
guardian should be present.
● Informed consent: Ensure that, before a victim of human trafficking agrees to share his or her
story, he or she understands that once the story is published, it will be available to the public at
large, in perpetuity.
○ Ask permission for every personal detail shared.
○ Human trafficking cases often involve complex safety concerns that could be
exacerbated by a published story, or if a victim or survivor has not fully healed, a
published story may reactivate trauma years later. Ensure, to the best of your ability,
that publication of a story won’t lead to potential harm from an at-large trafficker and
retraumatization though the sharing of a situation.
● Reporters should invest time engaging service providers and NGOs that work with survivors to
learn and understand the best possible approaches to survivors.
● Avoid blaming the victim, even with crimes they may have been forced to commit during their
exploitation. Victims are often blamed, directly and indirectly, for not seeking help more forcibly
or to leave their situation under their own will when it appears from others as if they could.
Often times, severe forms of psychological manipulation and coercion are at play that may not
enable the victim to leave.
● Journalists and activists must avoid vigilantism. It is NOT appropriate to help remove victims
from a harmful situation. Everyone should do their part to help eradicate this crime, but victim
assistance should be handled by accredited organizations or law enforcement, and not by
individuals without appropriate training. Instead, report the situation to law enforcement or a
victim hotline. “Rescuing” a victim is not a means to a story. Instead, connect a victim to a
reputable service provider to ensure they are safe and their needs are met.
Example Resources/Data Sources (all are U.S. only, unless otherwise noted):
● Human Trafficking Data:
○ RCMPD Human Trafficking Coordination Centre (Canada)
○ International Labour Organization (Global)
○ United Nations Office on Drugs & Crime (UNODC) (Global)
■ UNODC Report on Trafficking in Persons (Global)
○ U.S. Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report (Global)
○ National Human Trafficking Hotline Statistics (U.S. Only)
○ HumanTraffickingData.org (U.S. Only)
○ UNODC Human Trafficking Knowledge Portal (Global)
○ UNODC Sharing Electronic Resources & Laws on Crime (SHERLOC) (Global)
● Local News Articles
● Varied Data Set Repositories:
○ http://www.data.gov/
○ http://www.opendatanetwork.com/v2-search?q=

●

●

○ http://enigma.io/publicdata/
○ https://www.kaggle.com/
Business Records:
○ Thomson Reuters CLEAR
○ Lexis Nexis Accurint
○ Corporation Wiki
○ Better Business Bureau
○ In person requests: (e.g. county clerk offices)
Open Government Data:
○ U.S. Department of Labor (work visas)
○ U.S. Department of State Non-Immigrant Visa Statistics
○ U.S. Department of Homeland Security Immigration Data & Statistics
○ U.S. Customs & Border Protection Stats & Summaries
○ U.S. Department of Transportation Data
○ U.S. Census Data
○ U.S. Department of the Treasury Data
○ Uniform Crime Report Data
○ U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)
■ http://catalog.data.gov/dataset?q=organization:((hud-gov)+OR+(oh-hudgov))#topic=uncategorized_navigation

●

●

■ http://zillowhack.hud.opendata.arcgis.com/
■ http://www.huduser.org/portal/pdrdatas_landing.html
Connecting with local NGO’s (e.g. interviews, local data, expertise consulting)
○ United States:
■ Polaris
■ National Referral Directory
○ Canada:
■ Canadian Centre to End Human Trafficking
○ Mexico
■ Consejo Cuidadano
○ Global
■ Global Modern Slavery Directory
Misc. Resources
○ FinCen (U.S. only)
○ FinTRAC (Canada only)
○ OSINT Online Search Resources

Examples of Investigative Pieces:
● The Price of Nice Nails by: Sarah Maslin Nir (New York Times)
● In Secretive Marijuana Industry, Whispers of Abuse and Trafficking, by: Shoshana Walter
(Reveal)
● Sea Slaves: The Human Misery That Feeds Pets & Livestock, by: Ian Urbina (New York Times)
● Tricked and Indebted on Land, Abused or Abandoned at Sea, by: Ian Urbina (New York Times)

●

The ‘Boys’ in the Bunkhouse: Toil, abuse and endurance in the heartland, by: Dan Barry (New
York Times)

