California Watch’s seismic safety
story: Valuable lessons for
reporting any story, anywhere
By Corey G. Johnson

What is the “seismic story”?

California law requires the state
architect’s office to enforce the Field
Act – seismic regulations enacted
nearly 80 years ago. The law is
considered a gold standard of school
construction. It requires state
oversight to assure professional
engineering and quality control from
the early design phase to the first day
of classes.

What did we learn?
•
•

•

•

•

•

State regulators routinely failed to enforce Field Act, allowing children and teachers to occupy
buildings with structural flaws and potential safety hazards reported during construction.
At least 20,000 projects – from minor fire alarm upgrades to major construction of new
classrooms – were completed without receiving a final Field Act certification. California
Watch determined that roughly six out of every 10 public schools in the state have at least
one uncertified building project.
The state architect’s office has allowed building inspectors hired by school districts to work
on complex and expensive jobs despite complaints of incompetence. Inspectors have been
missing from construction sites at key moments and have been accused of filing false reports
– but that has not stopped them from getting more work.
The state’s top regulators at times have appeared more concerned with caseload
management than enforcing the Field Act. One state architect ordered what was dubbed
“Close-O-Rama” – a mad dash in the 1990s to approve projects as Field Act safe. Even now,
the state architect’s office has classified hundreds of projects for “no apparent or recorded
reason” as simply missing paperwork, according to a 2011 internal memo.
A separate state seismic safety inventory created nearly a decade ago shows more than 7,500
older buildings as potentially dangerous. But restrictive rules have prevented schools from
accessing a special $200 million fund for seismic repairs. Only two schools have tapped the
money. The vast majority of the buildings remain unfixed, and the money unused.
As the state architect’s office relaxed its oversight, the office became closely aligned with the
industry it regulates. Government officials became members of a lobbying group for school
construction firms; mingled at conferences, golf tournaments and dinners; and briefed the
lobbying group’s clients at monthly meetings. The state even told its employees that
taxpayers would foot the bill for their membership dues.

And there’s more
•

The California Geological Survey redrew the state’s official earthquake hazard maps decades ago
amid pressure from property owners, real estate agents and local government officials who feared
property values would decline inside these seismic hot spots. As the maps shifted, some schools
were located inside hazard zones one day and outside the next.

That’s cute Corey, but lets get to part
that helps me.
• Question: How can I get the safety story for
my community? What do I need?
• Answer: Skepticism and a “document state of
mind”

Tip 1: Be skeptical. Demand proof from
everyone. Then, verify verify verify.
• Unfortunately, it is legal in the U.S. to mislead or lie to a journalist.
• Whether you’re asking about aging infrastructure, fire safety, flood plains,
building code violations or food safety, expect the official in charge to deny
or dramatically downplay problems. Some will flat out lie.
• Why? Because many officials (and their attorneys) believe an agency could
get sued, lose funding or face a massive loss of jobs, by acknowledging the
existence of unaddressed safety hazards. For someone with authority, the
“Is it safe” question is explosive and fear-producing.

Tip 2: A document state of mind
• Although officials might not be forthcoming
with you, the problem has been documented
somewhere in an e-mail, an internal memo or
report. Safety problems are often discussed in
staff meetings. Minutes, notes and audio
recordings often capture these issues.
• The open record laws in your state are your
best friend when working a safety story. Learn
them and use them.

Warning: Frightened officials will attempt to thwart your records
request

•
•
•

•

Why? Because they can. Many states lack criminal penalties and other
meaningful deterrents for blowing off records requests. The really savvy
bureaucrat will provide the illusion of following the records law while
withholding the most important documentation. Some of those tactics
include:
Bizarre legal interpretations of what’s public and what isn’t.
Discouraging deep research by demanding ridiculously high fees.
Cherry picking your document release without your knowledge or
consent. This can involve removing explosive or embarrassing documents
from the stack produced for your request, coaching employees on what
records to provide, or limiting the scope of the internal search to ensure
key records are missed.
And yes, when all else fail, some agencies will flat out deny the records
exist. No records, no proof of problem, no story.

So how can I win the records battle?
Tip 3: Archives
•

•

•
•
•
•
•

When our records request for enforcement policies and meeting minutes
turned up “no records,” we pushed to see the agency’s index of their archival
files. From these indexes, we flagged about 25 boxes of older records, believed
to contain these documents. After receiving files from a government
warehouse, we were given an onsite office to review reams and reams of
paper.
Weeks later, those boxes turned up the meeting minutes and policy
documents we sought. But there was a bonus: the boxes contained tons of
other great records, we didn’t know existed. Some of the extra, but critically
important documentation included:
A internal study of enforcement problems filled with statistics and charts
Scores of memos documenting bureaucratic chaos
Complaints from employees, schools and other state officials
Budget raids of the agency’s funds by the Governor’s office
And letters showing top managers at the regulatory agency were also
members of a powerful school construction lobbying organization pushing for
lax safety rules and minimal government oversight.

A day at my state office

Tip 4: Momentum & People Trails
•

•

•

After repeated visits to an agency, the word will spread fast that a reporter is
around, which will produce ample amounts of employee curiosity. Every
organization has a small contingent of “true believers” who work and believe
in the agency’s true mission. Often these employees have squirreled away
records of wrongdoing that they were unsuccessful in stopping. These
employees will help you on a confidential basis.
Sifting through older documentation and tracking down internal telephone
books and organizational charts will give you names of former employees who
are still in the know about agency happenings and can connect you with
friendly current employees. Find them at home and ask them to share their
knowledge and perspective. They too will have records.
Pretty soon, human sources will give you the insights needed to push back on
record request gamesmanship. Sources on the seismic story not only secretly
provided the documents that were being withheld from records request, but
also shared intimate advance accounts of how officials were preparing for
showdown interviews; leaked records from sensitive internal damage control
meetings; and shared high-level emails and confidential records that were
exempted by the records law.

Examples from the field

Tip 5: Research experts carefully

• Like most things these days, experts can be hit or miss. Some are
completely unreliable because of their lack of firsthand knowledge. Others
are deeply connected to the authorities involved and may have strong
financial or personal incentive to downplay or dismiss problems.
• Try to find the independent experts who have demonstrated strong and
credible research in the public interest. Former employees can be helpful
with that. Older clips, academic journals and professional conferences are
also places where these experts can be found and cultivated.

Any questions?
• Feel free to contact me at:
• cjohnson@themarshallproject.org or 916-3468584.

