Navigating the
Oklahoma
Open Records
Act

What the ORA is all about?
How do you go about making a request?

What do you do if your request is ignored or denied?

OVERVIEW

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.2

As the Oklahoma Constitution recognizes and guarantees,
all political power is inherent in the people. Thus, it is the
public policy of the State of Oklahoma that the people are
vested with the inherent right to know and be fully
informed about their government. The purpose of this act
is to ensure and facilitate the public’s right of access to and
review of government records so they may efficiently and
intelligently exercise their inherent political power.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.2

The Oklahoma Open Records Act shall not create, directly or
indirectly, any rights of privacy or any remedies for violation of
any rights of privacy; nor shall the Oklahoma Open Records Act,
except as specifically set forth in the Oklahoma Open Records
Act, establish any procedures for protecting any person from
release of information contained in public records.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.2
The privacy interests of individuals are adequately protected in the
specific exceptions to the Oklahoma Open Records Act or in the statutes
which authorize, create or require the records. Except where specific
state or federal statutes create a confidential privilege, persons who
submit information to public bodies have no right to keep this
information from public access nor reasonable expectation that this
information will be kept from public access; provided, the person, agency
or political subdivision shall at all times bear the burden of establishing
such records are protected by such a confidential privilege.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.2

Except as may be required by other statutes, public bodies do
not need to follow any procedures for providing access to public
records except those specifically required by the Oklahoma
Open Records Act.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.3(2)
“Public body” shall include, but not be limited to, any office, department, board, bureau,
commission, agency, trusteeship, authority, council, committee, trust or any entity
created by a trust, county, city, village, town, township, district, school district, fair
board, court, executive office, advisory group, task force, study group, or any
subdivision thereof, supported in whole or in part by public funds or entrusted with the
expenditure of public funds or administering or operating public property, and all
committees, or subcommittees thereof. Except for the records required by Section 24A.4
of this title, “public body” does not mean judges, justices, the Council on Judicial
Complaints, the Legislature, or legislators.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.3(1)
“Record” means all documents, including, but not limited to, any book,
paper, photograph, microfilm, data files created by or used with computer
software, computer tape, disk, record, sound recording, film recording,
video record or other material regardless of physical form or
characteristic, created by, received by, under the authority of, or coming
into the custody, control or possession of public officials, public bodies, or
their representatives in connection with the transaction of public business,
the expenditure of public funds or the administering of public property.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.3(1)
“Record” means all documents, including, but not limited to, any book,
paper, photograph, microfilm, data files created by or used with
computer software, computer tape, disk, record, sound recording, film
recording, video record or other material regardless of physical form or
characteristic, created by, received by, under the authority of, or coming
into the custody, control or possession of public officials, public bodies,
or their representatives in connection with the transaction of public
business, the expenditure of public funds or the administering of public
property.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.3(1)
“Record” means all documents, including, but not limited to, any book, paper,
photograph, microfilm, data files created by or used with computer software,
computer tape, disk, record, sound recording, film recording, video record or other
material regardless of physical form or characteristic, created by, received by, under
the authority of, or coming into the custody, control or possession of public
officials, public bodies, or their representatives in connection with the transaction
of public business, the expenditure of public funds or the administering of public
property.

Oklahoma Open Records Act
Okla. Stat. tit. 51, §24A.3(1)
“Record” means all documents, including, but not limited to, any
book, paper, photograph, microfilm, data files created by or used
with computer software, computer tape, disk, record, sound
recording, film recording, video record or other material
regardless of physical form or characteristic, created by, received
by, under the authority of, or coming into the custody, control or
possession of public officials, public bodies, or their
representatives in connection with the transaction of public
business, the expenditure of public funds or the administering
of public property.

Fuzzy Areas
•

ORA recognizes an exemption if federal law
makes information confidential
(§24A.22) (FERPA, HIPPA, and other
acronyms)

•

Misconstruction by educators, health
providers, and others

More Fuzzy Areas
Law enforcement records (§24A.8)

•
Ten categories of records must be made available (arrestee
description, facts concerning arrest, incident reports and lists of
incidents, radio logs of calls dispatched, conviction information,
disposition of warrants, summary of crimes reported, jail registers
and booking information, dashcam audio and video, and bodycam
audio and video) (§24A.8(A))
•
Subsections on dashcams and bodycams contain exceptions
(§24A.8(A)(9) and (10))

More Fuzzy Areas
Law enforcement records (§24A.8)

•
If not listed in subsection A, can deny access to records
unless court finds public interest outweighs reason for denial
(§24A.8(B))
•
ORA imposes no new recordkeeping requirements
(§24A.8(C))

More Fuzzy Areas
Records in litigation of investigation file (§24A.20)

•

Not an exemption or ground to deny access

•
Law enforcement agency can deny access if
record available from another public body
Juvenile records (Okla. Stat. tit. 10A, §2-6-102(A))
•
Generally not treated as open record, unless
juvenile certified as adult or charged with specific
major crimes enumerated in statute

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
The Good
•
Strong statement of public policy favoring openness, at least in
principle
•
Public body required to designate person authorized to release
records during regular business hours (§24A.5(7))
•
Severely limits ability of parties to litigation and their counsel to
seal court records (§24A.29 and §24A.30)

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
The Bad
•
No specific time to respond––“prompt, reasonable access”
(§24A.5(6))—AG has defined as “only the time required to locate and
compile the public records,” but honored more in the breach than the
observance
•
Public agencies frequently have no one specifically assigned to
respond to open records requests

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
The Ugly
•
Public body may establish “reasonable procedures . . . to prevent
excessive disruptions of its essential functions” (§24A.5(6))
•
Public agencies use a queue system or other procedure to delay
responding to records requests
•
Public agencies sometimes flatly ignore open records requests or
claim exemptions that don’t apply

SB 191 (amending Okla. Stat. tit. 51,
§24A.5(6) (signed May 3, 2017, effective
November 1, 2017)
“A delay in providing access to records shall be limited solely to
the time required for preparing the requested documents and the
avoidance of excessive disruptions of the public body’s essential
functions. In no event may production of a current request for
records be unreasonably delayed until after completion of a prior
records request that will take substantially longer than the current
request.”

Making the request
•

Identify the proper agency

•
Request can be in any form—in person at agency, letter,
email, text—but best to be written even if requesting small
number of documents in person
•

Important to document request and any response

•
Request should always ask for acknowledgement that
request was received

This letter is provided by Joey Senat, Ph.D., OSU School of Media & Strategic Communications. Use of the letter is free, but please notify Professor Senat,
joey.senat@okstate.edu, when it is used.

DATE
NAME OF OFFICIAL
TITLE
AGENCY
ADDRESS
Dear ______________________:
Under the Oklahoma Open Records Act, Title 51, Sections 24A.1-30, I am requesting that any and all records related
to [NAME OF RECORDS / GENERAL DESCRIPTION] be made available to me for inspection. These records
should include, but not be limited to, the following:
[DETAILED LISTING OF RECORDS]

I acknowledge that not all government-held information is open to the public. However, the Oklahoma Supreme Court
has said the party claiming non-disclosure carries the burden to prove that an exemption applies. The Court also has
said government officials must consider in ruling on records requests that “disclosure is to be favored over a finding of
exemption.” If all or some portion of my request is denied, please cite in writing the specific statutory exemption being
claimed.

Please note that I am asking to inspect these records. I reserve, however, the right to request copies when the
records are examined.
The Oklahoma Open Records Act prohibits the charging of a search fee when the release of the “documents is in
the public interest, including, but not limited to, release to the news media, scholars, authors and taxpayers seeking
to determine whether those entrusted with the affairs of the government are honestly, faithfully, and competently
performing their duties as public servants.” [EXPLAIN YOUR IDENTITY & PURPOSE IN TERMS THAT FIT
THE PROVISION.] My request clearly falls within this provision of the Open Records Act and no search fee
should be charged for this request.
The Oklahoma Open Records Act requires that public bodies provide “prompt, reasonable access to its records,”
which a state Attorney General Opinion defined as meaning “only the time required to locate and compile the
public records.” Please respond to this request by no later than [DATE].
If you have any questions about the nature or scope of this request, please contact me. Thank you for your
cooperation.
Sincerely,
[YOUR NAME, TITLE AND CONTACT INFORMATION, INCLUDING ADDRESS, PHONE NUMBER AND
EMAIL ADDRESS]

Dear ______________________:
I request that you provide me as promptly as possible copies of [GENERAL DESCRIPTION DOCUMENTS],
including but not limited to [MORE SPECIFIC DESCRIPTION, INCLUDING DATE RANGE, IF
APPROPRIATE].
Please acknowledge that you have received this request. The Oklahoma Open Records Act requires you to provide
“prompt, reasonable” access to the requested records, which the Oklahoma Attorney General has defined as “only
the time required to locate and compile the public records.” Please provide the requested records on or before
_______, or advise me why the records cannot be provided by then. If all or some portion of my request is denied,
please cite in writing the specific statutory exemption being claimed.

As a member of the news media, the release of these documents is in the public interest, so you should not charge
me a search fee. If the cost to make copies is more than $________, please advise me of the cost before making
copies.
If you have any questions about the nature or scope of this request, please contact me. Thank you for your
cooperation.
Sincerely,

Costs and fees
•
Agency cannot charge a search fee if request is in the
public interest; therefore cannot charge search fee to news
media
•
Can charge only “direct cost of making the copy”
(§24A.5(4)(b))

FOLLOW-UP
How much time do you allow?

Recommend some follow–up letter, email, or
text if your sense is that the amount of time
taken to produce records is not reasonable, given
the scope and nature of the documents requested
Keep pressure on if agency not responsive

DENIED (OR SORT OF DENIED)
What constitutes denial
•

Direct (whether or not with identified exemption)

•
Constructive—courts
have
recognized
concept
that
unreasonable delay can be denial—question is how long does one
have to wait to sue?

Bringing a lawsuit (§24A.17(B))
Civil suit for declarative or injunctive relief if denied access––
limited to records requested and denied prior to filing suit—
should name agency, public official in charge of agency (in
official capacity), or both (§24A.17(B)(1))

If successful, entitled to reasonable attorneys’ fees
(§24A.17(B)(2))
If not successful, public agency/official can recover reasonable
attorneys’ fees, but only if court finds suit was frivolous
(§24A.17(D))

ODDS AND ENDS
Other possible remedy is criminal prosecution (misdemeanor) by
DA for violation of ORA (§24A.17(A))––highly unlikely to occur
No civil liability for damages if public official provides records
as allowed under ORA (§24A.17(D))

Q&A

