Conducting interviews with inmates in federal prison: Compiled by Amy Brittain
1. Reach out to the inmate via snail mail. The Bureau of Prisons’ website has a handy
“inmate locator” that allows you to search all federal prisons to find where the inmate is
being held. Inmates are labeled by a register number. You should address your letter
using their name and number. Do not include any stapled papers in your initial letter. You
don’t want any reason for the letter to be held up during the security screening process.
2. Register for an online e-mail account with corrlinks.com. In the future, this will allow
you to communicate with inmates via an online messaging platform (and phone app).
You’ll want to get this process started early, especially if you’re on a tight deadline.
3. Be specific in your initial letter. Describe your story and why you want to speak to the
inmate. Ask the inmate to add your email address to their approved list on CorrLinks.
4. Now, you wait. Hopefully, your inmate has access to CorrLinks. Sometimes inmates will
lose access to the platform because of disciplinary issues. If your inmate has received
your letter and has decided to communicate with you, you will receive a notification from
CorrLinks that the inmate is seeking to add you as an approved messenger.
5. Once dialogue is established, reach out to the prison media affairs officer for an
official interview request. Lately, I’ve heard that all interview requests are elevated to
the national BOP office in D.C. Historically, wardens have had much of the say if these
requests are approved. Be specific. Describe exactly what story you are working on. In
my requests, I said that I wanted to ask the inmates about their experience being
sentenced under the Youth Rehabilitation Act in D.C. as young, violent offenders.
6. If your request is granted… Ask in advance if you can speak to a corrections officer
who has worked with the inmate. Ask if there are disciplinary or sexual behavior issues
that you should be aware of in advance. Ask if an officer will be in the room during the
interview. Ask what you will be allowed to bring to the interview. You will likely NOT
be allowed to bring in your phone or any audio recorders, so be prepared to take
extensive notes by hand on loose-leaf paper.
7. Bring in as much supplemental material as possible: I brought in court transcripts,
police reports and sentencing letters. (Make sure none of these materials are stapled).
These materials provided helpful talking points as we went through the case history.
8. Scope out the room in advance and make sure you feel safe: For both of my interview
with convicted murderers, I was alone with the inmate (un-handcuffed) in a meeting
room. I propped the door open with a trash can, just in case.
9. Wear a watch: Since you can’t bring your phone, you need to keep tabs on the time.
10. Immediately type up your notes after your interview: You’ll want to quickly
summarize everything you remember about the inmate’s demeanor and comments.
11. Be polite to the prison staffers. When I went to a federal prison in West Virginia, I had
no intention of going back there after my interview. But after I had interviewed the
inmate’s mother, sister and girlfriend, I felt it was essential to go back to the prison to
check some facts and ask more questions. They expedited my second request and allowed
me to return to the prison about one week before the scheduled publication of my story.

