What’s Up With LinkedIn?
Navigating the latest changes
Jim Oberman
June 22, 2017

● 84,980 Members
● LinkedIn Premium is free
● Required to take the LinkedIn for
Journalist webinar annually
● Conducted by May Chow LinkedIn Corporate Communications

January 19, 2017
What happened to advanced
search?

December 2016 - An under-the-radar announcement

“This sometimes means removing features that aren't heavily used
by most of our members to invest in others that members tell us
offer greater value.”
Filters removed from Premium
1. Years of Experience
2.

Function

3.

Seniority Level

4.

Interested In

5.

Company Size

6.

When Joined

No “past not current” company filter!

Conversations with LinkedIn

Workarounds with Premium Access?
There are no effective workarounds

“You just need to apply some elbow
grease” - May Chow
https://www.linkedin.com/help/linkedin/answer/75814

Worthwhile features you still get with Premium
Allows you to send InMail messages
Allows you to remain anonymous while searching profiles
(If you have a basic (free) account, and choose to browse in
private mode, you won't be able to see who's viewed your
profile either.)

Premium is still worth getting

The Only True Workaround Costs Money

www.linkedin.com

Good News? Well maybe

May 9th, 2017
“Hey Jim- Apologies for the radio silence. We’ll be announcing quite a few changes to LinkedIn
filters (and in a broader sense, Search) this quarter, but I can’t give you an ETA yet as we’re still
working through some of the details. We’re aware of the need for “true past” (a.k.a. “past not
current”) so it’s likely that’ll make a comeback.
Best I can do at the moment is keep you posted on our plans and give you insight into the public
tests as we start them.” - Director of Product Management, Search & Discovery at LinkedIn

Research Tips
● Invite people to join your network and accept
as many invites as you can
● The bigger network allows for fewer masked
profiles-- the anonymous “LinkedIn Member"

But Use Caution
“Invites from strangers, beyond cluttering your feed, could
give openings to scammers or phishers.” --Victoria Ipri, an
independent LinkedIn consultant who teaches classes on how
to use the network

So choose carefully

Tips for contacting people using LinkedIn

● InMail messaging
● Look for contact info in person’s profile
● Cell numbers, email address, though they are
rare, are sometimes in a person’s profile.
Maybe a birthday - use it for public record
searches
https://www.linkedin.com/in/geoscripcariu/
https://www.linkedin.com/in/laurashin/

Chrome extensions for emails and phone numbers
● Hiretual -- https://hiretual.com/
● Prophet http://signup.prophet.rocks/
● Lusha www.lusha.co

jim.oberman@wsj.com

