Year in Investigations
2017
@DougHaddix & @MeganLuther
@IRE_NICAR

An NPR investigation identified ten times the
number of cases of the worst stage of black
lung,the deadly coal miners' disease, as federal
researchers reported. NPR's findings indicate
Progressive Massive Fibrosis (PMF) strikes
many more miners and at far higher rates than
previously recognized. The report comes as the
federal program that provides medical benefits
and cash payments to miners stricken with
black lung is threatened by a multi-billion dollar
debt and challenges to ongoing funding.

A Sarasota Herald-Tribune investigation
found that black people throughout
Florida are treated far more harshly than
white people in the state's justice system.
Black people are frequently found more
guilty, get more jail time and are served
more severe sentences, especially when it
comes to felony drugs, robbery and
battery.The judges who hear these cases
are also more likely to be a white man; out
of the over 900 judges within Florida, only
62 of them are black.

An American Public Media investigation
revealed how law enforcement mishandled one
of the most notorious child abductions in the
country and how those failures fueled national
anxiety about stranger danger, led to the
nation's sex-offender registries and raised
questions about crime-solving effectiveness
and accountability.

A Kentucky Center for Investigative
Reporting investigation revealed how the
University of Louisville’s nonprofit
fundraising arm bought an abandoned
factory in Oklahoma at the behest of a major
donor. The multi-layered $3.47 million-dollar
transaction had no academic purpose, did
not result in any revenue for the organization
and appeared to be an ethical breach and tax
code violation.

A USA Today investigation revealed how
9,000 teachers across the United States
should have been flagged for previous
disciplinary offense, but never were. The
investigation found that serious defects in
teacher screening systems throughout the
nation, and how inconsistent laws and
regulations allow potentially dangerous
teachers to continue working.

An HBO Sports investigation looked into the
inner workings of the International Olympics
Committee and its claim to being a progressive
and people-minded organization. But, the
investigation found the IOC rather focuses on
wealth, prestige and furthering its own goals.
Three reporters were sent to Rio, Sochi and
Beijing to uncover the disastrous effect the
Olympics had when these cities hosted the
Games.

A Channel 4 London investigation revealed how
Britain's Conservative Party was getting around
the country's campaign election spending
limitations in order to keep its position as
Britain's leading political party, spurring a lengthy
investigation by the Electoral Commission and
dozens of police forces.

An 18-month investigation by The
Oregonian/OregonLive found that
every time a soldier pulled the
trigger inside a National Guard gun
range, a bullet cast off bits of lead.
The investigation uncovered the
Guard's neglect allowed the toxic
dust to spread, endangering soldiers
and visitors to armories across the
United States.

An Atlanta Journal-Constitution
investigation found multiple
cases of doctors sexually abusing
patients throughout the United
States. Many doctors would not
only never be punished, but they
would be allowed to continue
practicing medicine. They
combed through 100,000
documents with data scrapers
and used various keywords to
uncover multiple cases of sexual
misconduct in all 50 states.

A Los Angeles Times investigation revealed that
California's National Guard had been using
various types of penalties in order to take back
tens of millions of dollars in enlistment bonuses,
which they claimed had been wrongly awarded.
Many of those enlisted had served tours in Iraq
and Afghanistan and some sustained grievous
injuries. Some were expected to pay back their
bonuses because their injuries were so bad they
couldn't finish their full tour.

VTDigger exposed allegations of longtime
fraud being committed at a Northern
Vermont ski resort using EB-5
immigrant investor money. The EB-5
program grants green cards to immigrants
who invest in U.S. businesses. The ski
resort developers were caught misusing
hundreds of thousands of dollars in
immigrant investment money and face
numerous counts of security fraud.

A WVUE-New Orleans
investigation revealed a
secretive practice used
by insurance companies
to force costumers to
pay steep premiums
back to insurance
companies on
prescription drugs.

An IndyStar investigation found
that USA Gymnastics has repeatedly
ignored and dismissed accusations
of coaches sexually abusing young
gymnasts. The investigation
revealed hundreds of cases of
gymnasts reporting sexually abusive
coaches, but the organization turned
a blind eye and allowed coaches to
continue working and never
reported the accusations.

A KRIK investigation exposed
corruption and crime within
Serbia's highest levels of power.
The investigation uncovered the
hidden assets of Serbian
politicians, along with their
questionable relationship networks
and potential wrongdoing.
Reporters investigated top officials,
including the Serbian mayor.

A Chicago Reporter investigation found that the
city of Chicago spent more than $210 million for
police misconduct lawsuits from 2012 to 2015.
The Police Department exceeded its annual
budget for lawsuits by almost $50 million, on
average, in each of those years. Yet, unlike some
other major cities, Chicago doesn’t analyze the
lawsuits for trends, identify the officers most
frequently sued, or determine ways to reduce
both the cost of the cases and officer misconduct.
Rather than rein in the practices that lead to
these settlements, officials have borrowed
millions to pay for police lawsuits, adding to the
city’s crippling debt.

The Texas Tribune went through
over six years of Texas police
records to form Texas' first ever
accounting of police shootings.
This collection revealed that Texas'
record-keeping is spotty and
sporadic, the Tribune's
investigation even uncovered
shootings that hadn't turned up in
public records.

A Houston Chronicle investigation
found that back in 2004, the Texas
legislature approved an illegal 8.5
percent quota limiting the enrollment
numbers of special needs kids into
the special education program. It was
used as way to save the state billions
of dollars, to alter performance test
scores and it kept 250,000 Texas
children from getting the benefits of
special education programs.

A CBC News investigation looked into Canada's
top 25 most accident-prone railway crossings and
found wide-spread design flaws across the
country. Some of the most dangerous railway
crossings in Canada lack automated gate arms,
protective pedestrian gates, advance warning
signs, bells and flashing lights. Other deficiencies
include poor sightlines for drivers, confusing road
signs and overgrown bush. As well, CBC News
learned Transport Canada does not routinely
warn the public about all railway crossings that
appear in its database of the country's 500
"highest risk" crossings.

A Naples Daily News investigation
found that Florida will not
immediately arrest drunk drivers
immediately after they cause a fatal
crash, and in some cases drivers
remained free for months, well
beyond the acceptable time period, as
investigations went on. The
investigation found dozens of drunk
drivers who never faced punishment
and hundreds were were free from
being arrested or convicted for years.

The Palm Beach Post investigation into
Palm Beach County's heroin epidemic
revealed an unregulated sober home
business, bogus addiction treatments and
created Florida's first and only cost
analysis of the heroin epidemic. The
investigation also compiled profiles and
photographs of the 216 people who died
from heroin overdose in 2015.

A KMGH-TV (Denver) investigation
found multiple cases of domestic abuse
ignored by law enforcement. The
investigation revealed a problematic
system of poor record-keeping,
untrained officers, mishandled or
unreported cases and victims of abuse
left without help or relief.

A Chicago Tribune investigation exposed
cases of the state of Illinois neglecting the
poorest and most vulnerable adults with
disabilities. The state decided to move these
adults to cheaper private group homes, where
they were left vulnerable, neglected and in
some cases, mistreated. The Tribune
identified multiple cases of harmed residents
in the group homes and tracked cases of
deaths throughout the state.

Through months of surveillance and
video coverage, A WTHR
Indianapolis undercover investigation
revealed tons of food and donations
intended for the homeless shelter
never made it to the homeless at all.
Instead, much of the food went
directly to the charity’s leaders who
took the food for themselves, their
friends, their family members and
even for their pets.

A KNXV investigation exposed how a group,
Advocates for Individuals with Disabilities
(AID), exploited the American Disabilities Act
and used it as a money making machine while
cloaked as a non-profit organization. Some of
the investigation's major findings included
AID often sued businesses for violations that
their facilities had also committed, the
businesses they did sue had never been visited
people with disabilities, the IRS granted AID
non-profit status despite having lied on their
application and AID is secretly funded by
someone with a history of consumer fraud.

An East Bay Times investigation looked into Oakland, Ca’s
‘Ghost Ship” fire, which killed 36 people, exposed how the
city failed to take certain actions and enforce regulations
that could have prevented the fire from happening.

Housing for migrant farmworkers
are regulated and monitored by
various state agencies and federal
laws, however, A Midwest Center
for Investigative Reporting
investigation found that major
safety and health problems are
often ignored and go unfixed. There
are few housing options for migrant
workers, so many are stuck with
poor living conditions that are out
of their control.

In a two-month investigation, NBC5
Investigates and Telemundo
Chicago teamed up to examine
every police-pursuit-related crash in
the Chicago area in recent years.
Their investigation revealed how
many innocent bystanders have
been killed or injured due to high
speed police chases.

A KHOU-Houston investigation
revealed that Houston Police
Department's $8 million body
camera program has fallen short on
its promise of "transparency."
Rather, the investigation found
how this footage isn't readily
available to the public, officers
often fail to hit the record button
and Houston Police Department
often violates its own policies.

A Milwaukee Journal Sentinel investigation
revealed a damaged and broken culture in a
northern Wisconsin prison. After budget cuts
shut down many Milwaukee-area juvenile
prisons, inmates were transferred to Lincoln Hills
prison in northern Wisconsin. The Journal's
investigation found that many inmates sustained
serious injuries, guards were untrained and
unprepared to deal with the troubled youth and
state officials ignored the hostile conditions and
did nothing to improve the broken system.

A Houston Chronicle investigation found that numerous
facilities throughout Houston, the capital of the
petrochemical industry, aren’t careful about the harmful
chemicals held in their warehouses. Hundreds of
chemicals pose serious threats to the lives of people living
near these facilities, which are not regularly inspected,
unless an accident or a complaint is placed. The facilities
also police themselves, regulations aren't functional,
accidents are rarely investigated, communication with
Houston's fire departments is weak and chemicals are
often transported through heavily populated areas.

A WXIA-Atlanta investigation looked
into a policy that stripped tens of
thousands of service members of their
medical benefits and veteran status due
to less than honorable discharges, even
though many had served in war zones
and suffer from PTSD and Traumatic
Brain Injury.

Injustice in the Valley

Through a five month long
investigation and hundreds of pages
of public records, a WJHL Johnson
City investigation uncovered how a
Tennessee state-run facility for
people with intellectual disabilities
underreported over 250 abuse cases
and police failed to properly
investigate the facility. The
investigation found employees who
neglected and abused patients, failed
to give patients their correct
medications and some employees
would come to work intoxicated.

A ProPublica and New York Daily News investigation
revealed how the New York Police Department has used a
"nuisance abatement" clause for years to threaten
businesses and homes. The clause, which has received little
scrutiny or attention, allows police officers to shut down
businesses for a prolonged period of time if they suspect
"illegal activity." While this law intended to target drug
traffickers and brothels, but most of the targets tend to be
in lower income, immigrant, minority neighborhoods.

A New York Times investigation revealed
the largest doping scandal in sports history
that took place on the Russian Olympic
team. The investigation provided a detailed
account of the scandal thanks to testimony
from the former director of Russia's
anti-doping laboratory. His testimony
revealed how for years Russia elaborately
got around doping rules and was still able to
have athletes compete.

A Frontline/NPR investigation
uncovered how much insurance
companies profited off of Hurricane
Sandy's devestation in 2013. The
investigation discovered how much
insurance companies profit from
disasters and how companies used a
taxpayer program to gain large
profits. All while homeowners
affected by the hurricane were left to
struggle.

A PennLive investigation revealed
major failings within Pennsylvania's
nursing homes and found multiple
cases of patients dying from
preventable deaths. It also found a
flawed state system that rarely led
serious investigations, never
reprimanded poor nursing homes and
offered little oversight or regulation.
The investigation included a national
database for nursing homes that inflate
their staffing levels, a database and lists
on the best and worst nursing homes
in PA and potential solutions to PA’s
nursing home problem.

An International Consortium of International
Journalists investigation sorted through leaked
documents and data to reveal the offshore
financial holdings of elected and public officials,
former and current world leaders and many other
public figures.It revealed deals shrouded in secrecy
committed by banks, firms and companies in
order to stash financial holdings in offshore
havens and make them nearly impossible to trace.

A series stories from The Washington Post
sought to reveal something vital about Donald
Trump’s character, by digging for the truth
behind his repeated promises to donate to
charity. At first, the stories focused on a specific
promise, made on the 2016 campaign trail: that
Trump had raised $6 million for veterans
charities, including a $1 million gift from his
own pocket. Then the Post’s investigation
broadened, to examine charitable giving across
Trump’s lifetime. It revealed, among other
things, that Trump had been using his
name-branded charitable foundation in ways
that seemed to violate both state and federal
laws.

A Chicago Tribune investigation
attempted to discover potentially
deadly combinations of
prescription drugs and sought to
find out if pharmacists were able
to recognize these combinations.
They teamed up with scientists to
search for drug combinations that
might cause a potentially fatal
heart condition.

A Frontline and ProPublica investigation
delved into the terror campaign that swept
across Europe in 2015 and 2016. The
investigation looked into the Charlie
Hebdo attacks, the Paris attack and the
Brussels bombing, while also focusing on
the structural flaws within Europe's
counter-terror defense systems.

A WTVF Nashville investigation
exposed questionable testing and
grading practices inside one of the most
highly applauded school districts in the
nation. The investigation found that the
lowest performing schools would keep
their lowest level students from taking
end of course exams and the required
ACT test in order to manipulate scores.
Some schools would also alter their
grading scales to increase graduation
rates.

A Wall Street Journal investigation examined the dramatic events in
Turkey that caused the country to go from promising democracy to
a near-autocracy.

The Naples Daily News investigation explored
the state of Florida’s beaches, and how little
the state invests in this important asset at a
time when development is allowed at a rapid
pace. The investigation found the lack of
investment has resulted in much of the state’s
coastline receding and local governments are
burdened with managing erosion. Even
though beaches generate billions annually for
the state in tourism-related sales taxes,
Florida's lawmakers and governors typically
return less than $1 to the shore each year for
every $100 they take.

A Kansas City Star investigation was prompted
after the death of a 10-year-old as he rode down a
17-story water slide at an amusement park.
Subsequent reporting and investigation
uncovered the following findings: Kansas and
local governments do little to regulate amusement
park rides, the water slide, billed as the world’s
largest, had little outside review for safety, local
government officials did not evaluate the slide for
safety, experts quoted by The Star questioned the
wisdom and safety of several aspects of the ride,
including the installation of an overhead netting
system and the risk it posed to passengers, the raft
that carried passengers was not tethered in any
way to the slide itself and the ride operator’s
decision to arrange passengers from lightest in
front to heaviest in back.

A Minnesota Star Tribune investigation
was prompted after the shooting of
Philando Castile, a black man who was
shot at a traffic stop by a police officer
and whose girlfriend Facebook live
streamed the aftermath. The investigation
looked into the officer, his training, and
the multitude of traffic stops Castile
encountered before his death, despite not
having a criminal record.

An Intercept and 100Reporters investigation
found a shadowy network of U.S. training
programs that train and assist foreign soldiers,
police and other personnel throughout the
world. Their investigation found that these
global training programs have little oversight or
a coherent strategy, a lack of testing, evaluating
or tracking trainees, and flawed vetting
procedures that intend to weed out human
rights abusers. Meanwhile, the American people
were not aware that such a program exists.

Purdue Pharma promises that OxyContin will
provide 12-hour pain relief, which is twice as long as
other painkillers on the market. However, for many
people, the relief wears of hours earlier and leaves
behind painful withdrawals and an intense craving
for more of the drug. A Los Angeles Times
investigation found that Purdue was not only aware
of this problem for decades, subjects in the initial
clinical trial said pain relief did not last for 12 hours.
The investigation also found that Purdue pushed
doctors to prescribe the drug, and when patients
complained about the short period of pain relief,
they had physicians just prescribe a strong dose,
leading to a greater chance of overdose and death.

A CIR/Reveal investigation
looked into records showing that
the wealthy neighborhood Bel Air
is the biggest residential water
consumer in all of California.
Despite a statewide drought
crisis, many affluent communities
are using excessive amounts of
water and have yet to be
reprimanded, while members of
lower income communities have
been fined for hosing their
driveways and not fixing broken
sprinkler heads.

A Charleston
Gazette-Mail
investigation found
that pharmaceutical
drug companies were
pushing massive
amounts of opioids
into pharmacies
throughout rural
West Virginia
counties with the
highest rate of drug
overdoses in the
country.

A Chattanooga Times Free
Press investigation took a deep
look into Chattanooga's
poverty and severe income
inequality. The investigation
pinpoints many of the causes
of Chattanooga's economic
disparities while also
presenting groups that are
invested in finding solutions.

A ProPublica investigation looked
into how Risk assessments are used
to determine the risk of someone
committing a crime in the future and
is used in some courtrooms to inform
decisions, determine sentencing and
rehabilitation needs. This algorithm is
being used more frequently, however,
a risk study on it has never been done
by government officials. ProPublica
did one and found that the formula is
more likely to flag a black defendant
as a future criminal and white
defendants receive a much lower risk
rating.

A Buzzfeed News investigation
looked into how a
dispute-settlement process used by
multinational corporations allows
them to commit crimes, especially
against poorer nations, and get away
with it. Thanks to investor-state
dispute settlement, or ISDS,
corporations are able to undermine
domestic regulations and ignore
environmental laws at the expense
of poorer nations.

A Reuters investigation uncovered
how the U.S. college admissions
process has become corrupted by
systemic cheating on standardized
testing, such as the SAT, in Asia,
and how complicit American
officials have turned a blind eye to
the system, in order to gain large
profits from the tuition of foreign
students.

A Boston Globe investigation uncovered how
after many Massachusetts state psychiatric
hospitals were shut down, the promise to replace
them with something better went unkept. The
failure to improve the state’s mental health system
has led to public safety crisis, including homicides
committed by mentally ill people and institutions
from hospitals to courts have become burdened
by waves of mentally ill people left without proper
treatment or support.

A series of stories by The Salt Lake
Tribune revealed the cruel, unfair and
perverse ways that Brigham Young
University treats sexual assault victims.
The investigation also revealed how
Mormon teachings that place blame on
the woman in sexual assault cases has
aided and abetted rape culture. Finally,
the investigation examined how BYU’s
Honor Code targets and often penalizes
victims of sexual assault.

A New York Times investigation
revealed how New York state
prisons tend to punish minority
inmates far more frequently than
white inmates. The investigation
analyzed over 60,000 discipline
cases and parole decisions in
order to reveal the disparity in
punishments.

An NPR investigation found that a formerly secret government program was created
during World War II to test the effects of mustard gas and other chemical agents on
60,000 U.S. Army soldiers. While government officials have since declassified this
program, they failed to mention that these tests were being done specifically to
minority soldiers to test the effects on their "colored" skin.

An NPR and the Marshall Project
investigation revealed a practice called
"double-cell solitary confinement" in
federal and state prisons. Double solitary
confinement is when two inmates,
deemed violent and unsafe to others, are
placed in a single solitary confinement
cell together. The investigation revealed
how this practice has caused high levels
of violence and increased the chances of
inmates killing other inmates.

