STRATEGY, SHOOTING, AND SURVIVAL FOR
NON-BROADCAST REPORTER
Welcome!

What kind of video will you make?
■ Know the intention of the video
– stand alone or with a story
– The whole story or focusing on one element
■ What is the tone of your video?
■ Will it need updates?

Before you leave on assignment
■ Check your equipment
– Is your phone fully charged?
– Do you have a backup power source?
– Is your lav working? Do you have extra batteries
– Check your lens and keep it clean
■ Remember to film horizontally, not vertically

■ Test video make sure it will record, phones can lock up
■ Try to keep clips under 1 minute each
– For easy editing by you or someone else

Trouble shooting on the fly
■ Have a back up plan to your back up plan
■ Is your shot in focus?

■ Record for a few seconds before actually filming
■ Carry headphones to check your sound level
■ Don’t film into the sun
■ Shoot close to your subject for better sound and photo
■ Treat your phone for video much like you would for stills
– If you don’t have a tripod - you are the tripod
■ Someone to shy to be filmed? Take a photo and record the interview audio on your phone

Evergreen content
■ Have a common topic you revisit again and again?
■ What is your city, state or town known for?
– National parks, a product, famous person, quirky history
■

Example: 5 differences between the Grand Canyon’s north and south rim

■ What does your audience care about?
– seasonal content, a reoccurring concert, charity event
■

Example: 6 ways you can accidentally start a wildfire

■ What does your audience need to know?
– tips, tricks and deals videos
■

Example: How to be a smart hiker

■ Keep a list for reference

For better production
■ Practice
■ Label your clips – easier to find and edit later
■ Have the person you are interviewing spell their name while recording
■ Taking video with your phone?
– many phones have a built in feature where you can film and capture photos at
the same time
■ Send any notes that may be relevant

Video made for social
■ Keep it consistent and simple
– 30 - 90 seconds
– 5-7 words per slide
– Easily readable font
■ Talk to your newsroom set up a standard for consistency across the board.
■ A video can be made with as little as 5 photos
■ Text on screen is your friend
– Mobile watchers often don't turn on the sound, text will keep people watching
■ Don’t always try to sum up your whole story, try to tell a different element

Facebook live
■

Minimum of 10-15 minutes maxes out at 4 hours

■

Promote it ahead of time

■

Practice going live before the big event

■

Audio, audio, audio!
– Interviews: ALWAYS use a lav or stick mic

■

Be aware of your surroundings

■

Make sure you have a strong internet connection

■

Set up your camera view

■

Watch your phone’s temperature

■

While the video is live you can not edit the title! You can fix it once it becomes on-demand

Reasons to use Facebook live
■ Have someone watching and responding to comments – for sharing related article
or other related content

■ Lets readers have access that they would never have otherwise
■ A way to interact in real time with your readers
– Makes it personal – you can respond to them by name
■ New feature - You can invite multiple people to a FB live
■ You can download and upload to your site

Paige Schwahn
Southwest Digital Hub Editor
■ Creates original videos, graphics, social posts, homepage management and
coordinates content between 9 different news websites in the Southwest
■ Oversees a team of producers who work in 3 states
■ Helps train and transition reporters from print to digital approach
■ Masters degree in Mass Communication from the Walter Cronkite School of
Journalism at ASU

■ Any questions?
– You can reach me at pschwahn@gannett.com or (602) 444-8526
Thank you!

