MANAGING THE REPORTER/EDITOR RELATIONSHIP
Andrew Donohue, Reveal/Center for Investigative Reporting
Lynn Walsh, NBC 7 San Diego
Alison Young, USA TODAY Network
2017 IRE Conference, Phoenix

FOR REPORTERS
Best practices for reporters to help get your editors get what they need:
1. Write week-ahead memos. Recognize that your editor is juggling a lot of stories from
multiple reporters. Take a few minutes toward the end of each week to send them a
week-ahead note detailing your key accomplishments during the past week – and what
your reporting plan is for the week ahead. This exercise helps both the reporter and
editor reflect on what was and wasn’t accomplished in the past week – and helps them
both see how the reporter intends to spend their time going forward.
2. Stop emailing: While helpful for quick updates, find ways to talk more and email less. If
regular conversation isn’t happening, consider asking at least for a one-on-one meeting
at the same time each week.
3. Do some reporting before pitching an enterprise story or project and asking for time.
When working a beat, carve out bits of spare time early in the morning, over lunch or
late in the day to do initial reporting on a promising enterprise tip or idea. By checking
out the tip in advance, you can make a more credible pitch that the idea is worthy an
official investment of time.
4. Make your enterprise story pitch in writing. Writing a story memo helps reporters
begin to create a plan for future reporting and provides a document editors can read
when they have time to focus, then use for further discussion with the reporter – and
other editors. Based on initial reporting, what’s the likely story – the minimum and
what’s the potential maximum story? What are the documents, data, human or other
sources you’ll likely use to pursue the story. Are there travel costs? Data costs? What is
your best estimate of the time and other resources needed to produce the minimum vs
maximum story? What are the unknowns? What are the potential barriers or problems
that might impact pursuit of this story? What are the visual or digital opportunities?
5. Discuss story expectations: As reporting is underway and the story evolves, find time at
regular intervals to discuss what the reporter currently sees as the likely story (which
may have changed from the initial pitch) and any new obstacles that may have become
apparent. Discuss deadlines and whether they are realistic. Discuss how the story is
being presented to others in the news organization – are problematic perceptions or
expectations being formed that are not in keeping with current reporting findings? A
reporter can’t meet editor expectations if they are based on faulty views of what the
reporting is finding vs what was hoped would be found. If editors aren’t initiating these
kinds of discussions, a reporter can ask for them.
6. Discuss multimedia and needs of other departments: Come up with a realistic plan –
discussed between reporter and editor – for how to handle the demands on a reporter’s

time from photo, video, graphics, interactive developers, partner news organizations
and others, especially in the final week and days before publication to ensure that
stories get fact checked and everyone gets what the need as deadline approaches.
Reporter strategies for frustrating editor behaviors
An editor who is focused on daily stories and gives no time for enterprise.
Strategy: Make your own time. Identify one strong enterprise idea and keep
chipping away at it. Carve out small blocks of time early in the day, at lunch, after
deadline, at night or on weekends. Get the story mostly done before sharing what you
have. Dangle the steak in front of them when it’s mostly cooked.) Another approach:
Consider sharing a story that others have done with your editor – and ask them what
they thought about it and whether they liked it. It may give you an opportunity to discuss
what it would take to produce a story like this.
An editor who has no experience doing investigative journalism, using documents, data or
FOIA.
Strategy: Take the time to gently educate them on an ongoing basis. Explain to them the
documents or the data you’re looking at when you find something exciting. Show them copies of
the document, or show them the data. Use week-ahead notes to describe the reporting you’re
doing. Share an example of a similar investigative story so they can see what the end result
might look like. Find other colleagues in your newsroom, company or through IRE to serve as
investigative reporting resources and mentors.
An editor who is an excessive
re-writer, or who inserts errors in stories.
Strategy: Talk with them about why they are doing so much rewriting. Ask additional
front-end direction so that perhaps you can write the story the way they want it – and still have
it be in your own voice. To avoid inadvertent insertion of error: Ask that re-written sentences or
sections be put in bold so that the reporter can carefully fact check the new prose – and also
check it against how they wrote it originally. (Tip: Keep copies of the drafts given to editors!)
An editor who pushes a story beyond what the reporting supports.
Strategy: Seek clarification for why the editor thinks the
reporting supports the assertion. If your gut says it’s gone too far, ask for
some time to think about it and review notes/data/documents. If you still think
it’s gone too far, be prepared to show the editor why. Don’t be afraid to bring
the documents, data (or lack of) to the table. If ethics or fairness are at
issue, be sure to say why. Try to find ways to ensure that editing and
rewriting is occurring far enough before publication to allow for thoughtful
review and discussion of such issues. Consider asking what others in the
newsroom think given the facts of the story.
A disorganized editor: Has great intentions, wants to give you time, but doesn’t manage all
the other departments involved.
Strategy: Help make your editor’s job easier. If they
don’t call for meetings with other departments, take it upon yourself to send
an email to your editor suggesting that a meeting be called – and specifying
the potential agenda for the meeting. Keep your own tally of what visual and
digital elements have been created – or still need to be done – and continue to
make suggestions for action through your editor. Develop good relationships
with multimedia editors and other collaborating departments in your newsroom.

An editor (or perhaps higher-up editor/editors) who decline to be involved during a project’s
development – and at the last minute decides it’s been done “all wrong.”
Strategy: Seek as much explanation as possible about what specifically they think is
“wrong.” Try to keep the conversation focused on details of the story/final draft so that the
conversation doesn’t turn into a philosophical one. Reporters should try to have situational
awareness of how your editor is communicating about the project with top editors at the news
organization. Ask whether your latest story memo has been shared? Or whether it would be
helpful for you to write a new memo that the editor can circulate to those higher up the food
chain. If a higher-up editor has a tendency to do last minute rewrites, ask whether that person
should be invited to some story meetings. Consider giving that person early drafts in hopes of
getting feedback before final stories are readied for publication. Discuss whether the news
organization should institute policies/best practices for when final feedback/edits must be
completed.

FOR EDITORS
The first rule of editing: there are no rules of editing. Every human being is different.
They have different strengths and weaknesses. Different motivations. Different ways of
working. Figure out an individualized approach for each reporter.
Some need a scheduled weekly sit down or you’d never hear from them. Others pop in
your office whenever they need help or have a juicy nugget to share. Others need a daily
check in. Some need to be pushed to say something clear and authoritative. Others
need to be reigned in.
For any given person, you might need to be a writing coach, a reporting partner, a
motivational speaker or a disappointed -- or angry -- parent. Figure out what motivates
each reporter, their strengths and weaknesses, and design your management around
what they need from you.
Communicate clearly, Part I: This is what you need to do. Two people can come
away from the same conversation with two very different takeaways. I try to follow up my
meetings with an email laying out our goals, priorities and the next specific tasks we
want to accomplish. This leaves no doubt in the direction you want to go, and creates an
easy agenda for the next meeting so you can follow-up on your progress.
Communicate clearly, Part II: This is why we need you to do it. Just as important is
explaining why. These are often organizational needs: why you want reporters involved
in writing headlines, why you’re asking them to write up short summaries of their findings
in addition to the long stories. As one reporter said: “This made it easier to do things I
didn't want to do, because I knew why I had to do them.” Beyond the nitty gritty, set a
clear sense of mission. It enables reporters to focus on what matters.
Ask for your reporters’ recommendations. You’re not all-knowing. Seek their
recommendations on how to go forward on a story or problem. They have a good sense
of the situation and oftentimes know the appropriate path forward (or at least the path
that they would be most enthusiastic about taking).
Give high-fives (or your own version of the high-five). You want people to be
ambitious. Give them the confidence to achieve more than they even thought possible.

And give them the energy to do it, too. This can be hard, lonely, sad work. But it is still
something we should be excited about. And it’s something we should have fun doing. So
have fun! It’s your job to set the tone for the room. Make the job fun for your reporters.
Just be there. You’re busy, yes. But there’s nothing more important than talking to your
reporters. Lots of times a reporter comes to my office wanting time to talk something
through. After spending a couple of minutes explaining the problem, they find their
answer on their own, without me having said a word. I literally did nothing but listen. It’s
a job a tree trunk could’ve done. And if you’re busy and can’t get to a draft or a request
for a little while, just let the reporter know immediately rather than letting them wonder
when on earth you’ll get to their stuff.
Invest lots of time on the front end. Be as engaged with chosing, framing and scoping
stories at the start as you are with editing and producing them on the back end. Be
highly involved with understanding and creating any methodologies. There’s nothing
worse than not completely understanding how your reporters arrived at some conclusion
until you’re sitting down to edit. This also allows you to voice your concerns about a story
early.
DEALING WITH SOME COMMON PROBLEMS
Problem: Communication
Solution: follow up email after meetings with recap of what was agreed on at the
meeting and to-do’s. I always like to ask how reporters prefer to communicate and
explain how I like to communicate. For example: I am much more responsive via text
than email when not in the office and have made it very clear that I can be texted at ANY
time and prefer that my team contact me that way if something is urgent or needs
attention, a quick answer, etc.
Problem: What are you spending your time on?
Solution: Build in more deadlines, or force reporters to juggle tasks.
Problem: You’re not getting what you want.
Solution: Understand: Do they not want to do it, or can they just not do it? Is it an
attitude problem or a skill problem? If it’s skill, then it’s simpler: coaching. If it’s attitude,
then it’s bigger and harder.
Problem: Overpromising.
Solution: Require a Perfect Pitch: One sentence. Who are you interviewing?
Confirmed/Not confirmed. Why should I care? Why does this matter? Highlight what you
know. Highlight what you do not know. Do your research!
AN EDITOR’S SUGGESTION FOR REPORTERS
No surprises. Every story requires you to make countless judgement calls. You have to
decide what information to include, or what not to emphasize. Talk through all of your
judgement calls with your editor. Be honest about what you have and don't have. Don't
wait until the end to explain problems/limitations/etc. Be transparent. First, it’s good for
you to have a sounding board. Second, you want your editor to know about these
judgement calls before you publish -- not after.

Treat your editor’s ideas with the same enthusiasm as your own. This might seem
like self-serving advice from an editor. But you’ll have a lot more credibility arguing
against an editor’s idea if you have a history of being a team player.
Do what you say you are going to do and editors won't bug you. Be on time. Do
what you say you are going to do. Make it happen. Do what they ask of you the first
time. Don't make them tell you a second or third time. It’s all about building trust.

