IRE-Phoenix
Breaking News panel
June 22, 2017
@chuckgoudieabc7
Breaking News Triage:
-Evaluate: determine what it is and what is important
-Prioritize: what you are going to look at? People, systems, regulations, all
of them?
-Treatment: Web and social media first? Working toward cut-ins or the next
broadcast?
Top Eleven tips to be on the air every day:
1. Terror transcends everything-frequently there is a local connectionvacationers, relatives--or just a compelling story of survival.
2. Check small plane crashes, train derailments and major roadway
accidents wherever they happen-especially tractor trailer and oil tanker
accidents: run tail numbers, DOT numbers-- find out who was on the plane;
or behind wheel and local links.
3. Monitor American soldiers who are killed or military accidents anywhererun names and don't go with DOD home cities. Frequently it is a base, not
actual hometown. Find out where they are actually from.
4. Look into bizarre crimes or unexplained major incidents regardless of
where they occur-check suspects and victims see if they ever lived or
worked in your area; taught there, grew up there.
5. Offer to truthsquad speeches, news conferences, announcements,
grandstanding claims by public officials. Usually something isn't Kosher.

6. Actually read DOJ charging announcements, WH press releases and
look at government appointments. Sometimes local people are in the fine
print.
7. Monitor big story anniversaries-revisit them, reach out to key players.
8. Prisoners: keep an eye on when criminals in big cases are getting out.
Pitch jailhouse interviews to people who are locked up.
9. If an agency or official announces that some charges, changes or
appointments will be unveiled tomorrow: make it your business to find out
what it is today and report on it today.
10. Practice the belief that many times there are interesting angles to
moderate stories...waiting to be discovered.
11. You don't always need an on-camera interview to make a TV story. If
you know something say something and figure out a way to show and tell.
You're the reporter.

