2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com

Watch Dog
Dozens of Federal Employees Watched Abundance of Porn on the Job in Recent Years
WRC NBC Washington, DC
Scott MacFarlane, Rick Yarborough and Jeff Piper
Scott FOIA’d 12 federal inspector generals for all closed and substantiated
reviews/investigations into computer misuse. The results? Porn watching galore on government
computers! You could easily do this with not only the federal agencies that are big in your state,
but also with the inspector generals for your state agencies.
http://www.nbcwashington.com/investigations/Dozens-of-Federal-Employees-WatchedAbundance-of-Porn-on-the-Job-in-Recent-Years-414743293.html?_osource=mobilesharebar
More than 7 million in unreported city settlement payouts
WCPO-Cincinnati
Hillary Lake, Greg Noble
This I-Team discovered multi-million dollar payouts after putting in a public records request.
The records showed more than 900 payouts out of the general fund since 2010. Amounts
varied from a hundred dollars to half a million. The largest settlement went to the family of a
homeless woman who was runover and killed by a police officer. Other payoffs included 20
thousand to a retired assistant police chief who threatened to sue the city for discrimination.
And just over three thousands of dollars went to settle a lawsuit claiming a city councilman had
accepted illegal funds to visit the White House.
http://www.wcpo.com/news/local-news/i-team/i-team-investigation-uncovers-more-than7-million-in-unreported-city-settlement-payouts
Does Washington's Trump Hotel buy American?
WUSA- Washington, DC
Eric Flack
President Donald Trump has led the effort to 'Buy American,'. He even signed the Buy
American, Hire American executive order in April, but that isn't necessarily the case in his own
Washington hotel. Armed with flags from nations around the world, Flack shows us just how
many countries make the items in Trump hotel room.
http://www.wusa9.com/news/investigations/does-trump-hotel-in-dc-buy-american/438366438

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Sponsor Of Traffic Camera Bill Has Multiple Tickets
NewsChannel5-Nashville
Ben Hall
NewsChannel 5 Investigates uncovered a State Representative pushing a traffic camera bill had
at least a dozen unpaid speeding tickets. The bill he is supporting would put restrictions on
speeding tickets and keep confidential who gets tickets. The representative says he only
believes cops can give tickets. However, records show he lost his license in 2014 for not paying
a ticket issued by a highway patrolman.
http://www.newschannel5.com/news/newschannel-5-investigates/sponsor-of-trafficcamera-bill-has-multiple-tickets
Government NOT Paying Out Restitution: Crime Victims Victimized Again
WRIC ABC: Richmond, VA
Kerri O’Brien
Kerri found crime victims that are owed money, being victimized all over again. She FOIA’d all
the unpaid restitution collected by local courthouses in several counties in Virginia. She
received a list of names of people who are owed money that’s already been paid. The clerks say
they can’t find these people, but with a quick search on Facebook, Kerri located person after
person and was able to let them know they have money waiting for them. It shows the
government is really working that hard to find these victims. Relying on snail mail in a day when
you can easily find anyone on social media. You could replicate this in your market.
http://wric.com/2017/05/22/8news-investigates-crime-victims-owed-victimized-again/
High lead levels found in water inside city buildings
KHOU-Houston
Scott Noll
KHOU 11 Investigates discovered high lead levels in the drinking water inside City of Houston
buildings. As a result, the mayor ordered all water fountains shut down in City Hall, and testing
for lead in the water of all city buildings. This story became about because we decided to go
out and test a number of places around for lead.
http://www.khou.com/news/high-lead-levels-found-in-water-inside-city-buildings/350946843
Judicial Accountability/Who’s Watching The Judges?
WTVF CBS Nashville, Tennessee
Phil Williams
When it comes to allegations of misconduct inside the courtroom, who's judging the judges?
The amazing Phil Williams has a running series looking into holding judges accountable. This is
often the most secretive area in government. In many states judges are appointed to lengthy

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
terms and once there are hard to get taken off the bench. Phil raised the after learning of a
Nashville judge who's repeatedly late for court.
http://www.newschannel5.com/news/newschannel-5-investigates/newschannel-5investigates-whos-judging-the-judges
Disabled Parking Cheaters Often Get Free Ride
KNBC-Los Angeles
Joel Grover and Amy Corral

Joel and Amy discovered that the California Department of Motor Vehicles is
failing to prevent widespread illegal misuse of disabled placards in certain
Southern California neighborhoods where parking spots are hard to find.
The findings echo the conclusions of a report from the California Bureau of State
Audits, which urged the DMV to expand efforts to stop abuse and fraud in the
state's disabled person placard program. You can do this by putting in public
records request and look for state or local audits.
http://www.nbclosangeles.com/investigations/Disabled-Parking-Cheaters-OftenGet-Free-Ride-428755153.html
Numbers don’t support college football playoff economic boom
WTSP CBS Tampa
Noah Pransky
If your city is looking at investing in major sports—be careful with those “economic impact”
reports. Watch this series of reports from Noah on why it’s so important not just to take the
word of the leaders trying to spend money on a sports team. Challenge the reports, the data,
how it was collected and presented and WHO did the work.
http://www.wtsp.com/news/investigations/numbers-dont-support-college-football-playoffeconomic-boom/410994125

Crime/Law Enforcement
Waiting for justice: Cleveland Police Struggle to Solve Murder Cases
WEWS-Cleveland
Sarah Buduson
Sarah found the percentage of murder cases Cleveland reported as solved to the FBI falls far
short of the national average. For years, FBI reports have shown what’s known as the murder
clearance rates is approximately 60 percent, which means the nation’s police departments only
solve about two-thirds of murders reported to the federal agency each year. It was just as likely

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
a killer would walk free as get caught. If you are in Tulsa, Minneapolis, Tampa, New Orleans
your numbers are below the national average...you may want to take a look.
http://www.news5cleveland.com/longform/cleveland-police-struggle-to-solve-murder-cases
The Murder Rate Through the Eyes of the Trauma Center
WMAR ABC Baltimore
Brian Kuebler
Trauma doctors struggle to keep pace with the surge in violence. An amazing take on
investigating escalating violence in a city. He and his photojournalist spent five nights with
incredible access to the trauma center of his ER, showing us Baltimore’s violence and depravity
through the eyes of the men and women trying to save lives every night.
http://www.abc2news.com/news/crime-checker/baltimore-city-crime/trauma-doctorsstruggle-to-keep-pace-with-surging-violence-in-baltimore
Transparency
KHOU-Houston
Jeremy Rogalski, Keith Tomshe, Ty Scholes, Stephanie Kuzydym and Matt Keyser
“Transparency” is a four-month investigation that revealed how Houston’s $8-million police
body-camera program was falling short of its promise to provide greater accountability. KHOU
uncovered a department ignoring its own policy, fumbling to locate hundreds of missing videos,
and failing to activate cameras when it mattered most--a deadly officer-involved shooting.
Since KHOU’s investigation, the new Houston police chief halted the rollout of body cameras
after concerns over the technology, and promised better oversight. You can start doing this
story by get your city policy. Find out if your city does reviews or audits. Find out if videos are
being released in a timely fashion. Put in public records request for keywords like “evading
arrest” or “use of force” and then ask for video to see what you get.
http://www.khou.com/news/investigations/transparency/transparency/345006909
$20K insurance claim after money 'stolen' from evidence room
WWBT- Richmond
Rachel DePompa
After exposing missing money and evidence from a police property room, Rachel caught the
police chief in a lie. He sent a press release saying only around $3,000 was missing and it was a
clerical error. But Rachel sent a records request for all of the insurance claims filed by the city.
In it she found a claim from the police department for $20,000. The reason for the claim? A
crime was committed. Money was stolen from the evidence room. FOIA those insurance claims
now! You will see claims for accidents involving city vehicles, especially the transit vehicles, it’s

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
a gold mine of information and story ideas.
http://www.nbc12.com/story/32842898/petersburg-pd-files-20k-insurance-claim-aftermoney-stolen-from-evidence-room
Documents reveal security concerns prior to seven escapes at correctional facility
ABC6-Columbus
Brooks Jarosz
Brooks obtained the most recent audit report on SEPTA (the private company running the
prison). The audit was done by the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction. It noted
several areas that could improve its operations, including:
● Provide at least 40 hours of structured activity for each inmate every week.
● Separate low-risk from high-risk offenders in treatment groups to avoid negative
influence on low-risk offenders.
● Limit groups size to 12 for treatment because in many cases there were 20 inmates to
one facilitator.
● Director should better supervise staff and provide training and feedback on a routine
basis.
http://abc6onyourside.com/investigators/documents-reveal-security-concerns-prior-to-sevenescapes-at-correctional-facility
Prisoners smoke joints, show off phones in prison videos
WSMV NBC-Nashville
Jeremy Finley
Ongoing Investigation “party behind the bars”. Jeremy keeps finding inmates posting drug
usage, showing off cell phones, cash and weapons all while behind bars. Many times they are
updating Facebook pages or having family members do it for them. Most states have some sort
of regulations on the books about posting online while behind bars.
Talker of story you could duplicate.
http://www.wsmv.com/story/35614712/prisoners-smoke-joints-show-off-phones-in-prisonvideos
Suspended drivers face revolving door of justice
WBNC-Columbus
Nathan Baca
Law enforcement and court officials call suspended drivers a “revolving door” of justice, leaving
many of these drivers unpunished after multiple times of breaking the law. Nathan found that
officers have discretion in citing suspended drivers in hit and run cases in Ohio and that

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
suspended drivers get behind the wheel minutes after courts tell them to stop driving.
http://www.10tv.com/article/suspended-drivers-face-revolving-door-justice
Muggers’ Secrets Revealed
WNBC New York
Chris Glorioso
A story that can be done anywhere and we’ve already seen it starting to be replicated. In this
series, NBC New York mailed surveys to hundreds of inmates behind bars serving time for
mugging. The responses alone are gold. Trust me-- I’ve already done this one in Richmond. You
can replicate this with whatever crime is more pertinent in your area. In Richmond—we did this
with home burglars. A great idea that easily travels to smaller markets and cities.
http://www.nbcnewyork.com/investigations/Mugger-Secret-Convicted-Robber-I-TeamTelemundo-Survey-Investigation-Series-412409743.html
Police aren’t required to notify you when they recover your stolen car-- and often don’t
KUTV-Salt Lake City
Matt Gephardt and Cindy St. Clair
When your car is stolen police don’t have to tell you its been recovered. City records show that,
in 2015, Ogden police recovered about 75 percent of vehicles that were reported stolen. But
records also show that, of those recovered, less than 46 percent of the owners were notified by
Ogden Police that their vehicle had been found. The other 54 percent had to wait for letters
from the DMV while their recovered-vehicles racked up storage fees.
http://kutv.com/news/get-gephardt/police-arent-required-to-notify-you-when-they-recoveryour-stolen-car-and-often-dont
New Way Of Tracking Credit Card Fraud
WBZ CBS Boston
Ryan Kath
New take on the exploding crime of credit card fraud. When his credit card was stolen, Ryan
tracked down video of someone using his credit card at several local businesses. He takes it a
step further and shows you the cost to the businesses also hit by that fraud. Creative way to
tackle an issue we report on every day.
http://boston.cbslocal.com/2017/05/01/i-team-reporters-stolen-credit-card-number-revealsrampant-fraud-around-boston/

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Troubling Trend of Crimes in Charlotte Malls
WCNC-Charlotte: Mark Boyle
NBC Charlotte wanted to know if crime is a problem at local malls and if so, just how bad is it.
So the Defenders requested hundreds of crime statistics to analyze the numbers to see if in fact
crime is up.
http://www.wcnc.com/news/investigations/investigators/troubling-trend-of-crimes-incharlotte-malls/426740487
Diversity in the Black and Blue
WAVY NBC Norfolk, Virginia
Brandi Cummings
Brandi’s two year-long investigation takes a look at how the local police department’s
demographics don’t reflect the city’s makeup. To further the story she creates a panel of men
to talk about the perceptions and challenges. Meanwhile the department says there are
challenges recruiting minorities.
http://wavy.com/2017/02/26/special-investigation-police-diversity-black-and-blue/
Stolen! Indy auto thefts receive little investigation
WTHR-Indianapolis
Bob Segall
Many reported auto thefts result in no investigation -- let alone a recovery or arrest – leaving
some victims with a trail of pain and destruction across the city of Indianapolis. Bob discovered
that Indianapolis quietly dissolved its auto theft unit five years ago.
http://www.wthr.com/article/stolen-indy-auto-thefts-receive-little-investigation
Houston’s Top Prostitution Hot Spots
KPRC-Houston
Shannan Adler, Robert Arnold
Shannan crunched the numbers to find the top five areas with the most prostitution arrests.
http://www.click2houston.com/news/prostitution-hot-spots-around-houston
Cape Coral Cops Spread Thin
NBC2-Fort Myers
Deila D’Ambra
The NBC2 Investigators crunched the number and found that at times, the police force is

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
operating with the same number of patrol officers as cities half its size. That can mean that for
every 12,000 people, there is only one officer on patrol. They questioned what that means for
safety by comparing those numbers with cities of comparable size in Florida.
http://www.nbc-2.com/story/35434763/nbc2-investigators
Safest neighborhoods
WKBN-Youngstown
Amanda Smith
We pay a lot of attention to areas with high crime — but what about the safest neighborhoods?
WKBN broke down pages of FBI data — each year it sends out statistics comparing every
community across the country — to reveal the safest cities.
http://wkbn.com/2017/04/12/27-investigates-poland-milton-safest-communities-in-valley/

Government & Politics
Federal Government Selling Recalled Cars At Auto Auctions
Circa News
Joce Sterman and Alex Brauer
Similar but on the federal level: When the federal government issues a car recall, they ask
consumers to get the problem fixed to get a danger off the road. But, Joce found the
government selling cars with dangerous recalls at auto auctions and not disclosing the
information. Is your local government doing the same? Are you state or county employees
hitting the roads in vehicles with open recalls? Worth a check. Is your state selling them at auto
auctions?
http://circa.com/politics/accountability/feds-auction-off-hundreds-of-cars-with-unrepairedrecalls-possibly-putting-buyers-at-risk

Safety concerns over city-issued vehicles
ABC6-Philadelphia
Wendy Saltzman
This investigation uncovered that hundreds of Philadelphia city cars have open recalls driven by
police officers, member of the fire department and medical response teams. They found six
thousand cars with open recalls including the detail driving the mayor around the town.
● Public Records Request for City vehicles-get vin or license plate number
● Run vin thru safercar.gov for recall
● If you get the license plate number use Carfax to run for recall

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
http://6abc.com/news/action-news-investigation-safety-concerns-over-city-issuedvehicles/1784141/
Votes Cast in election tied to vacant homes
WBRC FOX-Birmingham
Lydia Hu
She compared records of vacant house fires from 2015 in Birmingham with voting records from the
Alabama Secretary of State's Office. She found people using vacant properties or empty lots to vote
in the 2016 general election.

http://www.wbrc.com/story/34618400/on-your-side-investigators-votes-cast-in-2016-generalelection-tied-to-vacant-homes
Firefighters: Old trucks putting lives in danger
KHOU-Houston
Scott Noll
Firefighters say more and more they’re not just battling blames, but also their own aging
equipment when the alarm sounds. Work requests obtained by KHOU 11 Investigates confirm
firefighters’ complaints that trucks are repeatedly written up for the same recurring issues. And
despite the city’s plan to replace so-called “front-line” fire trucks every 10 years, it’s not always
happening. Records show more than one out every four of Houston’s front line ladder and
tower trucks are a decade or older.
http://www.khou.com/news/investigations/firefighters-old-trucks-putting-lives-in-danger1/417410142
Overcapacity Foster Care
WCVB ABC Boston
Kathy Curran
She’s done a series of stories you can track where she’s holding the state accountable for its
foster care system. In this story I’ve singled out she foia’d how many “overcapacity” waivers
were granted to foster homes to track just how large the problem is and how children are being
shuffled from home to home because there isn’t enough Foster families. Check your state!
There are similar trends around the country.
http://www.wcvb.com/article/5-investigates-data-shows-foster-care-systemoverloaded/9963941

Education/Schools
School bus drivers caught speeding
KWAN-Austin

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Brian Collister
It's against the law for school buses to go faster than 50 mph on any highway. The only
exception: they can hit 55 mph on interstates. Brian discovered bus drivers speeding at districts
across Central Texas—some with children onboard. Many districts have technology on their
buses to track a driver's speed, but they also found most school districts don't check it on a
regular basis.
http://kxan.com/investigative-story/black-boxes-on-school-buses-show-drivers-speedingyet-districts-rarely-monitor-device/
Another Great Take On Schools Buses Speeding
WTVR-Richmond
Melissa Hipolit
Melissa discovered that EVERY Richmond school has a GPS embedded in the bus. Those GPS
units send alerts to the school system every time a bus goes 10 miles per hour over the speed
limit for at least 30 seconds. Melissa foia’d the data collected by the GPS for three month time
frame. She found hundreds of examples of buses speeding… including 45 in a 25 and 63 in a 45.
http://wtvr.com/2016/10/11/investigation-finds-rps-buses-frequently-speed/
Policing the Schools: Minority Students More Likely to Be Suspended or Arrested
WNBC-New York
Pei-Sze Cheng and David Manney
The I-Team found minority students are more likely than other students to be suspended or
arrested.
Along with the NBC News Investigative Unit and the NBC-owned stations, the I-Team analyzed
data collected from all public schools in the nation by the U.S. Department of Education.
Called the Civil Rights Data Collection, every two years all public school districts are required to
report to the Education Department on wide-ranging topics from suspensions and expulsions to
arrests and referrals of students to law enforcement. Districts are also required to break down
data by race and disability.
The I-Team crunched the numbers from the 2013-2014 school year, the most recent data
available. The analysis found that nationally, black students and students with disabilities are
suspended, expelled, arrested and referred to police at rates disproportionately higher than
their white and non-disabled peers.
http://www.nbcnewyork.com/investigations/policing-the-schools-minority-students-morelikely-arrested-suspended-nyc-nj-ct-414271643.html

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Public School Security Cameras Really Working?
WXIA NBC Atlanta
Andy Pierrotti
The Atlanta Public School System has more than 4,000 cameras watching over their students
and staff, except Andy found several cameras that were broken for months. Not only were
there delays in fixing them, but most school districts have no policy that sets a standard on
when school cameras should be fixed. He held school leaders accountable—you can too. What
did he FOIA? Thousands of security camera repair logs.
http://www.11alive.com/news/local/investigations/no-one-is-watching-1/439386491
Schools fail to test for lead despite federal guidelines
KHOU-Houston
Scott Noll
When Texas’s largest school district changes policy after you file a records request, it’s a good
sign your project struck a nerve. That’s what happened after Scott requested records of lead
testing from 51 Houston area school districts. What followed was four months of reporting that
uncovered more than two thirds of school districts surveyed ignored federal recommendations
to test the water in schools for lead. And in the cases where districts did test for lead? Scott’s
analysis found more than half had at least one test above federal limits. in one case, testing
uncovered lead levels 80 times higher than what the EPA considers safe.
1 in 6 school district officers in Georgia have troubled pasts
WSB-Atlanta
Patti DiVincenzo and Aaron Diamant
A Channel 2 Action News/Atlanta Journal Constitution investigation shows 15 percent of school
district police officers in Georgia have troubled pasts. That's twice the rate of officers working in
city and county police departments. The officers were investigated for things such as excessive
force, lying, theft or even sexual misconduct at one of their earlier jobs, but are working this
school year in Georgia public schools.
http://www.wsbtv.com/news/2-investigates/2-investigates-15-of-school-district-officers-ingeorgia-have-troubled-pasts/524380270

Consumer
Did You Know Your Websites Must Be ADA Compliant?
Scripts Investigative Reporter for 3 Florida Stations
Katie LaGrone
While tracking a wave of ADA (Americans With Disabilities Act) complaints she discovered

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
something that might be worth checking out in your state. Not only if there are a rash of ADA
lawsuits, but also, tracking if websites are ADA compliant? I’ve never heard of this. I bet most
people aren’t even aware. There are so many angles.. the cost? Is it generating suits? Talking
with the blind about their access online. Or you can just track if there is an excessive amount of
ADA lawsuits in your area?... the ADA website though… A really unique bit of information.
http://www.abcactionnews.com/longform/is-your-website-ada-compliant
Is your child’s toy spying on you?
WSB
Clark Howard
Could a child’s toy being spying on you or sharing information about your kid? This story takes
on yet another wifi enable item in our homes that opens us up for data and picture hacking.
Actually the hacking doesn’t seem to be real hard in the case of the doll WSB tested. It looks
like you just need wi-fi.
http://www.wsbtv.com/news/2-investigates/is-your-childs-toy-spying-on-you/522108976

Popular Flea Medication Suspected In Deaths
WSB Atlanta
Jim Strickland
People love their pets! Jim uncovered FDA reports showing a popular flea medication is
suspected in hundreds of pet deaths around the nation. Why grieving dog owners believe its
responsible, and what the drug company and FDA say. Can be done anywhere. Put out a call on
your station's Facebook page and you’ll likely find people who’ve had this happen to them.
http://www.wsbtv.com/news/2-investigates/dog-owners-blame-popular-flea-medicine-forpets-deaths/490037654
Discount makeup sold online could be a dangerous counterfeit
WSB Atlanta
Jim Strickland
US Immigration and Customs Enforcement seized nearly 74 million in fake pharmaceuticals in
2016.
Jim looked at the hidden dangers of counterfeit makeup and compared “real” cosmetics to
online “fake” products by going to a lab and having the makeup tested to prove there’s a
difference.

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
http://www.wsbtv.com/news/2-investigates/discounted-makeup-sold-online-could-be-adangerous-counterfeit/525319063
Gas Pumps Years Overdue For Inspections
WWBT NBC Richmond
Rachel DePompa
Great low lying fruit out there that makes for quick turns and impactful stories. You and your
photojournalist stop at gas stations MULTIPLE times a week as you travel to far off areas
chasing stories. We started noticing that the inspection stickers were more than 3 years old. I
quick search on the state’s website and I discovered gas stations were supposed to be
inspected EVERY 2 years. We tracked stations across our viewing area for a week and then
called up Weights and Measures. They offered to take us on an inspection and the head of the
agency wanted to talk. EVERYBODY pumps gas—well except in New Jersey—Also—we found
quite a few stickers were sliced—which led to follow ups about a record number of skimmers
being found last year.
More Gas Pump Skimmers Being Found Despite Efforts to Prevent Them
NBC-Miami
Willard Shepard
Skimmers continue to be found at gas pumps across Florida. 128 skimmers have been found
statewide through mid-April 2017. That’s on pace to surpass last year’s total when 219
skimmers were found. In Florida gas stations legally have to have security measures including a
sticky seal that would notify workers if someone had tampered with the pump. This team
obtained the list of the stations where state inspectors have found skimmers but didn’t find
security in place. At three locations we checked, there still weren’t seals on the pumps and
places that did have measures thieves were finding new way to work around them.
The Vanity Award Scheme
KARE NBC Minneapolis
A.J. Lagoe
AJ finds that some “Best Of” awards may be duping both businesses and consumers. It arrives
in the mail or email—you’ve won the “Best of” award, but owners quickly discover they have to
$150 to claim the award. The so-called awards often have no judging criteria and no real voting,
http://www.kare11.com/news/investigations/kare-11-investigation-warning-about-bogusawards/321755034
Email scam targets homebuyers
KARE-Minneapolis

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Jay Olstad and Steve Eckert , KARE
A Minnesota couple lost more than $200,000 in a sophisticated email scam authorities say is
sweeping the country. This scam targets people buying a new home. What’s scary about this
scheme is that the emails look legit and ask for homebuyers to wire money just prior to the
closing of the house. KARE Investigates talk to victims, FBI, and a tech expert who could trace
the emails overseas.
http://www.kare11.com/news/investigations/kare-11-investigates-email-scam-targetshomebuyers/435752635

Public Safety
Sex Offender Registry Loophole
WBRC FOX: Alabama
Lydia Hu
She discovered a flaw in her county’s sex offender registry allowing sex offenders to live too
close to an elementary school.
The state pays an outside contractor, Watch Services, to run the registry statewide. The
contractor claims it’s a mapping error. Though the correct address for the school was
submitted, the software placed it 2.5 miles away from the actual location When police search
addresses for offenders, the database would not warn that the school was too close because it
was mapped in the wrong place. The contractor runs sex offender databases for 4,000 local
police departments across the country.
http://www.wbrc.com/story/34421195/flaw-in-jeffco-sex-offender-registry
Dangerous Debris
NBC 6-Miami
Dan Krauth
Driving on many South Florida highways can be difficult enough, but the NBC 6 Investigators
learned there’s something that’s making the roadways even more of a dangerous obstacle
course - road debris.
They examined crash data for Broward and Miami Dade Counties and discovered accidents
caused by road debris increased by 60 percent over the past four years.
http://www.nbcmiami.com/news/Dangerous-Debris---412961143.html

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Tennessee big rig inspections decrease while fatal crashes increase
WJHL-Johnson City, Tennessee
Nate Morabito
As fatal crashes involving large trucks and buses went up in Tennessee from 2010 to 2015,
according to the most recent federal data, the number of commercial motor vehicle inspections
statewide went down.
State records show the number of commercial motor vehicle inspections across Tennessee
declined almost every year since 2012. Tennessee Highway Patrol completed 71,421
inspections in 2016 compared to 80,447 in 2012, which is an 11% decrease during that time.
● Used Federal data for fatal crashes (could use state data)
● State data for the number of inspection
http://wjhl.com/2017/06/08/tennessee-big-rig-inspections-decrease-while-fatal-crashesincrease/
No Wrong-Way Signs On Highways
NBC New York
Pei-Sze Cheng, Kristina Pavlovic and Dave Manney
After tracking a history of deadly wrong-way crashes on a Long Island highway, Pei-Sze
discovered “warning signs” that are required by state law were missing on miles of roadway. A
great reminder to always track deadly accidents and look for patterns—you never know what
you’ll discover.
http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/Wrong-Way-Crash-Sunrise-Highway-DangerWestchester-New-York-Investigation-414989773.html
472 Bay Area Bridges Structurally Deficient
NBC Bay Area
Stephen Stock, Julie Putman, Jeremy Carroll, and Scott Pharm
Of California’s 24,955 bridges, overpasses and on-ramps, 3,935 of them are in the Bay Area and
carry an average of 125 million cars each day. And, about a tenth of the Bay Area’s bridges
need major fixes. This Investigative Unit found that in the most recent data from 2013, 472
bridges in the Bay Area were ranked as needing improvements. On an average day, those
bridges carry three million cars.
● DOT Bridge Data-IRE Database
http://www.nbcbayarea.com/investigations/472-Bay-Area-Bridges-Structurally-Deficient301257961.html
Manhole Explosions Growing in Cities
NBC Boston

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Karen Hensel and Douglas Moser
Just GOOGLE manhole explosions! You’ll be surprised at how often it's happening because of
aging infrastructure in cities across the US. Karen digs deeper into something we all drive over
every day. She discovered there’s no oversight in inspections. There’s no penalty for
companies not performing the inspections that are required by law and the reports FROM the
inspection don’t even have to be shared to the state.
http://www.nbcboston.com/news/local/Underground-Danger-No-State-Oversight-of-UtilityManhole-Inspections-422063763.html
Hundreds of TSA workers failed drug and alcohol tests
KGW-Portland
Kyle Iboshi
Nationwide, 858 TSA workers tested positive for drugs or alcohol between 2010 and 2016,
according to federal records obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request.
The TSA conducts drug and alcohol tests randomly. Tests are also given if there is reasonable
suspicion an employee is under the influence.
● Story also cited a July 2016 report from the US House Homeland Security Committee
found increased employee misconduct at the TSA.
http://www.kgw.com/news/investigations/hundreds-of-tsa-workers-failed-drug-alcohol-testsat-airports-across-us/428913091

Medical
Non-Emergency ER Visits Draining Public Coffers
WVUE FOX New Orleans
Lee Zurik and Tom Wright
Go FOIA this now! State and federal money fund the Medicaid program. Lee’s review of a year’s
worth of data found tens of thousands of non emergency visits to the ER. Medicaid recipients
visited the ER for fussy infants, throat pain, postnasal drip, routine health exams, hangnails,
blisters, warts, even sunburn.
http://www.fox8live.com/story/31866109/zurik-non-emergency-er-visits-draining-publiccoffers
Reviving a Life Saving Technique
KCBS-Los Angeles
Randy Paige
In Los Angeles County,there are not tubes that can intubate children in ambulances. In the

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
1990’s a decision was made to not allow paramedics to use them after a study found that they
could slip out of place. But, now with new technology medical experts say there’s no reason not
to use the intubation tubes for children and that it could save lives.
http://losangeles.cbslocal.com/2017/05/23/caution-intubation-procedures-children/
Popular Weed Killer Causing Cancer?
WSB ABC Atlanta
Jim Strickland
It’s the most popular weed killer on the planet! Is it causing a rare form of cancer? I’ve seen a
couple of stations starting to do this story. Thousands of lawsuits are filed against the
company—there is most likely one in your state!
http://www.wsbtv.com/news/2-investigates/does-roundup-kill-more-than-just-weeds-lawsuitsclaim-it-also-causes-cancer/519802646
Not Board Certified
NBC6 Miami
Dan Krauth
Dan found doctors advertising false information online. Calling themselves board certified or
even doctors when they are not. Several people changed their ads after Dan called! Remember
to check on the online advertising—and it may be a worthy check that leads to a story. AJ Lagoe
at KARE did something similar with Veteran’s Affairs and the credentials it was listing online for
its doctors. He found people claiming they were board certified that were NOT.
http://www.nbcmiami.com/investigations/Doctor-Credentials-NBC-6-Investigators-DiscoverIssues-with-Online-Advertising-423710733.html

Heroin Epidemic
Into The NICU
WVEC ABC Norfolk, Virginia
Laura Geller
Another way you can tell the heartbreaking story of the Heroin epidemic in our country and
your community. Laura got incredible access to the NICU of a hospital to show how the
healthcare community is struggling to care for newborns, born addicted or exposed to opiates.
She shows how the numbers have skyrocketed through the emotional interviews of the nurses
forced to care for these babies.

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwi3lvGz0
a7UAhXLNSYKHU0EBVYQFggoMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.13newsnow.com%2Fnews%2Flo
cal%2F13news-now-investigates%2F13news-now-investigates-babies-born-addicted-toheroin%2F264676921&usg=AFQjCNEcAKONCwdtsZ88xRvcf6fCso9aqw&sig2=6_1HZBRwUll_Heu
2JNyJvA
Government Failed To Warn About New Drug Hitting The Streets
WBNS CBS Columbus, Ohio
Jerry Revish
I thought this was a creative way to track the problem. FOIA’d emails of public officials to show
it took them 10 days to warn the public about a dangerous (KILLER) new strand of Heroin being
sold on the streets. In the emails many officials didn’t even want to issue the warning. It’s the
strongest drug ever to hit the streets of Columbus. A synthetic opioid that the DEA says is 100
times more powerful than Fentanyl and 10,000 times more potent than morphine. It’s used to
tranquilize elephants and other large animals.
http://www.10tv.com/article/elephant-tranquilizer-sold-heroin-addicts-ohio

Hidden Camera
Colorado sees alarming spike in e-cigarette explosions
ABC7-Denver
Tony Kovaleski, Kurt Sevits, Brittany Freeman, Alan Gathright and Andy Miller
You’ve probably seen the videos on YouTube and on the news: E-cigarette batteries in the
pockets of unsuspecting users exploding into showers of sparks and flames.
Denver7 Investigates compiled what they believe is the most extensive and comprehensive list
of e-cigarette explosions in the country. They reviewed information from public records, court
filings, internet reports and fire response records. In Colorado, they counted at least 34 ecigarette battery explosions, the vast majority in 2016, with 27 of those cases involving injuries.
http://www.thedenverchannel.com/news/investigations/denver7-investigates-uncovers-analarming-increase-in-e-cigarette-explosions-in-colorado
Federal Loophole Allowing Dealers To Roll Back Odometers
WMC NBC Memphis
Andy Wise
Andy discovered a federal loophole that allows dealers to roll back odometers. He tracked
down private sellers and small –time auto dealers in Northeast Mississippi that are hiding
behind federal regulations passed in the 80’s. The federal odometer law (49 U.S.C. Chapter 327,

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com
Public Law 103-272) requires sellers and dealers to provide written disclosure of a vehicle’s
mileage to prospective buyers. "However, vehicles ten years old and older are exempt from the
written disclosure requirements," according to NHTSA's Odometer Information Overview about
the nearly 40-year-old regulation. Following a paper trail and even answering Craigslist ads,
Andy track down some of these dealers using this loophole.
http://www.wmcactionnews5.com/story/35466273/monday-at-10-andy-wise-confrontsdeceptive-car-dealers
Overdoses and crime skyrocket at downtown library
KUSA-Denver
Jeremy Jojola, Katie WIlcox, Nicole Vap
Denver's main library is now a hub for crime and drug abuse, resulting in significant spikes in
emergency calls for overdoses, fights and sexual assaults. A review of city records revealed that
in the first four months of this year, emergency dispatcher received 44 calls for overdoses at
the Denver Public Library. There were no such calls during the same time frame the year
before.
Jeremy spends three days undercover at the library where he used a camera to document
people injecting heroin and conducting drug deals in and around the library.
http://www.9news.com/news/local/investigations/undercover-investigation-overdoses-andcrime-skyrocket-at-downtown-library/440247035

2017 IRE Conference
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
Jennifer Cobb-KHOU, jcobb@khou.com
Rachel DePompa-NBC12, rdepompa@nbc12.com

