Setting Data Free With Cometdocs
Journalists registered with the IRE are entitled to a free monthly subscription premium account
from Cometdocs.com with all features unlocked. Just send an email cometdocs@ire.org with
your first and last name and email address.

Online Platform
Once you have your Premium account, visit Cometdocs.com and login with the email you sent
in. When you log in, you will be faced with the main online interface.
Clipboard Area
This is the area above the tabbed interface where you upload your files. A few things to note
about the Clipboard:

●
●
●

You can upload multiple files at once (50 for Premium account users)
Drag and drop files, upload from your computer or Import files from Dropbox and
GDrive (you must be logged into the cloud service)
You can upload and store non-PDF documents as well

Convert Tab
In this tab, you can convert your PDF files (or create PDFs).
1.
2.
3.
4.

Drag your PDFs from the clipboard area to the file conversion area
Select your conversion output
Click on Convert
Then click on the converted results to download your converted file from your browser to
your computer

Transfer
This tab allows you to transfer files to specific individuals via email and transfer link.

1. Drag PDF files you wish to send to others to the empty square area
2. Add your recipients’ email addresses (to send to other Cometdocs users, use the email
they have set up with Cometdocs)
3. Add your own email
4. Type a message in the text field below
5. Click on Transfer

Store
This tab is your document manager where you can manage and access all files you have
converted on Cometdocs and the converted results associated with the file.

In this tab, you can:
1. Create folders for organizing your PDF documents
2. Download any of your stored PDFs and the files associated with them:

3. Edit your PDF metadata
4. Convert your files
5. Preview your PDF files (unavailable for non-PDF documents)

6. Share any of your PDF documents and the files associated with them
7. View any of the different versions that are associated with a specific PDF document
8. Move your files from folder to folder
9. Delete your files
10. View all files or preview “Running Conversions” by clicking on the All Files drop down
menu.
Host
You can publicly share your PDF documents in this tab.

This tab allows you to:
●
●
●
●

Generate a publicly shareable link for your PDF document
Share your PDFs on social networks like G+, Facebook, Twitter
Label your PDF files by category. You will need to assign them a category to make them
accessible via your Public profile and for the Cometdocs public file repository
Change the privacy settings of the PDF documents and change them from public to
private files

Desktop App
When installed on your desktop, Cometdocs will ask you to log in. Doing so will activate the app.
Right-click PDF conversion and PDF creation
To convert your file:

1. Right click on the PDF you want to convert
2. Select the Convert To option (or if it is a non-PDF document, you can select to create a
PDF file from it)

3. Select your desired output format and Cometdocs will automatically convert the file. You
will get pop-up notifications that your file is being converted and when your converted file
is done. Your conversion results will be located in the same folder as your source PDF.
Conversion Tracking
You can keep track of your PDF conversions through the Recent conversions dialog.
To access this, simply click on the Cometdocs icon in your System Tray. You can view the file
being converted, the file path, and the status of your conversion.

Send files from your desktop to Cometdocs online document manager
Because you are logged in to your account from your desktop, you can directly send files from
your desktop to your online account in the Store tab. Right-click on your file and select Send
To> Cometdocs. You will get a notification that your file is being uploaded and when the upload
has finished.

Cometdocs conversion engine
Connection to the online service goes even further as the conversion process takes place
online. You will get notifications that your file is being converted and when it has been
converted. This means that you can continue with your work and Cometdocs will take care of
the PDF files for you.

Mobile Conversion Apps
You can get PDF conversion and PDF manipulation capabilities on your phone with Cometdoc’s
mobile apps. Apps are available for iOS and Android platform.
PDF Converter Ultimate
This app converts to all the same files that the desktop and online platform do. All file sizes can
be converted; uploaded files to mobile apps are unlimited. Files can be accessed from your
device via Gmail, Dropbox, Box.com, GDrive and then converted on the spot.

The mobile apps do not drain the phone battery because conversions are done on the servers.
But do note that there are some limitations for PDF Converter Ultimate: locked functionality,
conversion time, PDF complexity, internet speed, and server load.
Individual mobile apps
●

PDF Conversion Apps - There are apps with PDF converter and PDF creation
capabilities you can download and use for free. Free versions of conversion apps
have a 1 hour waiting period for your converted files; one-time paid versions can
convert files instantly. Also, available to download for free are specialty non-PDF
converters such as:
○
○
○

●

Image to Word (iOS & Android)
Image to Excel (iOS & Android)
Audio conversion (iOS & Android)

PDF Manipulation Apps- Some apps can manipulate PDF documents for you
such as PDF Merge and PDF Page Remover. These are free to download, but
like the conversion apps, they have a 1 hour waiting period; one-time paid
versions can edit your PDF file instantly.

Notable Apps
● PDF to Word- Convert your PDF to Word on mobile. Linked services for this app
are now free. iCloud account users can access files to convert.
● PDF to Excel- Convert PDF to Excel from wherever you are. This will convert
simple, straightforward PDF tables into Excel spreadsheets on your device.

Tips, Tricks & Useful Things To Know
To get the most out of Cometdocs,com, try a few of these tips on each platform:
Online Platform Best Practices Tips
●

Auto-store your documents
Cometdocs sessions last 20 minutes before timing out and refreshing, deleting all files
that were in the Clipboard area (where uploaded files appear). Ensure that you have the
Auto-store function turned on so you don’t lose those files. Turn this on by going into
your Settings> General and checking the Auto-Store feature.

●

For large file conversions that take too long, convert them on the desktop
To avoid long upload times with large files, convert PDFs directly from the Cometdocs
desktop app. Cometdocs will perform the file conversion for you and notify you when the
conversion is done. No need to waste time waiting to upload your file. Converted results
will be located in the same folder as the original file.

●

Bulk conversion for multiple PDFs
You can convert multiple files at once by dragging them into the convert window,
selecting your output format and clicking on convert. All files will convert simultaneously.

●

Use Cometdocs’ Conversion Networks
Cometdocs is part of a conversion network of online converters that are Cometdocs
sites. No email or account is needed to use most of these online converters. You can
upload your file, convert it, and download the results for free. This is ideal if you are on a
public computer, do not want to log in, but simply need a quick conversion.

●

Create a Public ID to share documents publicly with others
In order to share PDF files with others publicly, create a public profile and a public profile
ID. Go into Settings>Enable Public Profile and start customizing your profile with a bio
description, photo, and URL.
To make a file public, select any file from your Store tab, click on Share> Public and
click on Update. Then in your Host tab, locate the file and simply select a category for it.
This file will then be publicly displayed and available on your public profile page and the
Cometdocs Public Files repository.

Desktop Platform Best Practices Tips
●

Zip files for sharing on Cometdocs
Avoid failed attachments and slow emails by first zipping your files and then sharing
them through Cometdocs.com by selecting the Send To option in the right click context
menu and selecting Cometdocs. Note that zipped folders cannot be converted, but only
shared.

●

Reprint your PDF documents if you’re having troubles converting your file
For trouble PDFs that will not or are not converting properly, try reprinting the file by
opening the PDF in any PDF viewing application. Click on Print in the application’s File
menu (or print functionality equivalent), and in the Printer device drop down list, select
any PDF printer from the list and print your file. Then try the conversion with Cometdocs
again.

●

Convert scanned PDF files with Cometdocs (English language)
Cometdocs can convert scanned PDF files that need OCR to extract the data. Scanned
PDF conversion is only available for PDF documents in English. Cometdocs can convert
non-English language PDFs, but if you are using Cometdocs to do so, use a native
(electronically generated) PDF file for accurate results.

●

Use Cometdocs to multi-page PDF to image conversion
For visualized data you may want to use from authenticated documents from verified
sources, use Cometdocs to convert PDF to JPG (or other image formats). Cometdocs
will convert each PDF into separate image files you can then import into any image
editing app where you can simply crop and save the image as needed.

Mobile Apps Best Practices Tips
●

Use the individual Cometdocs mobile apps as an alternative to locked PDF
Converter Ultimate conversion functionalities
For conversions on mobile devices, use one of the individual mobile apps to work
around PDF Converter Ultimate’s in-app purchases. They are free to use, but have a 1
hour waiting period for the converted results.

●

Use converted results with other apps
Use the Send a Copy option when clicking on the down arrow menu of your converted
file. This will help to integrate your converted results with other apps from which you can
access and work with them.

●

Manipulate your PDF files with Cometdocs mobile apps
Apps like PDF Page Remover (Android only) or PDF Merge (iOS & Android) can help
you prepare and tailor your PDFs for more precise conversions. You can eliminate
irrelevant PDF content or combine multiple PDFs for easier conversion. Then simply

send the converted files to services like Dropbox or GDrive. You can then access them
with Cometdocs.com.

