Truth from fiction on the
beat
CHRISTINA JEWETT
KAISER HEALTH NEWS, ENTERPRISE/INVESTIGATIONS TEAM
@BY_CJEWETT
CHRISTINAJ@KFF.ORG

Infiltrating the fortress

Great investigations…

-- break free of the newspaper ‘beat’ silos
-- Make use of data, shoe leather and a variety of sources –
court records, police reports, financial data, campaign finance
data and more

Facility inspection
reports



Get them from state health department
(sometimes online), AHCJ (online),
Medicare regional offices

State health departments
perform the inspections on
behalf of Medicare



AHCJ:
http://www.hospitalinspections.org/

Hospitals



Example - From Buzzfeed investigation of
Universal Health Services, psych hospital
chain

Dialysis facilities
Psychiatric hospitals
Nursing homes
psychiatric hospitals

Etc…

Psychiatric Solutions, Inc.

“

When Knapp began yelling and running the hospital's halls
one night in December 2005, a single technician was
supervising the 14-patient unit, according to a federal
inspection report.
Knapp, who worked at a social service center for the
homeless mentally ill, had bipolar disorder and had tapered
off her medication to prepare for gastric-bypass surgery.
The technician urged her to stop shouting.
"No, I don't have to. You're going to kill me," Knapp shouted
back, according to the report.

”

Wall Street  Main Street (medical)
 Who owns the local facilities?

 See what they are telling the press & public
 Then look at what they’re telling investors
 SEC ‘Edgar’ search engine

- Key SEC filings: the 10-K (annual report) and 10-Q (quarterly
report)
- DEF14A – executive compensation
- Presentations on ‘investor’ page on their website
- Risks, liabilities, lawsuits, investigations, strategies to make money
- Quarterly earnings calls with Wall Street – Seekingalpha.com

“

Example - digging on deadline

”

How Tom Price helped a small biotech
get what it wanted in Washington

A letter to CMS, a windfall for a donor


Tom Price, the Georgia congressman tapped for the nation’s top health
job, pressed Medicare officials on a funding change that led to a windfall
for the small biotech company run by one of his top campaign
contributors, according to a document released under an open records
request.

Earnings calls link company’s desire to
what Price sought:


In an earnings call that same month,
Petit reported that the company had
been “quite busy in Washington
meeting with Senators and
Congressmen and encouraged them
to support the CMS reimbursement
change on skin substitutes.”



It wasn’t long, though, before MiMedx
had great news. During a Dec. 5,
2013, call with investors, the company
reported that Medicare changed its
wound payment policies in ways that
exceeded its expectations. The
changes include ending the waste
and moving to a tiered payment
system.

Adverse event reporting
 Spate of laws starting passing around 2008

 Mandating public (often) reporting of certain adverse events and

infection data

 Start with the clips – search for your state and ‘patient safety’ or

‘adverse event’

 Read the law. I know it hurts. But you may find a hidden trove of

information that’s one quick open-records law request away

 Review annual reports on the web (or ask for them)

Hospital claims data

Diagnoses, procedures, charges
AHRQ HCUP national sample data
States like FL, CA and Mass.
What can it show?

The clogged arteries of Clearlake
- By Emily Bazar, in SF Chronicle


Clearlake, Lake County -- This rural Northern California town known for its
scenic, bass-filled lake now has another distinction: Clearlake-area
residents have been undergoing two common heart procedures more
than any other Californians, posting rates so high that they exceed most
other regions by multiple factors.



Between 2005 and 2009, people here underwent one of these procedures,
elective angioplasty, at 15 times the rate of people in Sonoma, and more
than five times the rate of San Franciscans and Californians as a whole.
Angioplasty is used to open blocked arteries that supply blood to the
heart, usually with stents.

Finding people (aka
patients)
IT AIN’T ALWAYS EASY

A couple resources
 http://researchclinic.net/



IRE Tip sheets from Margot Williams

How do I find her?

Women who used Lupron a decade or more ago to delay puberty or
grow taller described the short-term side effects listed on the pediatric
label: pain at the injection site, mood swings and headaches. Yet
they also described conditions that usually affect people much later
in life. A 20-year-old from South Carolina was diagnosed with
osteopenia, a thinning of the bones, while a 25 year-old from
Pennsylvania has osteoporosis and a cracked spine. A 26 year-old in
Massachusetts needed a total hip replacement. A 25-year-old in
Wisconsin, like Derricott, has chronic pain and degenerative disc
disease.
“It just feels like I’m being punished for basically being experimented
on when I was a child,” said Derricott, of Lawton, Okla. “I’d hate for a
child to be put on Lupron, get to my age and go through the things I
have been through.”

“ Did somebody say ‘counterfeit
spinal screw?’

HOW DO YOU FIND A PATIENT WHO HAS ONE ON HAND?

”

CNN) -- Victoria Byers did not drink alcohol. She did not abuse drugs. But when she was a teenager
in foster care, several times a month, she would board a van at her group home and go to rehab.
Byers couldn't figure out why she had to take drug tests and sit in group therapy sessions on
addiction at So Cal Health Services, a clinic tucked in an office park in Riverside, California.
"And I told them, you know, 'Why should I be here? I have no drug issue,' " said Byers, now a slowto-smile 22-year-old.
The director of Byers' group home confirmed Byers was clean but said she sent all six girls under
her care to the clinic because she didn't have enough staff to separate those with substance abuse
problems.
The arrangement was strange. It was also a scam.

Finding people, cont.


Crowdsource

 As in, let’s crowdsource right now. How have you found

people for a story when you had no idea where to start?

“

Other people’s secrets
- ambulances
- psychiatric hospital workers
- drug interactions

”

Private equity & ambulance service
The New York Times
tip ‘o the hat to Danielle Ivory

Private equity buys ambulance
companies


…The Times found, private equity firms applied a sophisticated moneymaking
playbook: a mix of cost cuts, price increases, lobbying and litigation.



In emergency care and firefighting, this approach creates a fundamental
tension: the push to turn a profit while caring for people in their most vulnerable
moments.



For governments and their citizens, the effects have often been dire. Under
private equity ownership, some ambulance response times worsened, heart
monitors failed and companies slid into bankruptcy, according to a Times
examination of thousands of pages of internal documents and government
records, as well as interviews with dozens of former employees. In at least two
cases, lawsuits contend, poor service led to patient deaths.

Danielle Ivory:


(1) Local court records. We scoured the local courts in major location where
Rural/Metro operated and every county where the company ran fire
departments. Almost none of these records were online and they tended to be
at small courts (like small claims and probate courts.) We had to call up the
clerks at the courts and ask them to help us -- or go in person.



If we hadn't been able to get these records, we would not have known that
Rural/Metro's fire departments regularly charged fire victims thousands of
dollars after house fires and, if they didn't pay, sued them for the balance.



The court records included address information, which helped us find people
who had been affected, and the bills from Rural/Metro, which were listed as
exhibits.

Emails (exhibits in bankruptcy court)


(2) Emails. Transcare filed for bankruptcy, leaving thousands of people
suddenly out of work and extremely angry. We ended up getting a trove
of internal company documents and emails and were able to show solid
evidence that the company had put patients at risk by loading them onto
rickety ambulances with not enough (or expired) medications.



- We had so many emails, we were able to piece together a timeline from
them.

Ambulance response times

(3) Via open records requests, we asked major cities and towns where
Rural/Metro operated ambulances for any information that the company
regularly reported, as well as their contracts (note: the fire departments did
not have contracts.) We received a variety of information. Some towns
collected lots of response time data. Some literally collected nothing.
- Knox County in Tennessee collected some really interesting data that
showed, not only response times for ambulance, but how often Rural/Metro
had only three or fewer ambulance available to pick up patients.

Finding former
psych hospital
workers
Rosalind Adams, BuzzFeed
Investigations

She said:


About 10% of the people you’ll reach out
to will talk



How do you find them?

LinkedIn, Facebook searches, Indeed.com, Wayback machine (they
often list clinical staff on website) AKA archive.org
- I also built a database of former hospital ceo's using the wayback
machine, old hospital directories from different states and LinkedIn. I
found about two dozen former CEOs to talk after building a list of a
couple hundred.

She says:


Be open/ show interest in anything
they might say/ stay on the freaking
phone and meet people in person
when you can.



one example I give is a source who
first wanted to talk about about how
she hadn't been invited to a wedding
of a coworker and then later
discussed fraud allegations.



It helps to ask knowledgeable
questions about their work, and also
hospitals are complex structures, you
don't want to be (completely)
shooting around in the dark if you
don't have to.



Current and former employees from at least 10 UHS hospitals in nine
states said they were under pressure to fill beds by almost any
method — which sometimes meant exaggerating people’s
symptoms or twisting their words to make them seem suicidal —
and to hold them until their insurance payments ran out.

About 20 employees said UHS operates ethically and provides high-quality
care. “I can honestly say in my hospital I never felt like people were being
held long after they were due to be discharged,” said Bill Niles, who ran
Roxbury Hospital in Pennsylvania for eight years.
“They wanted you to perform with the highest standards,” said Shari Baker,
who ran Palmetto Behavioral Lowcountry Hospital in South Carolina until
earlier this year. She called UHS “a very ethical organization.”
But scores of employees from at least a dozen UHS hospitals said those
facilities tried to keep beds filled even at the expense of the safety of their
staff or the rights of the patients they were locking up.

“

Previously, the company had told me that hospital quality measures were
an important part of how CEO's are compensated, and the bonus
structure document showed otherwise.

”

