Introduction to Excel
By Aimee Edmondson, Ph.D., Ohio University; edmondso@ohio.edu
This demonstration will go through some of the basics of Excel.
First, we will filter, sort and subtotal.
In this exercise, we will analyze data from the Committee to Protect Journalists, which I
downloaded at
www.cpj.org/killed/cpj-database.xls

How did I find this data set? I searched for .xls files (Excel files). Try this with many different
keyword searches. It is amazing what you can find online that is easily downloadable. Just make
sure it is from a reputable source.
Using Google advanced search, look for .xls files only:

Filtering
In this exercise, we will review how to extract/filter subsets of the data and copy them into other
worksheets inside our main workbook. This is a common part of data analysis, especially if you
want to extract data from a large data set (national data, for example) for a smaller area (regional
data, for example). Once you have carved out smaller subsets of data, the analysis can be much
simpler and less error-prone.

Make sure you’re using a copy of your data – not your original. In this example, use the dataset
“Journalists Killed CPJ”
Under the Data tab, turn on the automatic filter by clicking on the Filter icon at the tip (it looks
like a funnel):

Notice that little pulldown arrows show up at the top of each column:

You should take plenty of time to explore all of the columns on the spread sheet to imagine the
possibilities for stories. In this example, we are going to explore column E called “Country
Killed.” Let’s filter for journalists killed in Kenya. When you click on the arrow next to “country
killed” a drop-down menu appears and all of the possible items are highlighted. Click on (Select
All) to unhighlight all of the items, then click on “Kenya.”

This is what you will see. Three journalists killed in Kenya since 1992, as reported by the
Committee to Protect Journalists:

Now, look at column N, types of Death. Filter for “Murder.” How many records did you find?
To locate that number, look at the bottom left of your screen.

Out of 1,280 records, there were 615 deaths that were categorized as “murder.”
You can remove the filtering mechanism by clicking on the filter icon, that little funnel.

SORTING and SUBTOTALING
In this exercise, we will learn how to sort information. Think about all of the possible
applications with data as we work through this section. You can sort in a variety of ways.
Click on the Data tab on the top ribbon (if you aren’t there already).
Next, click on the Sort icon next to the Filter funnel:

We want to group all of the journalists with the same nationality together in this example. This
will help us determine which country has lost the most journalists since 1992. There are several
ways to sort. Here is the easiest:

Highlight the column you want to sort. Here it is column G, Nationality. In the ribbon, under the
Data tab, next to the Sort button, You can click A to Z or Z to A. Notice this is sorted A to Z
with Afghanistan at the top. Zimbabwe is at the bottom.

Let’s subtotal to count the number of deceased journalists by country.
Here is the subtotal icon, on the far right of the ribbon:

When you click on “Subtotal” you will get this dialog box:

Notice you are counting the number of reporters (rows) and you will have subtotals after each
country.
How many journalists whose nationality if Afghanistan have died? 8
What about Algeria? 59
Let’s collapse the subtotals in order to look at the data more easily. You can do this in the top left
corner of the spread sheet. Click on “1” then “2” and then “3” – notice the subtotals function is
most effective on level “2” in this example.

To get out of subtotals, click on the “subtotals” icon in the ribbon on the top right, then click on
“Remove All” when the dialog button pops up.

Doing Math Calculations
Your next step in learning excel will likely will be some kind of math. Calculations can help you
look for trends in the data, possible story ideas or key nuggets of information to strengthen your
story.
To enter a formula, announce to Excel that one is about to come with the equal sign. The easiest
formulas are simple arithmetic:
+ is plus
- is minus

/ is divided by
* is times (multiplication)

Sum, Average and Median
Compiled from lessons by Brant Houston, (formerly of) National Institute for Computer-Assisted
Reporting (nicar.org) and Sarah Cohen (Investigative Reporters and Editors and NICAR)
Excel recognizes that you often want to summarize data. Excel’s power comes from its ability to
let you use data you’ve entered once by simply referring to its location on the spreadsheet, not its
value.
You’ll do this by entering formulas and copying them. Get good at this, and you’ll rarely have to
calculate anything by hand again.
In this exercise, you will learn about average and median using yet another dataset:
Journalists often talk about the average salary, but sometimes it is valuable to know both average
and median. Average is the total amount of salaries divided by the number of salaries. Median is
the value at which half the salaries are higher and half are lower. If you are looking at a set of
salaries and one person is getting an extremely high salary, then the average will be distorted by
that high salary. A more accurate and fair way to look at salaries in that case would be to use the
median.
Here we have a fictional collection of salaries received by the cronies of a mayor/politician as
shown here:
Most of those you’ll use at first are simple summary functions for totaling (summing) or
averaging of some kind. You tell Excel to calculate a function over a range of cells:

=SUM(start:end)
says, Sum everything beginning with the cell I say is the start (say, B2) through (the colon)
ending at the end, (say, B9).

You can also use:
=average(start:finish)
=median(start:finish)
In the next table we have salaries from “last year” and “this year”:

To find the average, move your cursor to A11 and type Average. Then move the cursor to B11 as
in the table below and type =Average(b2:b9) as shown in Table 1-2. The (b2:b9) tells the
spreadsheet that you want to calculate a range of numbers from B2 to B9.

Hit enter to get the average in the next table:

Repeat the formula for the C column, typing = Average(c2:c9). Then move your cursor to A13
and click. Type Median and then move to B13 and type =Median(b2:b9) as shown below.

Hit enter to get the result as in below:

Repeat the formula for C13. Now that you have seen how to find the average or median for a
column of numbers.
Now you will learn how to “anchor totals” – when you do a “percent of total”:
Sometimes you don’t want Excel to adjust formulas for you.

When you copy, this is what happens:

because Excel has adjusted both the numerator and the denominator:
Anchor the denominators with stick-pins you make with dollar signs:

Now it will copy correctly.

Calculating Percent Change
By Aimee Edmondson
Remember: When you do analysis, keep a separate backup table of all your original data.
For this exercise we will be using a sliver of population data for several countries in Africa from
the years 2005 and 2010. We will figure out how the population changed for each country listed
over a five-year period. Then we will calculate the percent change. NOTE: The populations
listed here are (x1000). So Burundi is listed as 7378, and that represents 7,378,000 or almost 7.4
million.
Reporters think Excel will calculate percent changes automatically. It won’t. But you’ll only
have to remember how to make one once. Excel will copy that formula for you over and over.
Get it down now:
Percent change = (new - old) / old
First let’s make a new column and call it Chng2005-2010.
In cell D2, write a formula to figure out the change in population from 2005 to 2010. The
formula is “=c2-b2” and should look like this:

Press enter to get the results.
Next, copy the formula all the way down column D.

You do this by putting your cursor on the bottom right of
the cell with the formula and double clicking. (Your cursor becomes a little black cross first.)

This simple calculation shows the true power of a spreadsheet. In a split second, you can perform
a math calculation on hundreds of rows. Yes, this is just 9 rows in a demonstration, but you get
the idea.
Now calculate percent change – this will help us give more meaning to the numbers. To
calculate, you need to take the change in population and divide it by the original 2005 population
column. Make a new column in E and call it Pct2005-10.
The formula is: “=d2/b2”

Notice how the software highlights the cells in the formula. That helps you see if you’re typing
in the right cell addresses.
Press return to figure out the percent change.
Notice you have an odd result: 0.154648956
Not very meaningful is it? To show this as a percent, you need to make sure you are on the
“home” tab at the top, then click on the % key in the ribbon (in the middle).

Your result should change to 15 percent. So, there has been a 15 percent increase in population
in Burundi in a five-year period.
Copy the formula down the entire column.
Go to the data tap and sort by Percent Change, column E, largest to smallest. (Make sure your
cursor is within the data). Uganda should be at the top.

