2017 IRE Conference
Phoenix
June 2017
Tawnell D. Hobbs, The Wall Street Journal
@tawnell
Eva Parks, KXAS-TV, Dallas
@NBCDFWEva
Francisco Vara-Orta, Education Week
@fvaraorta

Digging deeper to tell better
stories on deadline…
Use data and information on hand or that’s
easily accessible. Know where to look.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Check register
Paid and unpaid leave lists
Salary database with stipends
Cell phone numbers of employees
Employee directory
Student directory
 Historical data is your friend!

The confirmation of Betsy DeVos…
…The proverbial background stories must be done,
but what about her education efforts?
Did her push for school choice in her home state of
Michigan pay off? What will she be walking into as
the nation’s new education leader? Now for a quick
assessment in a fast-moving confirmation process…

My to-do list:

-Look at state and national test scores that
should be readily available online
-Find the players in Michigan – her home state,
where she got her start.
-Look at campaign finance reports (for state
races and PACs that she’s tied to)
-Look for any grant applications/responses tied
to charter schools in Michigan

Betsy DeVos, Nominee for Education Secretary, Faces Confirmation Hearing
Her efforts to foster charter schools as a public-school alternative have had
mixed results in Michigan
By TAWNELL D. HOBBS
Updated Jan. 17, 2017 9:20 a.m. ET

Betsy DeVos has made fostering charter schools in Michigan her mission, using her wealth and sheer
force of will to help create schools that now educate more than half of public-school students in
Detroit.
…By some measures, Ms. DeVos has been hugely successful. Charter students in the Motor City
outperform their peers in the school district, which has for years struggled academically and
financially.
…Yet Detroit students overall still do worse than their peers in urban districts nationwide and
charter performance statewide has trailed average scores for charters on national exams in math
and reading for at least a decade. And a 2015 federal review noted concerns with the state’s charter
performance.

.
DeVos Set to Take Over Education System Where Test
Scores Have Stalled
By TAWNELL D. HOBBS
Updated Jan. 31, 2017 8:52 p.m. ET

If confirmed as education secretary by the U.S. Senate, Betsy DeVos will take over a
national education system with an improving graduation rate but stagnant test
scores, despite a reform effort under the Obama administration that pumped billions
of dollars into the worst-performing schools.
Findings:
-Under the administration of former President Barack Obama, billions of dollars in
grants targeted struggling schools...
But despite the $7 billion boost … national reading and math test scores have been
flat or had small increases from 2009 to 2015, following bigger and steadier
improvements made under former President George W. Bush, who took office in
2001. Minority students also posted larger advances under Mr. Bush.

Must-have directories…
Student directories
Employee directories
Salary/stipend databases

The power of the student directory…
‘Exemplary’ Dallas ISD school skipped science,
social studies for 3rd-graders
Tawnell D. Hobbs

Third-graders at Field Elementary School in Dallas helped propel their school to
“exemplary” status, but unbeknownst to their parents those stellar math and
reading scores came at a cost.
The students learned only math and reading for most of the school year, while
teachers were pressured to fabricate grades for science, social studies and
enrichment courses like music. Some of the grades were given by teachers who
had never taught the subjects.
Dallas school investigators documented the problems …but parents were never
told about the phony grades and that their children missed nearly a whole
school year of instruction in some subjects.

In cold calling parents at the school using the student directory, this
parent was my first call… her son was struggling in the subjects missed.

Salary database comes in handy…

More Dallas ISD employees making six-figure salaries
By TAWNELL D. HOBBS
Staff Writer
Published: 25 November 2012 11:12 PM
Budget cuts in Dallas ISD have resulted in the elimination of hundreds of positions across most salary
levels. But those in the six-figure salary range have grown and are at a high this school year.
Salaries in the district have been a source of contention for some community members who believe
Superintendent Mike Miles is setting pay too high, mainly for people in his Cabinet, where salaries
range from $180,000 to $220,000. Miles’ base salary is $300,000.
A Dallas Morning News analysis found that DISD has 129 employees, not including pending hires, who
make $100,000 or more. That’s up from 111 last school year and 121 the year prior.

Salaries for those 129 workers add up to more than $16 million annually.
Those figures are a big jump from 2008-09, when 79 employees had six-figure salaries. The steady
increase came as the nation struggled through a stubborn recession and high unemployment.
Meanwhile, DISD was rebounding from a financial debacle that resulted in hundreds of layoffs.

Follow the money…
Check register
Credit card purchases
Salary and stipend databases
Purchase orders
Change orders
Settlement agreements

Watch for departing employees who leave but stay on
the payroll under settlement agreements…

Jan. 29, 2015
agreement:
…resign and receive
pay and benefits
through June 30,
2015

Examples of following the money…
Dallas ISD spent millions on extras, check register shows
The Dallas Independent School District spent at least $57 million over four years —
or one year’s average base pay for 1,086 teachers — on purchases such as pricey
meals, costly trips, lucrative consulting contracts and overnight stays at hotels in the
Dallas area and beyond.

Public schools turn to marketing to win back students from charters

Charter stipends guzzling cash

What’s in that $100,000 report?

WAS THE PROMISED PRODUCT
DELIVERED?

My deadline story…

What’s in that report? Is it worth the
$100,000 price tag?
-- 306-page report
BUT…
-- Padded with school district
charts and maps
-- Five research studies from
other groups; available on the
web
-- Printouts of two proposed
Texas bills that never became
law
-- Contained basic knowledge:
The magnet programs are
popular

Next steps:
• Look at specs promised in request for proposal, or RFP, and contract details
Promised:
-Budget analysis
-Facility analysis
-Transportation analysis
-Site visits of facilities/programs
-Community input
Last step:
•Talk to district officials
•Interview consulting company rep
Reaction
•District superintendent on the defense
•Consulting rep comes clean

End result:
Cost cut in half.

Financial red flags…
 Credit card purchases for even amounts can
indicate gift card purchases.
 Understaffing in office overseeing purchases;
unanswered questions
 Frequent change orders and/or budget
amendments
 Big budget swings
 A decreasing reserve, or emergency, fund
 Back-to-back purchases to stay under spending
limits

More people are communicating
electronically…
Electronic communications
Emails
Text messages
Instant messages

We heard about problems in HR, and decided to investigate…

The findings…
The head of Dallas ISD’s human resources department and
one of her executives resigned Thursday after The Dallas
Morning News obtained instant messages in which they
poked fun at race, religion and old age, while disparaging
coworkers and discussing ways to get rid of employees.

The messages portray a department at odds with its
ostensible mission to protect, support and help employees.
The department also manages the Professional Standards
Office responsible for creating a positive work environment
and investigating violations of professionalism.

Be observant!
-Check Facebook or Twitter for information
(before the pages are deleted or set to
private)
-Use TweetDeck or other social media
dashboards to track subjects or issues.

A Facebook picture…

A quick way to provide depth
is to look for trends and
patterns for perspective –
school districts often copy
each other.
…and don’t shy away from lighter indepth stories, especially ones that take
readers into schools.

Questions?

