Eric Wieffering
Deputy Managing Editor
Enterprise & Investigations
612.616.6752
@ewieffering

Going Deep on Breaking News
The 24-hour news cycle and the link economy – sharing of news stories over social networks –
has changed reader expectations around major news events.
The pressure to stay on top of daily developments is more intense than it has ever been. Even on
so-called "commodity news" - a press briefing, a protest march - you cannot afford to be late. If your
story does not appear near the top in search, or is not shared widely in social media, you lose
eyeballs – maybe forever.
As a result, it can be tough to find the time or bandwidth to pursue or develop quick turn
enterprise or deeper investigations – stories that advance a continuous news event, or even change
the outline of the narrative. But this kind of work is essential. Breaking news coverage attracts
visitors; enterprise and investigations during breaking news can help turn visitors into paying
subscribers.
Here are some ways to balance the demands of daily coverage with the need to go deeper. They
apply especially to the first days and weeks after a breaking news event. They worked well for us at
the Star Tribune in the first two weeks after the shooting of Philando Castile.
1. Get Organized! Start identifying the reporters, photographers, and editors who need to be
on the story.
2. File obvious data requests as soon as possible. Be polite but firm in your insistence that you
have a right to the information. Prepare to unleash your lawyers.
3. Identify the most important questions, topics or themes, and create reporter/editor teams
for each one. It will help focus their thinking around both daily coverage and quick-turn
enterprise targets. If you have a small newsroom, maybe you have only one person on each
team. That’s OK.
4. If your news event is generating daily protests, rallies, marches, etc., make sure you have a
team to handle that coverage. It’s no less important than other stories that may be in the
works.
5. Draw from all parts of the room if you can. It’s always better to over-staff, especially in the
beginning.
6. Let the teams ID the most promising daily and enterprise targets. Get them up on a
whiteboard for everyone to see and discuss, including visual, graphic and interactive
journalists involved in the coverage.
7. Communication is vital. We created a dedicated (open) channel in Slack and shared our
daily and enterprise coverage plans. The last task of the day for any editor on this story:
Update that Slack channel so that dayside reporters, editors and the digital desk could get
rolling early.
8. Publish when ready. Don't “save” for print. For the most part, forget about the classic
"weekender." Today’s audience want what you have when you have it.

