Tips on investigating student loan “debt relief” scams
Tipsheet prepared by Rich Read, a NerdWallet investigative reporter, for ​“Investigating
inequality in higher education,”​ a panel at #IRE17, the annual conference of Investigative
Reporters & Editors, Phoenix, June 23, 2017.

A six-month investigation by NerdWallet reporters exposed companies that offer phony debt
relief to people with student loans. National and local journalists can build on our work,
interviewing borrowers who’ve been swindled, investigating “debt relief” companies or
examining government agencies responsible for enforcement.
You can ​read our stories​, published in June 2017, and check out the ​NerdWallet Student Loan
Watch List​, a live web tool that we’ve updated to flag companies and warn consumers. The
first-of-a-kind Watch List is designed so consumers searching the web for information on a
specific company will encounter our entry on the business and a link to the full roster.
The Watch List features entries on more than 130 outfits, linking to public documents and other
sources useful for writing stories. The ​Who Gets Listed ​page describes how we conduct
research and determine which companies qualify for the Watch List.
How schemes work
As total student loans surpass $1.4 trillion, so-called debt-relief companies market services to
struggling borrowers, often promising to help them reduce payments or seek loan forgiveness.
Many companies charge illegal upfront fees and monthly dues. Some companies charge
borrowers to fill out application forms that they could complete for free through the U.S.
Education Department.
Telemarketers at some companies persuade borrowers to give them loan-account passwords
and power of attorney, then hijack accounts and let payments lapse, resulting in seized tax
returns, garnished wages, slashed Social Security benefits or ruined credit. Some ventures
gross more than $1 million a year, such as the business we featured in this story about a
call-center supervisor who ​became a whistleblower​.
What you can do
You can choose companies on the Watch List to investigate further. You can find student-loan
borrowers to interview concerning experiences with companies. ​This story​ features three such
people, illustrating impacts on individual borrowers. We found that scammed borrowers tend to
be reluctant initially to talk by phone, being that many have fallen for telemarketing pitches.

Bear in mind that student-loan holders who’ve lost money to rackets aren’t just young people.
Parents, grandparents and other relatives have co-signed loans for family members to attend
college. The 44 million people with student loans include borrowers in every state and abroad,
and folks ranging from alumni of prestigious institutions to victims of predatory for-profit schools.
Given ​scant federal enforcement​, local prosecutors are left to play Whac-A-Mole, sometimes
closing a company in one state that remain free to keep operating in the other 49, as ​this story
shows. Not all debt-relief outfits are scams, as shown by this p
​ rofile of a counselor​ working for a
nonprofit.
Our ​project page​ includes links to stories with practical tips for consumers, including an article
on ​what borrowers can do​ if they’ve fallen for a fraudulent company. Consumer tips are easy to
localize.
More ideas
To find people who’ve dealt with these kinds of companies, check names in public records
linked to our Watch List entries. Or search social media using company names, or more broadly
for consumers reporting problems with such businesses or loan servicers. Check with your state
attorney general or consumer agency for names of borrowers who’ve filed complaints or been
listed in court documents as due for refunds. Search the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau’s ​complaint database​.
James Dennin, a writer at Mic who built on our reporting, used a Yelp review to find a ​person to
feature​.
To learn more about how we conducted the investigation and where it led, read this ​Forbes
column or this ​CNBC​ story.
Emily Richmond, of the Education Writers Association, asks my reporting partner Teddy Nykiel
and me to suggest story ideas for reporters in ​this podcast​.
To see more of our stories on these and other topics, visit the ​NerdWallet’s public interest
reporting team​ page.
Get in touch, if you’d like
Contact us if your news organization is interested in partnering on a future project. We
investigate schemes that target consumers.
If we can help you follow up on the student-loan project, contact Rich, ​rread@nerdwallet.com​, or
Teddy, ​teddy@nerdwallet.com​, or Alex Richards, ​arichards@nerdwallet.com​. Our editor is Drex
Heikes, ​dheikes@nerdwallet.com​.

