Sexual Violence on Campus
The Records and Resources Available

By Dan Bauman
The Chronicle of Higher Education
IRE 2017

What We Track
- Every Office of Civil Rights (Education Dept.) investigation into complaints of sexual violence
since April 2011 (Dear Colleague Letter).

How Do We Track These Complaints
- Each week, The Education Dept. releases a list of open OCR investigations into sexual violence
on campus
- When a case is OPENED, we request the notification letters to the university and complainant
alerting them an investigation has been opened. We also request the records or data asked for
by the Dept. of Education of the school.
- When a case is RESOLVED, we request the letter of findings, the resolution and agreement
- When a case is CLOSED, we request the entire case file associated with the investigation

As soon as we get documents, we upload them to the Tracker. Weekly
emails alert users to the receipt of new documents and case status
changes.

Go to: http://bit.ly/wesley-ire

Track Title IX Cases in Federal Court Using Sqoop.com
Save Keyword: Name of Colleges or Universities You Cover
Nature of Suit: 440 Civil Rights: Other or 448 Civil Rights: Education
Cause: 28:1331, 20:1681, 42:1983
Plaintiff: Use of AKA “Doe”
Cases brought by accused assaulters and alleged victims against U.

*New cases and case updates will be integrated into weekly Tracker emails shortly

Formal Data Collection
FBI UCR Data: Formalized campus police departments collect sexual assault data like regular
departments. Mostly big publics. http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr
Education Dept. Clery data: Both publics and privates have to report crime and sexual assault
data annually for their Clery report. Data for all schools lives here. http://ope.ed.gov/security
DOJ Violence Against Women Act data: Data on punishments to sex crimes at nearly 130
universities who signed up for VAWA grants. FOIA required to obtain data.
http://muskie.usm.maine.edu/vawamei/
BE WARNED: Underreporting happens with FBI and Clery data. May be a story in itself if few or no sexual
assaults or rapes are reported. Only counselors are exempt from not reporting a rape or assault.

Other Records
-

Reported crimes, investigations and arrests at university police department or local police department
Crime log and Clery data not yet reported to ED
Disciplinary case dispositions, sanctions and other data
If student found guilty, name cannot be held under FERPA (but other exemptions may preclude release)

Dan Bauman
The Chronicle of Higher Education
202-466-1201
dan.bauman@chronicle.com

