DIGGING
DOCUMENTS
[for]

James V. Grimaldi
james.grimaldi@wsj.com
@jamesvgrimaldi

Jaimi Dowdell
jaimi.dowdell@gmail.com
@JaimiDowdell
Tips for Finding Documents

 When you need to prove something, think of documents. Ask sources if that was written down in
a memo or report.

 Documents aren’t only paper: Think electronically.
 Documents can be wrong. Just because it is published by the government doesn't mean it is
correct. Double check math, dates, facts.

 If a source mentions a document or report, ask for it, get it or FOIA it.
 Don’t be discouraged by stonewalling -- file FOIAs.
 Request FOIA logs. Lists what others, attorneys, businesses and special interests are requesting
 Retention schedules are key. Not only do they give you a list of documents that an agency
*should* keep, but they also tell you how the government refers to the documents.

 Request the same records from multiple departments and agencies.
 Triangulate records
 Read and reread your documents. You find new things the second and third times after you’ve
done more reporting.

Where to find documents

 Get creative with your online searches. You can use Google and search by filetype, but there are
some fancy tools available. For example, Inteltechniques Custom Document Search Tool:
https://inteltechniques.com/menu.html

 Search Google by filetype.
 Search archives using Archivegrid. There are finding aides for more than 1,000 archives
beta.worldcat.org/archivegrid/

 Millions of documents about the tobacco, drug and other industries held by UCSF, which
describes them as being “created by industries that harm public health.”
industrydocumentslibrary.ucsf.edu

 Federal, state, local government
 Courthouses – PACER, online dockets
 State agencies that provide documents without official records requests
Some of our favorite documents

 Form 990 charity tax returns (citizenaudit.org, guidestar.org)
 Corporation records kept by secretaries of state (opencorporates.com)
 Retention schedules (*see above)
 Rulemaking dockets (regulations.gov for most federal)
 Lobbying records (open secrets www.senate.gov/legislative/Public_Disclosure/LDA_reports.htm.
Search the Lobbying Database contains reports filed on amounts of money paid to lobbyist

 DOJ’s Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) web site can provide information on the names of
lobbyists for foreign entities. www.fara.gov Also, the Center for Responsive Politics has a new
site to track this federal data; it can be found at https://www.opensecrets.org/fara/

 Campaign contribution records. www.Opensecrets.org, the Center for Responsive Politics, or the
new and improved Federal Election Commission site, www.fec.gov. Another site,
http://moneyline.cq.com requires paid registration. State information at The Institute on Money in

State Politics http://www.followthemoney.org The Campaign Finance Institute provides statistics
and historical campaign finance information. http://www.cfinst.org

 Invitations to fund raisers. www.Politicalpartytime.org is a crowd-sourced project to track
political fund raisers. Searchable by member, committee, etc.

 Lawsuits, depositions, exhibits
 Indictments, criminal complaints, search warrant affidavits
 Property records (usually county recorder of records.)
 Complaints to government agencies
 Special funds
 Inspectors general and audit reports (ignet.gov)
 General Accountability Office audits, investigations and reports, and Congressional Research
Service reports, which offer authoritative briefings on issues

 Budgets; OMB filings
 Trade association publications, newsletters, websites (where they brag about lobbying successes)
 Company and office phone directories; some government directories online
 Congressional salaries and assignments www.legistorm.com has information on congressional
trips, the raw financial disclosure forms and congressional staffer salaries.

 Inspections (school cafeterias, bridges, dams, etc.
 Indictments, criminal complaints, search warrant affidavits
 Property records (usually county recorder of records.)
 City filings, such as building permits, zoning permits, rent-stabilization documents
 SEC documents (with h/t to Theo Francis, James’ colleague at WSJ:
https://businessjournalism.org/category/beats/sec-data/
o The 10-K is the annual report that publicly traded companies file with U.S. securities
regulators. The 10-K offers the most comprehensive picture of a company available to
outsiders – the closest thing to the truth outside confidential internal documents. There

o
o

o

are updates crucial developments – in lawsuits, regulatory inquiries and risks the
company faces.
The 10-Q is the quarterly report issued by publicly traded companies. A 10-Q is a regular
progress report, a three-month window into the company’s financial health and
operational well-being.
8-K Current Report—disclosure of “material” events. Companies use 8-Ks to disclose -or try to bury -- news. A routine 8-K with an earnings release could include a separate
section noting that the CFO or another senior executive is planning to retire at the end of
the year. Or an unremarkable update to the company’s ethics policies could be followed
by a section on a major plant shutdown.
DEF-14A (Proxy Statement). A proxy shows several things: 1) Salaries of top executives,
including cash, stock, and perks such as free jet rides. 2) Conflicts of interest of
executives and board members. 3) Pending shareholder votes on key issues, including
mergers and controversial political issues. 4) Disputes between a company and powerful
shareholders.
How to use the documents

 Don’t look at documents in isolation. Compare:
o
o
o

To other related documents
Versions of the same document over time
E.G., compare annual reports to previous years. Microsoft tools can help you compare
Word docs. Save the first filing from your browser and open it in Microsoft Word, or
copy-and-paste text from a filing into a blank Word document. Do the same with the
second filing. Then use Microsoft Word’s “Compare Documents” function to see what’s
changed.

 Build a chronology or timeline from documents. (If you don't start with a timeline, chances are
you'll find you need one later.)

 Weave interview and public info with documents in timeline
 Use DocumentCloud to annotate and make documents searchable.
 Create a system to keep track of your documents if you start getting overwhelmed.
 Share key documents with others in your newsroom early on -- they might have great ideas for
how the information can be used visually.

 Bulletproof your reporting by keeping track of key numbers. For example, the number of counties
in your state, the number of school districts in your coverage area, etc. This will help you make
sure that you've requested all necessary documents and get the information you need.
NOT EVERY DOCUMENT IS ONLINE: For this, James found documents only available
at City Hall

Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner’s Rent in Washington: $15,000 a Month
Owner is a Chilean magnate who bought house for $5.5 million
By Mark Maremont and James V. Grimaldi
April 3, 2017 11:43 a.m. ET
80 COMMENTS
Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner, President Donald Trump’s daughter and her White House adviser husband, are paying $15,000 a
month to rent their new home in Washington’s fashionable Kalorama neighborhood from its billionaire owner, according to newly
filed documents.
The documents, filed by the landlord with the District of Columbia housing department, present the first concrete financial
information about the rental agreement between the couple and the home’s owner, a Chilean magnate whose company is embroiled in
a dispute with the U.S. government over a mine potentially worth billions of dollars.
The rent is in line with that paid for similar luxury properties in the area, according to local brokers. Even so, it represents a seemingly
poor financial deal for the landlord, according to real-estate experts.
The owner, Andrónico Luksic, bought the house after the November election and paid $5.5 million for the six-bedroom property. The
house never was advertised for rent. The White House has said Ms. Trump’s and Mr. Kushner’s broker knew somebody had a bid on
the property and helped facilitate the match. The couple moved in shortly afterward.
The $15,000 monthly rent works out to an annual sum of about 2.5% of the home’s value, after subtracting about $40,000 in taxes and
insurance that the landlord generally pays.
“That’s a terrible investment” for the owner, said Joshua Adler, who owns multiple rental properties in Washington including a
Kalorama house. As for the renters, he said they are “getting use of a $5.5 million home for far less than it normally costs to have a
home of that value.”
Rodrigo Terré, who manages Mr. Luksic’s personal investments, said the rent represents a “reasonable return” on the $5.5 million
investment.
He said he anticipates the house will gain in value by at least $1 million over an unspecified period, so he isn’t as concerned about the
short-term financials. Mr. Terré said he believes the lease is for 2 ½ years.
“This was an arm’s-length transaction at a market price,” said Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for the White House, Ms. Trump and Mr.
Kushner.
As reported in The Wall Street Journal in March, a mining firm controlled by Mr. Luksic’s family is involved in a legal dispute with
the federal government over a proposed copper and nickel mine near a Minnesota wilderness area.
The Obama administration blocked the proposed mining project in its waning days, citing environmental concerns, but the company
and some Minnesota politicians have asked the Trump administration to reverse the decision.
Both the White House and Mr. Luksic’s representatives have said there is no relationship between the house rental and the mining
dispute, and have said the rental was arranged through brokers without the two parties ever meeting.
The filings with the housing department show the tenant on the Kalorama property is Tracy Place Home LLC, which links back to the
general counsel of Mr. Kushner’s family company in New York.
The LLC was formed on Dec. 19, three days before a company controlled by Mr. Luksic closed on the house, which is on Tracy Place.
Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump can easily afford the rent: They have assets valued between $240 million and $700 million, according to
financial disclosures made public Friday.
Jim Bell, a real-estate agent with TTR Sotheby’s who specializes in Kalorama property and wasn't involved in the rental, said he
would expect the house to rent for between $13,000 and $15,000 a month.
Other nearby, smaller houses recently were listed for rent for between $11,500 and $12,500.
Write to Mark Maremont at mark.maremont@wsj.com

