DIGGING
[for]
DOCUMENTS
James V. Grimaldi
james.grimaldi@wsj.com
@jamesvgrimaldi

Jaimi Dowdell
jaimi.dowdell@gmail.com
@JaimiDowdell

What is a document?
• an original or official paper relied on as the basis,
proof, or support of something
• something (as a photograph or a video or audio
recording) that serves as evidence or proof
• writing conveying information, such as
financial documents or historical documents or a
classified document that was leaked to the media
• a computer file containing information input by a
computer user and usually created with an
application (as a spreadsheet or word processor )
•

Merriam Webster definition

Tips for Finding Documents
•
•
•
•

Documents aren’t only paper: Think electronically.
Documents can be wrong. Double check math, dates, facts.
File FOIAs – don’t be discouraged by stonewalling
Request FOIA logs. Lists what others, attorneys, businesses and
special interests are requesting
• Get government retention schedules. Lists documents that an
agency *should* keep, and how government refers to them.
• Request the same records from multiple departments and
agencies.
• Triangulate records

Where to find documents
• Federal, state, local government
• Courthouses – PACER, online dockets
• State agencies that provide documents
without official records requests
• Search Google by filetype.
• Use Inteltechniques Custom
Document Search Tool:
inteltechniques.com/menu.html
• Archives: Use Archivegrid to search
1,000 archives
beta.worldcat.org/archivegrid/
• Millions of documents “created by
industries that harm public health”:
industrydocumentslibrary.ucsf.edu

Some of our favorite documents
• Form 990 charity tax returns (citizenaudit.org, guidestar.org)
• Corporation records kept
by secretaries of state
(opencorporates.com)
• Retention schedules (*see
above)
• Rulemaking dockets (
regulations.gov for most
federal)
• Lawsuits, depositions,
exhibits
• Indictments, criminal complaints, search warrant affidavits
• Property records (usually county recorder of records.)

More favorites
• Complaints to government
agencies
• Special funds
• Inspectors general and audit
reports (ignet.gov)
• GAO and CRS reports
• Budgets; OMB filings
• Inspections (school cafeterias,
bridges, dams, etc.
• Securities records (SEC.gov), business records
• Emails, correspondence, desk calendars, entrance/exit logs
• Flight logs and manifests for aircraft
• Congressional correspondence to federal agencies

How to
analyze your
documents
• Use DocumentCloud:
search & annotate
• Build a timelines w/
documents & info
• Don’t look at documents in isolation. Compare:
• To other related documents
• Versions of the same document over time
• E.G., compare annual reports to previous years.
• Create a system to track documents.
• Share key documents with others in your newsroom early
• Keep a list of key numbers in documents

It isn’t always online

Property records

D.C.
Corporate
Records

Global
corporate
search

The owner behind the shell co.
Basic Internet
search linked
Rodrigo Terre to
Andronico
Luksic, a Chilean
mining magnate.
His company was
suing the United
States.

Court and clip search

DC Rent Control
Laws
The documents, filed by the
landlord with the District of
Columbia housing department,
reveal the rent: $15,000/month,
less than a reasonable return.

Rep. Tom Price, HHS Secretary
TIP: Tom Price
has been day
trading health
care stocks.
STOCK (Stop
Trading on
Congressional
Knowledge)
Act.
Financial
Disclosures

http://clerk.house.gov/public_disc/financialsearch.aspx

Compare:
Financial
Disclosure
to
Legislation

Pick for Health Secretary
Traded Medical Stocks While
in House

President-elect Donald Trump’s pick to run the Health and Human
Services Department traded more than $300,000 in shares of health-related
companies over the past four years while sponsoring and advocating
legislation that potentially could affect those companies’ stocks.
Rep. Tom Price, a Georgia Republican, bought and sold stock in about 40
health-care, pharmaceutical and biomedical companies since 2012, including
a dozen in the current congressional session, according to a Wall Street
Journal review of hundreds of pages of stock trades he filed with Congress.
In the same two-year period, he has sponsored nine and co-sponsored 35
health-related bills in the House.

What is
FOIA?
• Passed in 1966; took effect 1967
• Any person has a right to access federal
agency records
• Enforceable in court
• Nine main exemptions can, but are not
required to, limit access
• FOIA requests to any agency

FOIA Exemptions
1. National security -- cause some
“damage” to the national security
2. Internal agency rules -- personnel
3. Statutory exemption -- kept secret by other federal laws
4. Trade secrets -- customer lists and secret formulas.
5. Internal agency memos – studies to reach a decision.
6. Personal privacy -- personal information in the government’s
hands
7. Law enforcement records -- jeopardize criminal or civil
investigations
8. Bank reports -- conditions of banks and other federally regulated
financial institutions
9. Oil and gas well data -- information about the location of oil and
gas wells of private companies
Source: http://www.rcfp.org/federal-open-government-guide/exemptions-disclosure-under-foia/8-bankreports#sthash.wTSOhE4O.dpuf

WWW.FOIA.GOV
list of principal FOIA contacts across agencies
IRE’s FOI page: http://www.ire.org/foi/
National Freedom of Information Coalition http://www.nfoic.org/
Reporter’s Committee on Freedom of the Press is a rich legal resource on free speech issues,
developments in the law. http://www.rcfp.org/
Public Citizen’s FOIA page http://www.citizen.org/Page.aspx?pid=5171\
Government’s Attic Web site, run by a FOIA activist. http://www.governmentattic.org/
National Security Archives at George Washington University collects and publishes declassified
documents acquired through the Freedom of Information Act. Includes “The Torture Archive”
of more than 83,000 pages of documents (and thousands more to come) related to the interrogation
of detainees from the wars Iraq and Afghanistan. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
The Justice Department has compiled an excellent list of legal references, FOIA guides
and publications -- inside and outside of the government. http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/basicreferences.htm
SELECTED GOVERNMENT WEB SITES
The Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) was created within the National Archives
and Records Administration when the OPEN Government Act of 2007 amended FOIA.
OGIS was established to mediate disputes between FOIA requesters and Federal agencies,
review FOIA policies, review agency compliance with FOIA, and recommend policy changes
to the Congress and President to improve the administration of FOIA. http://www.archives.gov/ogis/
Almost every government agency posts online its FOIA handbook, which is a valuable resource
for negotiating with FOIA officers. “Your own handbook says... ’’ Here are a few:
http://www.foia.gov/report-makerequest.html
Defense Department’s FOIA site, including the DOD FOIA handbook and list of
contacts within DOD (Army, Navy, etc.) http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs/foi/
Department of State
http://foia.state.gov/
Department of Treasury http://www.ustreas.gov/foia/
Department of Interior
http://www.doi.gov/foia/
Department of Commerce http://www.osec.doc.gov/oebam/FOIAWebsite.htm

Secrecy Prompts Project
The U.S. Congress eight years ago did
something it rarely had done before:
Lawmakers exempted from the
Freedom of Information Act a database
that traced guns used in crimes back to
firearms dealers.
Called the Tiahrt Amendment

The Blackout
• The resulting blackout curtailed what
had been a steady stream of media
investigations into gun stores and
firearms trafficking.
• The assignment from Investigations
Editor Jeff Leen: Break the secrecy.

How We Broke the Secrecy
• Created a database of more than 35,000 guns
traced to crimes from unpublicized state databases
and local police evidence logs from Maryland,
Virginia and the District of Columbia.
• Compiled a list of 511 police officers killed by
firearms. This was done by reviewing thousands
of police and court records and 30 crime gun
traces from court files on police killings.
• Obtained lists of the top 12 gun dealers in the past
two years who have sold the most weapons traced
from Mexican crime scenes

In Virginia
• Learned from a Post colleague about a
database called the “Virginia Criminal
Firearms Clearinghouse”
– Created by state law in 1993
– Requires all local police in Virginia to report all
guns they take into possession to VSP.
– Must fill out dozens of fields of information,
including – if done – results of the ATF trace.

