Lessons from Democracy’s Detectives James Hamilton, Director,Stanford Journalism Program
I Why is investigative reporting underprovided in the marketplace?
Investigative journalism is underprovided in the market, but new combinations of data and
algorithms may make it easier for journalists to discover and tell the stories that hold
institutions accountable.
According to IRE’s definition of investigative reporting, it involves original work, about
substantive issues, that someone wants to keep secret. Original work means fixed costs in story
creation. Social importance: stories sometimes have impact on the operation of institutions.
Since firms are not fully rewarded for changes in public policy, these changes are positive
spillovers or externalities. Significant transaction or hassle costs: Government may try to keep
some data secret. Fixed costs, positive externalities, transaction costs can help explain who
does investigative reporting and why it is underprovided.
II Results from Democracy’s Detectives: The Economics of Investigative Journalism
Each dollar invested by a news outlet in an investigative story can generate hundreds of dollars
in net benefits to society from changes in public policies.
The investigative stories submitted in Investigative Reporters and Editors’ annual prize
competitions are costly to produce. Investigations by newspapers or magazines averaged six
months, with television reports taking about a month less, and those from online news
organizations about a month and half more.
Prize winning-work is becoming more concentrated. The top five outlets accounted for 30% of
major investigative reporting awards in 1990s, a figure that increased to 47% in 2000s. Prize
winning-work now involves more journalists per project, and more partnerships across media
outlets.
In an era when prospective journalists face uncertain incomes and little time for training in the
workplace, the average age of reporters winning Pulitzers for investigative work has increased
by nearly ten years since the 1980s.
While Freedom of Information Act requests by media at a sample of federal agencies dropped
by a quarter from 2005-2010, FOIAs from local newspapers declined by nearly 50%. Local
newspapers once led in innovative reporting methods, but that expertise too has shifted to
nonprofits, universities, and specialized media outlets.
A single reporter can consistently change lives and laws. In nearly 36 years of investigative
work, Pat Stith, a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter at The News & Observer in Raleigh, NC, did

more than 300 investigations. 149 of his stories sparked substantive changes, 110 generated
deliberative impacts, and 43 had individual impacts such as firings or resignations. About 10%
of his investigations caused the state legislature to act, with his work generating 31 new laws in
North Carolina.
III What is to be done?
Pursue government records. In Democracy’s Detectives I examine stories submitted to the
Investigative Reporters and Editors prize competitions from 1979 to 2010. About 14% of IRE
stories involved government records requests. The stories with the most impact though were
more likely to involve FOIA or FOI requests. About 40% of the stories that triggered review of
policies involved government records requests. Government records were requested in at least
a quarter of stories that resulted in people being fired, in instances that triggered audits, or
investigations where policies changed. In stories where laws had been passed because of the
reporting, 24% involved government records requests.
Team up and partner. For investigative work recognized by with Pulitzers, Selden Ring,
Goldsmith, and Worth Bingham awards, I find that over time there has been an increase in
awards which cite the work of four or more people and the percentage of awards involving
three cooperating media outlets. Division of labor works, which means that people who have
acquired expertise can do more when they come together as a team on an investigative project.
A story discovered and developed by media outlets that are collaborating can magnify the
reach and impact of the work.
Seek out new data and algorithms. The field of computational journalism builds on and
incorporates elements of computer-assisted reporting and data journalism. This new approach
often involves larger data sets and more sophisticated algorithms. Recent advances in
computational journalism center on reporting by algorithms, about algorithms, and through
algorithms. Stories generated by computer algorithms include those involving Narrative Science
and Automated Insights. The Wall Street Journal and ProPublica have each done reporting that
looks at the disparate impacts of private and government algorithms on different groups in
society. Reporters are also using algorithms to mine for stories, as the Atlanta Journal
Constitution did in using web scraping and machine learning to identify potential cases across
the country of doctors involved in sexual misconduct. Academics working in computational
journalism are looking for puzzles and data to pursue in partnerships with reporters. Two
research questions we’re focused on at Stanford are: How do you lower the costs of discovering
stories through better use of data and algorithms? How do you tell stories in more personalized
and engaging ways? If those are questions you’re working on, I hope you’ll contact me at
jayth@stanford.edu.

