Spotlight on Investigative Journalists: Results from National Survey Data
Gerry Lanosga, Indiana University
Brant Houston, University of Illinois
Publications
● G. Lanosga and B. Houston, 2016, “Spotlight: Journalists’ Perceptions of Investigative
Reporting and Its Role in Society.” ​Journalism Practice​ (DOI:
10.1080/17512786.2016.1228472).
● G. Lanosga, L. Willnat, D. Weaver, and B. Houston, 2015, “A Breed Apart? A
Comparative Study of Investigative Journalists and U.S. Journalists.” ​Journalism Studies
(DOI: 10.1080/1461670X.2015.1051570).
Rationale for studies
Investigative journalism is the highest expression of the media’s watchdog role, but it
faces continual pressures from both internal and external forces (e.g. legal threats and
newsroom economics). Despite the centrality of watchdog reporting to modern journalistic
identity, there had been no broad survey of investigative journalists since 1991.
Sample
Professional and academic members of Investigative Reporters & Editors; 3,225
names/emails obtained from IRE; final valid sample of 2,806; 867 completed responses for 31%
response rate. Questionnaire consisted of 50 questions, some designed to replicate general
surveys of journalists for comparative research.
Selected Demographics
Personal
● Average age 46
● 59% male
● 88% white
● Median income $69,734
Occupational
● 72% full-time employees
● 39% print (22% broadcast, 19% online/multimedia)
● 16% small market (under 100,000); 18% medium (100,000 to 499,999); 66%
large ($500,000 and up)
● Business model: 64% for-profit; 23% nonprofit
● Years in journalism: 20 (median); years in investigative: 10 (median)
Conflicting views on state of the business
● Negative: About half think journalism is headed in the wrong direction, say it is getting
harder to get time and resources for investigative, and say the news media’s
commitment to investigative is decreasing.

●

Positive: Most report increasing commitment to investigative in their own newsrooms.
Notably, nonprofit journalists (most of whom are refugees from for-profit newsrooms)
have somewhat more positive assessments. Nonprofit journalists also report significantly
higher levels of job satisfaction (50% very satisfied versus 37% of others).

Inputs, outputs and the relationship of investigative journalism to policymakers
Respondents say stories originate with tips from sources only 21% of the time versus
37% from their own enterprise or curiosity. At the other end of the process, investigative
journalists say their stories often prompt specific policy outcomes such as official investigations
(69% some or most of the time) or criminal charges (28% some or most of the time). A third of
respondents acknowledged their stories produce no tangible results most of the time.
Asked broadly about intersecting influences in the news, investigative journalists
concede their influence in policy matters is eclipsed by that of officials. Journalists believe
officials have more influence than they should over the media’s agenda of news coverage - and
they think journalists have less influence than they should in the policy process.
Role perceptions: investigative journalists are not monolithic
Not surprisingly, respondents overall express strong support for investigative journalists
acting as mobilizers of people and policymakers, as adversaries of business and government,
and as interpreters who investigate claims and provide interpretation of complex issues.
However, one distinct cluster of respondents - nearly two-thirds of the sample - was much more
inclined to embrace an activist role in pushing social reform based on findings of investigative
stories. Some factors associated with this cluster include higher incomes, working for public
media, and placing less importance on religion in personal lives.
All journalism should be investigative?
Yes, but a comparison of IRE members with a broader sample of journalists reveals that
self-identified investigative journalists are in many ways “a breed apart” with a more
independent streak of mind. For instance, they are less likely than journalists overall to indicate
a political or religious preference. They are also less likely to express concern about issues
such as benefits and job security; rather, they place higher emphasis on issues related to
journalism’s role in society, such as helping people and influencing public affairs.
Investigative journalists are also more supportive than journalists as a whole of
controversial reporting tactics such as using documents without permission, deception and
hidden camera use.
Future research
Is there a Trump bump for investigative journalism? Will there be continued growth in the
nonprofit sector? These are issues suggesting the need for regular replication of this survey,
along the same lines as the American Journalist surveys conducted once a decade by Weaver,
Willnat, et al.

