THE NATIONAL REGISTRY OF EXONERATIONS collects, analyzes and disseminates
information about all known exonerations of innocent criminal defendants in the United States from
1989 to the present. We publish narrative accounts of each exoneree’s case and we provide
accessible, searchable online statistical and demographic data about the cases. We also conduct
empirical studies of the process of exoneration and of factors that lead to the underlying wrongful
convictions.
Our database is accessible online at exonerationregistry.org.

We study false convictions—their frequency, distribution, causes, costs and consequences—in order
to educate policy makers and the general public about convictions of innocent defendants. We focus
on exonerations because the only false convictions that we know about are those that end in
exoneration.
We aim to be accurate, objective, transparent and accessible.
We rely entirely on publicly available information. We do not practice law or investigate cases of
possible innocence. We do not collect, maintain or use confidential information of any sort, or work on
behalf of any individuals. We do not make our own judgments about the guilt or innocence of
convicted defendants. Our criteria for classifying cases as exonerations are based on official actions
by courts and other government agencies.
The most accessible way to search and sort or cases is on the Detailed View – which is accessible
under the USING THE REGISTRY tab on our banner, and includes detailed information on all
exonerations we list—2046 as of June 19, 2017.
The detailed view has a filter function, in which one can search for cases that include any words that
appear in the narrative summaries of the cases, as well as factors that contributed to the false
conviction.

The Detailed View can also be sorted and searched by the exoneree’s Name, Age and Race; by the
County and State in which the crime occurred; by the Type of Crime, Sentence, Year of Conviction
and Year of Exoneration; by several factors that contribute to wrongful convictions—Mistaken
Witness Identifications. False Confessions, Perjury or False Accusations, False or Misleading
Forensic Evidence, Official Misconduct, and Inadequate Legal Defense—as well as by a variety of
variables collected under the “Tags” column: cases that included arson, cases in which a codefendant of the exoneree confessed, cases that involved a prosecutorial conviction integrity unit,
“child sex abuse hysteria” cases, cases with a child victim, cases with a female exoneree, federal
cases, cases with a jailhouse informant, misdemeanor cases, cases in which no crime occurred,
cases in which the exonerees pled guilty, posthumous exonerations, and shaken baby syndrome
cases.
Clicking on the last name of an exoneree in the Detailed View (or the more limited Summary View)
will take you the page for a narrative summary of that case, as well as a thumbnail sketch of the case
and possibly a photograph.

The Registry website also includes an interactive data display, accessible under the Resources tab
on our banner. This application can do most of the sorting and filtering tasks that can be done in the
Detailed View—and many others—and display the output visually.

You can also request the published Registry data in spreadsheet format by clicking on the
appropriate link under “REGISTRY DATA” in the drop down menu under the “RESOURCES” tab.
The Registry welcomes direct inquiries about our data or research. Please send an email to
NationalRegistryOfExonerations@umich.edu,
which will reach Senior Researcher Maurice Possley, Editor Barbara O’Brien, and Registry Founder
Samuel Gross.
Attached is a one-page graphic description for our most recent annual Report, Exonerations in
2016. The complete Report was released in early March of 2017 together with a special report on
Race and Wrongful Convictions in the United States. Both reports may be found in “REPORTS” in
the drop down menu under the “RESOURCES” tab.

