LUCKY 13 TIP-SHEET FOR FINDING, NURTURING, AND PROTECTING SOURCES
MICHAEL REZENDES, BOSTON GLOBE
1) Everyone wants to talk, no matter what they have to lose. It’s your job to find a way to get
them to open up.
2) Be sincere -- don’t pretend to be sincere. If you’re really interested in what someone has to
say, they’re more likely to talk.
3) Swallow your ego. If a source wants to complain about the news media or your news
organization, let them vent. Once they get it all out of their system, they’ll start telling you want
you want to know.
4) Hand-holding. Sources are often anxious and fearful. It’s your job to re-assure them – or to
frankly asses the risks of talking to you and explain why taking a risk is the right thing to do.
5) Creating a comfortable space. It can be tedious, but sometimes you just have to spend time
letting a source get to know you before they feel comfortable enough to talk.
6) Read voraciously. Before you approach your source, devour everything you can about the
subject so when something is mentioned in an interview, or appears in a document, you’ll
understand its significance.
7) Flattery will get you everywhere. It’s okay to inflate a source’s ego by telling them how
important they are to the story. Once they start talking, you may find they’re more important
than you realized.
8) Don’t put on airs. Especially with a reluctant source or someone who’s not used to being
interviewed, there’s no need to act like a big shot.

9) Be accessible. Make it easy for people to find you, whether through a tip-line, social media,
email, or telephone.
10) Indulge the crazies. Many tipsters may be genuinely nuts but the tenth crazy story may turn
out to be true. You won’t know unless you listen.
11) If a source refuses to take your calls or return your email, write them a letter explaining
yourself. If that doesn’t work, write them another letter to say you’re still interested and still
need their help.
12) The cold door-knock. If a source refuses to talk, you might try showing up on the front
porch. Don’t think of this as a hostile confrontation (although it can be). Sometimes sources will
be impressed because you took the time and made the effort to pay them a visit. If they don’t
answer the door, leave a hand-written note with your business card and cell phone number.
13) Convey the big picture. Many people are willing to share information if they believe it will
help right a wrong or otherwise contribute to society.

