BEHIND THE CRIME TAPE

How to build trust with police, develop sources and report stories of accountability.
By Justin George of The Marshall Project
(former Baltimore Sun police reporter)

●

●

●

●

●

●

Show up. Attend every press conference and police event possible, even if you don’t plan to write about it.
Not only does it increase face­time with the police commissioner, giving you the ability to ask direct
questions, it also shows police that like them ­­ you will show up whenever & wherever.
Accept nothing. This goes without saying as it’s Journalism Ethics 101. Never accept a thing ­­ lunch, coffee,
beer. You buy (and charge your news organization!). It lets cops know you have integrity, which they
respect, and it draws a clear line: You’re a cop, I’m a reporter. We’re cordial but I’m at work. When cops see
you adhere to standards, they're more likely to believe that you also hold journalistic tenets such as
accuracy, fairness & objectivity high.
Work a few nights. Attend district or precinct nighttime community meetings. This is where you meet the
district commanders who are the ‘faces’ of the department for neighborhood groups. They are the “middle
managers,” who are often the most honest and direct about what’s going on. They may not speak to you
on­the­record but they may have a lot to say off­the­record when there aren't PIOs around.
Don't shy away from the critical stories. I once wrote a story critical of the department’s new public database
of use­of­force incidents. It was supposed to give residents more transparency but hadn't been updated in
months. The next day, the lead public information officer called and chewed me out. He said I didn't
understand the complexity of Internal Affairs. We discussed allowing me access to a police investigation so I
could see what he was talking about for myself. The next investigation that came up: The death of Freddie
Gray. I spent nine days embedded in that historic investigation.
Stop tweeting opinions on your beat. Sure, readers are looking to us for instant analysis when something
happens. But don't tweet what you think happened inside the police department if you don't have the facts &
sources to back it up because you could be wrong. Avoid hot takes. Don’t ‘like’ or RT them either & stay
away from the snark. Police, like everyone else, are paying attention, & your objectivity & fairness are
always on trial.
Use news and controversy to gain access. When police are facing criticism because they can't curb a
shooting spree, and they tell the public they're doing the best they can while woefully understaffed ­­ tell the
department to prove it. Ask them to let you go on that foot patrol with one of the officers working a 12­hour
OT shift with no days off. Fentanyl and heroin are killing at record rates? Ask to embed on that special
taskforce battling the problem. The police commissioner tells the public that officers are undergoing

●

●
●

retraining after shooting multiple unarmed men? Ask to sit in on the retraining so the public can know it's
really happening.
Start small. Don't ask for a homicide embed right off the bat. Ask for a district ride­along or night in the crime
lab. Show police the value of letting residents see their vantage point through detailed, accurate & fair
reporting. Build from there.
Stress fairness. Explain to the department that their side is not being heard, and that the public is more likely
to trust an independent source such as a journalist than a press release or public relations campaign.
Ask the mayor. For departments that want nothing to do with providing reporters access, make your request
to the mayor or top elected official. Politicians know the benefit of the press even if police chiefs don't.

