Gaining trust and building rapport: Interviewing victims of violent crime
Ashley Luthern, reporter for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
DO:
-

Be patient. Often you don’t get the great interview soon after the
crime/tragedy/incident you’re covering. Make contacts during breaking
news and then follow up.
Ask victim and community advocates to help connect you to sources.
Follow past IRE tips sheets for backgrounding people and finding sources
(scour social media, pipl.com, Lexis Nexis etc)
Allow for a long reporting and writing process. Most of these interviews take
hours and require follow-up for the smallest details to effectively re-create a
scene.
Ask if the person kept a diary, wrote emails/letters to a friend – anything that
might help you get in his or her frame of mind at the time of what was
happening.
Take notes, video and photos on your phone as you can. I followed a
basketball team for a season – and I’m not a sports reporter – and it was such
a help to be able to review video of key game moments
Seek out public records (see below)
Be genuine and honest about your goals for reporting the story. Show
examples of your past work.
Remember your subjects aren’t public officials. When a draft is done, I often
talk through parts of the story to the sources for fact-checking -- and because
I never want them to be surprised by what they see in the story.
Consult resources like the Dart Center, which specializes in helping reporters
cover trauma and take care of themselves, too.

DON’T:
- Rush to fill the silence or keep the interview moving. If you’re pausing, the
subject will naturally fill the silence and usually reveal more. I learned this
from my radio/podcast colleagues.
- Say you know how they feel. You don’t.
- Use language that implies pity.
- Don’t take your sources word for everything (obviously). Back up what you
can through other interviews and/or documents.
Public records:
Often sources don’t remember the precise order or details of event because of the
length of time that has passed or because of the trauma of it. Gather every scrap of
paper you can about the particular case/incident, including:
1. Court records. I’ve found sentencing transcripts to be particularly helpful
because they usually have a lot of rich detail about a suspect’s backstory and
the lasting impact on the victim.
2. Police incident reports, 911 calls, video interviews

3. Jail records – calls/videos
4. Your own archives to see if this person has given any interviews before or
was quoted in any other spot news. If you’re writing about a decades-old
event, these archives can be invaluable for key quotes and finding other
people to interview.
Context:
Work in as much context as you can about whatever crime occurred. Be creative if
you can’t get it the usual way. For example, it can be hard to get local non-fatal
shooting data from the police department because agencies aren’t required to track
it for national crime reporting standards.
- Ask hospitals and/or check your state health department
- Ask local academic institutions that may have studied it
- Check with the Fire Dept, in case they transport NFS victims.
- Check advocacy groups, like the Gun Violence Archive
The secret tip:
When in doubt, call a librarian.
I’m not kidding. If you are having trouble finding information, whether it’s an old
news story or an academic study or a book on the history of whatever subject you’re
writing about, call a librarian. They are professional researchers.
I have used this tip from a J-school professor more times than I can count. It’s
always when I have run out of ideas and am struggling to find an answer to
something. The librarians have come through every time.

