Tips on helping you cut through the he said/she said of domestic violence
By Katie LaGrone, FL Investigative Reporter, E.W. Scripps
WPTV, WFTS, FOX 4
Katie.lagrone@scripps.com

Court Records
-

-

Make an appointment with your Clerk of Court!
You need to understand how case information is inputted, tracked and organized. Once you
understand what you can get your hands on and how- it will make your records request that
much easier. CLERK OF COURTS DON’T ALL USE THE SAME SYSTEM!
Understand the difference between DV cases filed in criminal court and those filed in civil court.
*real story example- In Katie LaGrone’s “For the love of guns, the alarming truth about FL’s gun
laws,” we sought court data to show how many defendants, under protective orders, were
charged with violating a restraining order over gun issues. To help us illustrate that, we asked
for a criminal court database of all persons under a protective order who were also charged with
firearm issues. KNOW THE STATE STATUES THAT APPLY TO WHAT YOU’RE SEEKING!

Finding/Interviewing DV victims
-

-

-

DV cases are messy, so reporters looking for credible interviews need to seek out credible
source to find them.
Contact your local/state domestic violence advocacy groups. They will be your best source for
victims and attorneys who take on these cases and have vetted them for you.
Once you identify a victim, do as much research as you can on his/her case. You need to know
who you’ll be speaking to and how he/she ended up as a “domestic violence victim.”
Remember, his/her abuser likely has his/her own claims of abuse; mistreatment.
Know that many victims are still living in fear so getting them to talk on the record can be
challenging. Depending on their case details and how active or old the case is, be open to
offering up an anonymous interview for TV or print.
When seeking out victims or family members, use the resources we all know to use- phone,
email, home visits, social media, etc…
Be kind, be compassionate and be respectful.

Elements to help bring a powerful DV case to light
-

-

-

Remember your own station or newspaper archives. The strongest DV cases may have received
media attention when it happened.
*real story example- In Katie LaGrone’s “For the love of guns, the alarming truth about FL’s gun
laws,” we sought domestic homicide case details from local law enforcement AND relied on
archives for pictures, video and other case details.
Obtain 911 calls. Chances are, the case you’re highlighting for your piece included a 9-1-1 call.
Don’t forget to contact law enforcement or the state attorney’s office for a copy of those calls.
9-1-1 calls can provide the strongest emotional detail of what happened.
Don’t forget to also ask for other scene images and/or video. Be respectful and judicious on
what you choose to include in your piece. These cases are often a person’s worst nightmare.
Showing images and/or 911 calls often leave the victim or his/her family reliving it.

