Broadcast: Deep dive II (Sponsored by National Association of Broadcasters)
Danielle Leigh @DanielleNLeigh
Scott MacFarlane @MacFarlaneNews
Rick Yarborough @Ricknbc
Scott Friedman @ScottNBC5

K5 INVESTIGATORS: HAZARDS FOR HIRE

“Hazards for Hire” exposed the large number of vehicles for hire on the road despite having
unaddressed safety recalls. By collaborating with several TEGNA stations and cars.com to
obtain data from around the country, KING5 found passengers in Seattle had the highest
likelihood of climbing into a vehicle with an outstanding recall. KING’s reporting required sorting
through a massive amount of VINs, ultimately numbering over 30,000 in Seattle alone. As a
result of the investigation, Seattle council members and state lawmakers immediately began
drafting new rules to require taxi, Uber and Lyft drivers to stay current on safety recalls.

How We Got the Data:
https://www.nhtsa.gov/recalls - Federal website for checking any vehicle for a recall
using its unique VIN. The search will tell you what the recall is for and when it was
issued going back 15 years.
City or County License Database - Enter each VIN one by one into the federal recall
website and create a spreadsheet of your findings.
Copy of Vehicle Safety Inspection Checklist and Requirements - This will help you see
what local entities are and are not checking for.
Be prepared for a fight. In Seattle, Uber and Lyft tried to block the release of any
database containing the VINs of their drivers’ vehicles arguing it would create a
competitive disadvantage. It required a court order for KING to obtain the documents.

Alternative Methods If You Get Denied:
Visit Uber, Lyft and Taxi Pick up Zones at airports, sporting events and concerts and
take pictures of the VIN (It’s on the lower left side of a vehicle’s windshield).
For Uber and Lyft, ask coworkers and friends to take screen grabs of their trips. Then
use the license plate and driver data to request VIN information from your state DOL or
DMV.

Key Contacts:
Uber, Lyft Spokespersons, Attorneys
Taxi Unions
City, County, State Business Regulations Departments
State Lawmakers on Committees over Transportation and Business
Riders
Mechanics involved in vehicle inspections
Commercial Litigation Attorney

Tips for doing a Data heavy story When You Work “Alone”:
Look for opportunities to collaborate with other investigative reporters at other affiliated
stations.
Collaborating helped KING share responsibilities, gather data from a larger section of
the country and expand the story’s reach.
Find Newsroom allies: producers, assignment editors, and digital producers interested
in developing as content producers who can help.
Set mini deadlines to break up the work amongst other stories.
To watch the full investigation:
http://www.king5.com/news/investigations/could-your-next-cab-uber-or-lyft-be-unsafe/354732337

NEWS4 I-TEAM: SLIPPING THROUGH THE CRACKS

A year-long investigation by the NEWS4 I-Team at WRC-TV in Washington, DC revealed one of
America’s largest school districts failed to revoke the licenses of teachers who sexually assaulted
students, and the team caught the school district lying about it. WRC’s reports led to
immediate change including a new state law enacted within months in Virginia and new
policies involving revoked licenses in two states.

Finding the Story Without a Tip:
 Get License Revocations from State Agencies School Teachers
Horse Trainers
Dentists
Doctors
Physical Therapists
Midwives
Boxers
Social Workers


FOIA Multiple States
Look for long lapses between incident and revocation
How did one man lose his license in two states?

The First Story:
 Initially Focus on One Case
Get all available documentation from the school district, county and state
 Create a timeline to simplify the story
 Track Down All Involved Parties
The Follow Ups:
 Push to get school district on camera
 The Superintendent’s response was critical for future reports
The 21 Day Rule:
 FOIA the emails of stakeholders using key words from your investigation, including
reporter/producer name
 Get an inside look at the discussion happening on the inside prior/post report
 Look for names in those records that might lead to a new angle
Getting Results:
 Go to State Education Departments with oversight EARLY so they’re familiar with the
report before air
 Monitor State Board meetings (open and closed)
 Reach out to victim’s representative
 Identify the legislative committee with oversight
 Try both chambers of the legislature
 Create online series page so interested parties have easy access

Obstacles:
 The I-Team created a timeline of the Brad Norton case using dozens of records obtained
through FOIA. That led to us being the first to uncover the mistake the school district
made with Norton’s license.
 Gathering information about teachers with revoked licenses specifically for sexual
misconduct was especially difficult as Virginia only listed names. Before our reports
Maryland did not list anything publicly. It took months of negotiating with local and
state agencies to find information through FOIA.
 Maryland and Virginia records also redact ALL identifying information about victims or
witnesses in cases. The I-Team relied on door knocking and sourcing inside the justice
system to track down victims in the cases.
 The team also spent weeks tracking down parents who had no knowledge about how
the school district had dropped the ball until we alerted them.
 It took months of surveillance to figure out where some of the teachers we focused on
now lived so we could approach them for responses.





The main school district at the focus of our reports initially refused to go on camera.
Our station finally convinced the outgoing County Superintendent to do an interview
where our reporter asked her about any other languishing teacher licenses.
We were very limited with visuals for this story. School districts were very reluctant to
let us inside to shoot broll of classrooms. So, our photographer/editor actually
constructed our own classroom in an empty room of the station.

Results:
 Within two days of our first report Fairfax County School Board launched investigation
into Norton case.
 Two months later two Virginia legislators introduced bills to help state investigate
teachers.
 Virginia Board of Education demanded statewide school check to uncover other similar
cases at the end of January.
 Virginia governor signed new law in February. School districts are now required to
notify state within ten days of any suspected misconduct by teachers.
 In May, a Virginia delegate asked state Department of Education to expand what
information is publicly available for teachers who have their licenses revoked for
misconduct.
 The Virginia Department of Education agreed to review its policies on disclosure of
teacher license revocations.
 Maryland’s State Superintendent of Schools ordered the public posting of all teachers
who had their licenses revoked including when and why.

To watch our entire “Slipping Through the Cracks” series:
http://www.nbcwashington.com/investigations/Slipping-Through-the-Cracks425777904.html

NBC5 Investigates: BIG BUSES, BIGGER PROBLEMS

This nine month long investigation of a government run school bus agency serves as a case study in
records that can help track safety issues and spending inside government agencies.
This investigation morphed from a school bus ticket scandal into a financial scandal and even an
investigation of a questionable government land deal.

Key documents:
Check registers:
Some agencies post these on line. They list all checks the agency has written along with the payee and
amount.
Invoices & Checks:
Using the check register you can request each check and the supporting invoice to see what the agency
paid for.

In the first report in our series “invoices” we requested for some checks turned out to be traffic tickets
that had been paid with taxpayer money - tickets racked up by hundreds of school bus drivers who ran
red lights.
Campaign Finance reports:
In Texas, each agency must make these reports available to any member of the public during regular
business hours at agency headquarters.
We found the top elected official at the agency had received a quarter of a million dollars in campaign
contributions from people tied to a vendor involved in a program that put the agency in financial
trouble.
Purchase card (credit card) records
These records offer a bigger window into how officials are spending taxpayer money on travel and other
items.
We found the agency had been using p-cards to donate taxpayer money to a charity run by the
superintendent. The money funded a golf tournament that also involved a government vendor at the
center of the financial crisis.
Annual audits and financial reports
Annual audits detail an agency’s financial strengths and weaknesses. They also highlight major financial
transactions.
We found the agency had sold taxpayer owned school bus lots to raise cash as they were sinking in debt.
Then they leased the land back at a huge long term cost to taxpayers.
Vendor contracts & bids
Bid information and final vendor contracts can tell you a lot about the people and companies the agency
is doing business with.
Bid information we obtained provided a history of the private vendor’s past deals and the contracts
detailed payment information and the scope of work to be performed.

Safety Records:
We requested numerous records to look more closely at the school bus agency’s safety history:
Accident Reports

In addition to police reports some states require school bus accidents to be reported to the state
education agency or the state police.
Complaint Databases
Many public agencies put “how’s my driving” stickers on the back of vehicles. Then they often keep a
database of phone call complaints made by drivers.
We found more than 4000 complaints phoned into the agency in less than 2 years – many for reckless
driving and speeding.
One school bus driver with 32 complaints was still behind the wheel.
With GPS tracking systems more agencies now have records showing on time / late arrivals.
We also got a database of complaints made by parents staying their child’s bus was late or never
arrived.
Accident settlement payments
Some agencies keep a database of all accident claims they have settled.
We found more than $2 million dollars in claims settled in less than 3 years. The database also pointed
us to attorneys and victims.

To see our full investigation:
http://www.nbcdfw.com/investigations/Dallas-County-Schools-Investigative-Series-401118835.html
For more on the documents used in our investigation:
http://www.nbcdfw.com/investigations/Big-Buses-Bigger-Problems-Key-Documents-Behind-DCSInvestigation-407631505.html

