Schools, disabilities and
abuse
Heather Vogell/ProPublica

Restraints & Seclusion
• Restraints are physical holds in which a student’s
ability to move their head, torso, arms or legs are
limited.
• “Mechanical” restraints use something artificial like
straps, handcuffs or bungee cords to do the
restraining.
• “Seclusion” refers to situations in which a student is
confined against their will in a room they are
prevented from leaving.

Students with disabilities represent about 12% of all
students in public schools nationally. But they make
up 67% of the students subjected to restraint or
seclusion in school.
- From a “Dear Colleagues” letter issued by the U.S. Department of Ed civil rights office in Dec. 2016.

“…restraint or seclusion should never be used except in situations where a child’s
behavior poses imminent danger of serious physical harm to self or others, and
restraint and seclusion should be avoided to the greatest extent possible without
endangering the safety of students and staff.”
US Department of Education 2012 voluntary guidance on restraint & seclusion

“We have hundreds of examples of kids who are being restrained
and secluded for behaviors that do not rise to the level of causing
harm to themselves or others.”
Cindy Smith, policy counsel at the National Disability Rights Network.

Find students

Our story with NPR focused on the case of Carson Luke: Luke, who is
autistic, was 10 years old when school staff members crushed his hand in
a door while trying to close him in a seclusion room at a public school in
Chesapeake, Va.

How to connect with families:
• National Disabilities Rights Network
• COPAA: Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates
• Your local special education attorneys and advocates: web searches
or word of mouth
• Court & social media searches (Facebook group)
• Visit a special education school and talk to parents in the parking
lot after dismissal
• Us! heather.vogell@propublica.org: We may have local tips to
share.

Our analysis found: 163,000 instances of restraint.

7,600 reports of "mechanical" restraint. (Arrests not included)
Seclusion: Children placed in "scream rooms" roughly 104,000 times.

Student-based documents:
• Notifications to parents or other
reports on restraints/seclusions
• IEPs
• Functional Behavioral Assessment
(identifies problem behavior,
triggers and prevention & coping
strategies)
• Behavior Plans
• Emails to parents.

Each year, nearly 20,000 youngsters with severe disabilities are sent
to live at special education schools at public expense.

In less than five years, AdvoServ’s Carlton Palms facility
put its residents in mechanical restraints 28,000 times,
state records show.

“They tortured him.”
-Lorraine Kennedy-Shields, Adam’s mother

Records on abuse & neglect:
• Autopsies, child death investigations, law enforcement
reports
• Medical records
• Child protection agency stats and, sometimes,
confidential reports
• Restraint reports – tallied up or, if parents help, the
individual restraint reports.
• Injury reports to parents or to regulatory agencies
• IEPs and FBAs.
• Emails to parents.

Emails between regulators opened a window on the company’s behind-thescenes maneuvering…
The company threatened to go over bureaucrats’ heads:

And resisted requests by government officials to document what they were doing with students:

Lobbying records further detailed their influence:
Look at whose campaigns companies and
their principals contribute to, who they
hire and what those folks do to further
the company’s interests.

Source: Disability Rights California

