The life-changing magic of organizing your notes
Sarah Hutchins | IRE & NICAR | sarah@ire.org

A few of my favorite tools, apps and tips:

Note-taking / Writing:
-

-

-

-

-

Google Docs
o Keep separate folders for each story.
o Great for collaborating and sharing notes with colleagues.
o Works across multiple devices so you can take your notes on the go.
o Cost: Free
Evernote
o Great for note-taking, uploading pics and other documents.
o Snap pics and save them to project folders. Search for text within an
image.
o App/phone-friendly
o Cost: Basic plan is free, but some cool add-ons in paid plans
§ Can forward emails to Evernote under Plus Plan ($34.99/yr)
§ Can search for text in PDFs (an annotate PDFs) under Premium
Plan ($69.99/yr)
Scrivener
o No frills word processor AND project management tool.
o Create virtual notecards and move them around to outline your story.
o Take snapshots of your story to track rewrites, edits and more.
o Upload notes, research and more –- and view it side-by-side with your
copy as you write.
o Cost: Free trial, then $45
WorkFlowy
o A list-making app that works in your browser.
o Create sub-lists, nested lists, etc
o Great for brainstorming, note-taking, project management.
o Less structured than other note-taking/organization apps.
o Cost: Free
Index your notebook:
o Use small post-its to index/mark who you interviewed and when. This
makes it easy to find an interview when you’re on deadline.
o Label the front of your notebook with the dates you started and
finished it. Use that in conjunction with your calendar to pinpoint
interviews.

Audio / Transcribing:
-

-

-

oTranscribe
o Web app that allows you to listen to a record and take notes in the
same window (no more toggling between programs!)
o Cool features: Auto-saves as you type, interactive timestamps, export
to Google Docs and other programs.
o Cost: Free (open source!)
Cogi
o Useful for recording in-person interviews, meetings or phone calls.
o Record an entire interview, or use the highlight feature to only record
key moments as they happen (watch the video on the Cogi website for
details on this feature).
o Add tags, photos and text notes to your recordings.
o Also offers transcripts of recordings (for an added fee).
o Cost: Pay as you go, Standard ($14.99/month) with a 30 day free trial,
and Pro ($39.99/month)
Rev
o A human will transcribe for you at $1/minute.
o Also offers captioning and translation services.
Dragon
o Your standard dictation app.

Project-management / Progress tracking:
-

-

Google Sheets
o Create project timelines, spreadsheets, due-date trackers and more.
o Share them with colleagues or other collaborators. Multiple people
can be working in the sheet at once.
o Great for creating project templates. Once you find a system that
works, you can copy it and re-use for every story or project.
WorkFlowy – see above
A well-placed whiteboard!
o Create a tracking system/grid on your whiteboard and put it
someplace you’ll see every day. Use post-it notes to track key
assignments and when they should be due. Move the post-it through
your grid as the project progresses.
o This is a great way to see your progress – and to easily show others
your progress.
o Cost: Free (minus the cost of supplies)

Documents/Data/FOIA:
-

FOIA Machine -- Our simple tool allows anyone to generate a public records
request with all the necessary legal boilerplate, all for free.

-

MuckRock – File, track and share public records requests
DocumentCloud – Organize and publish your documents
IFTT (If This Than That) -- A free platform that helps you do more with all
your apps and devices
o If more than 30 days pass, put a reminder on my calendar to follow up
on a FOIA request…
o Use it to remind yourself to do basic tasks: Follow up on a call, index
your notes, etc.

Suggested by others
-

DEVONthink -- Organize and work with all your documents — bookmarks,
email messages, text files, images, PDFs — in one place, regardless where
they originated. Quickly capture data without interrupting your workflow.
DEVONthink's unique AI assists you in getting the most out of your data
collection.
o “If you are a journalist or professional blogger reviewing our apps get
your free not-for-resale copy.”

-

Basecamp -- Project management and sharing

-

Zotero -- A free, easy-to-use tool to help you collect, organize, cite, and
share your research sources.

-

Growly -- Growly Notes lets you capture everything you’re interested in, all in
one place. Organize class notes, research projects, trips, to-do lists, or
journals. Scrapbook your images, web links, and video clips.

-

TapeACall Pro – Record phones on iOS or Android phones.

-

TranscribeMe – Mobile transcription app

