Smart strategies for small newsrooms
Nate Morabito: WJHL-TV's Community Watchdog. He spends his days exposing
corruption, wasteful spending and holding the powerful accountable.
nmorabito@wjhl.com
Susan Richardson: Chicago Reporter editor and publisher of The Chicago Reporter, a
nonprofit investigative news organization that focuses on race, poverty and income
inequality. She was a metro editor at the Chicago Tribune and the Sacramento Bee. In
2002, she was a Nieman Fellow. She has a graduate degree from Harvard's Kennedy
School of Government.
srichardson@chicagoreporter.com
Rose Ciotta: EdSource associate editor. She recently won a Jim Bettinger News
Innovation Fund grant from Stanford University to link experienced editors and
producers with small news organizations. At WIVB-TV she won two Edward R. Murrow
regional awards. She’s a former John S. Knight Journalism Fellow, a former IRE board
member.
rciotta@edsource.org
Thomas Peele: Investigative reporter for the Mercury News and East Bay Times in
Northern California; He led the papers’ investigation of the 2016 Ghost Ship fire in
Oakland.
tpeele@bayareanewsgroup.com

1) Look outside the box: There are no rules and no limits any longer on where you can look for
help and collaborations: visiting editors; fellowship funded reporters; universities; other media;
nonprofits; project specific funding
2) Look elsewhere for extra money: Seek out project funding from foundations or other donors
so you can hire temporary staff or contractors to help you tackle big investigations
3) Look for Partners with special skills: Partner with an established academic research institute
to help you gather and analyze data; contract for data help
4) Rolling Investigations: Don’t expect reporters to be able to only work on an investigative
story for months at a time. Plan your investigation that publishes or posts stories as they are
ready
5) Include Investigations in Annual Planning: There’s never enough time. Plan it so news
organization can point to at least one investigative story or project for the year.

6) Plan for the Big Story: When news breaks and all hands are on deck, work harder to stay
organized. Use shared documents in Google drive to share contacts and notes. Highlight quotes
being used in a story in the shared documents so they aren’t used in a different story. Don’t
replicate each other’s work, especially when time is tight.
7) Be Strategic: When starting an immediate investigation in a breaking news situation, make an
inventory of what sources are immediately available. If it is the weekend and city hall is closed,
what can you find on Nexis and government websites? If it is decided to publish investigative
reporting incrementally, set sights on what can be achieved in a day and make it shine rather than
trying do too much and end up combing through your notes for a lede as the deadline clock ticks.
8) Know your colleagues’ strengths. Who can do what? Who can scrape and query. Who is the
right reporter to send to a politician’s house to door knock at 8 p.m.? Who understands
regulatory agencies? Who knows public records? Who is best to connect with millennials, artists,
people of different ethnicities? Know what your co-workers can do for the time that you need
them to do it.
9) Don’t let a small newsroom be a place of small resources. Insist on Nexis, Pacer, TLO
(http://www.tlo.com/) and other subscription services and use them to produce great work. Show
editors their value. Keep bookmarks of court websites, document and data libraries and
regulatory agencies organized and fresh for when you need to find something in a hurry.
10) Make the time to learn how to dig. Keep dossiers on the people you cover: deeds,
mortgages, financial disclosure statements, campaign finances records, law suits, divorces,
bankruptcies, tax liens, social media posts. Be constantly vetting people on your beat. Many of
the best investigative reporters worked for years honing skills on government beats and learning
investigative reporting while also producing daily stories.
11) Be efficient. Don’t waste time on stories that frankly don’t matter as much. Get them done
in a minimalist fashion and focus on the bigger stories you’re working on. Give 100% instead of
110% on those stories. Focus on follow-up reporting. Follow-ups are less time consuming,
important to see an investigation through and good ways to keep helping with the daily grind.
Continue to peel back the layers of any investigation. Keep asking questions and keep doing
follow-ups until you and your viewers/readers fully know how and why something became a
problem, who’s to blame and the proper solution.
12) Ask for help. Request a research day(s). Tell your boss, “Let me show you it will be worth
it.” I started with one day a week on research and now have two research days a week and more
when warranted. Also ask for patience. Great investigative journalism takes time. When you
need extra time and resources, ask for it, but be sure and find ways to turn other content to help
feed the beast. I always get a gut feeling when I uncover a big story. In those instances, which
only come a few times a year, I ask my supervisors to let me fully commit to the story. The great
stories require you to work on them non-stop for a reasonable period of time. Those are the
stories that should look, read and feel like you’ve invested a significant amount of time. They
should also show your efforts to answer every question.

13) Stop apologizing: Change your mindset. Your work/job isn’t any less important because of
your newsroom size/market size. Start small and think big. Whenever working on local projects
request statewide/national data and records to do comparisons. Think of how much more
powerful your story will be when you can say, “Our local (fill in the blank) is the worst in the
state/nation when it comes to (fill in the blank) issue.
14) Let Readers/Viewers know you want their tips: Whether it be online, on television or in
print, make sure your face/byline is routinely publicized.
15) Help the Newsroom: Yes, investigative reporting takes time. Don’t use that as an excuse to
hide away in the newsroom and pop up only occasionally. Attend editorial meetings and offer
your expertise to breaking news stories or general news. You will be helping to create an
investigative culture in the newsroom

-

