Humanizing the heroin crisis
Pat Beall
The Palm Beach Postpbeall@pbpost.com
Sources of information
•

•
•

•

•

Accurint.($)In addition to helping locate next of kin, can provide leads on such things as whether
a person owns a boat, bought a home, filed bankruptcy or has a drug-related criminal record,
which indicates whether their addiction might have been a years-long struggle.
Online obituaries. Useful for locating next of kin; can provide information on what the person
cared about. Comments from friends and family are also helpful for finding people to speak to.
Social media: Facebook/Instagram/Twitter/online obituaries. Facebook in particular is a rich
source of information on a person’s life: what sports team they followed, the music they listened
to, their relationships with friends and family. There may also be Facebook tribute pages
following their death, and names of people who might be willing to be interviewed. The Post
secured legal opinions on what could be used from Facebook or other social media accounts of a
deceased person, including photos. However, anyone using photos in particular might want to get
an opinion on invasion of privacy laws in their own state. Further, there is a real possibility of two
people having the same name, age and even shared hometown- and both are on Facebook.
Finally, we made a decision to blur the faces of other people in a social media photo, especially
children, unless we had specific permission from the next of kin.
Police reports. Unlike fire rescue records, police reports did not fall under HIPPA, and so gave
us information not only on the circumstances of a death, but also on such things as a positive field
test for heroin, whether needles were found nearby, whether the person died at a treatment center
or sober home, the names of the prescription medicines they might have in the room and what
they had in their pockets when they died. The only redactions we found were general -and broad redactions of information where the investigation into the death had not been closed.
Public records. Property records and deeds can tell you about homeownership. Official records
can tell you whether there was a foreclosure or IRS lien, marriages or divorce. PACER ($) can be
scoured for bankruptcies, but is most helpful when you have specific states to search.

Issues
•

•

•

Expect a criminal record.Small-time criminal records indirectly linked to addictionare common
and understandable in the context of addictive behavior: Driving with a suspended license,
shoplifting, public disturbance, misdemeanor battery were frequently found.
A user is not an addict. People who use- and die- after using heroin are users, but not all users
are addicts. Our decision to use the word addict or addiction was based on interviews with
families, friends and/ or documented stays in drug rehab. Also, the language may be shifting from
the word addict and addiction toward Substance Use Disorder- SUDs, for short, to better reflect
the science.
Heroin-related death vs heroin death.We used the wording “heroin-related” so that we could
accurately reflect the scope of the epidemic. Determining whether a death is linked to heroin is
not straightforward. If both heroin and other drugs are found in an autopsy, medical examiners
may list the cause of death as “multi-drug toxicity” because it may be impossible to tease out
which drug caused the death. Further, heroin quickly breaks down into morphine once injected,
and so a heroin overdose may have no finding of heroin at all. To count all deaths with morphine

•

•

•

•

•

is misleading, but so is including none. Finally, fentanyl is being sold to unsuspecting users as
heroin, or is mixed with heroin. Our determinations on whether to include fentanyl and morphine
deaths were made on a case by case basis, based onthe methods of medical examiners:
circumstances, including such things as needles or a positive field test for heroin at the scene of
the death, recent heroin use, a history of heroin use.
Some people may leave almost no traces behind. After years of addiction, some people no
longer had meaningful connections with friends or relatives, making it hard to find enough to
write about them. Some people died so young they left almost no footprint in the world. In these
cases, we recounted the last hours of their death, based on police or other public records.
Identifying next of kin.It’s important to make a determination of what constitutes a good faith
effort to contact kin.In contacting families, we tried to use the next of kin identified in police
reports, and barring that, the closest next of kin identified in Accurint. Sometimes, one next of kin
vehemently disagreed with another next of kin about speaking with us- a mother at odds with her
daughter in law, for instance.
What happens when someone doesn’t want their loved one’s story or photo in the paper?
This is an ethics decision every paper needs to determine internally. After months of discussions,
we decided we were not asking for anyone’s permission to write a person’s story or use their
photo. Rather, we were telling the family what we were doing, why we were doing it, and inviting
them to participate. Whatever the decision, buy-in needs to come from the publisher as well as
top editors. He/she will be in line for getting the wrenching phone calls, the canceled
subscriptions, the threats of lawsuits.
Know what you believe. Addiction is a disease, but that concept is relatively new, and can be
hard to understand in the context of a chronic illness with a destructive behavioral component.
Speaking with surviving family members or friends shattered by their loved one’s disease may
make it harder, not easier, to understand. The amazing Nora Volkow, director of NIH’s National
Institute on Drug Abuse, has a blog, streamed comments – and links to understandable science- at
https://www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/directors-page.
Know what you cannot do. Secondary trauma is real. Of the five Post reporters who started on
writing about people who died, only two could finish. Symptoms of secondary trauma can include
sleeplessness, irritability, obsession, sadness. The DART Center for Journalism and Trauma may
be a source of guidance. https://dartcenter.org/

Questions?
Post reporters have been writing about multiple aspects of the heroin crisis since mid-2015 and are happy
to share: For information on gathering police and death data, researching and writing profiles, crunching
hospital data, legal issues, sober home abuses, treatment fraud, government action/inaction, the science of
addiction, start with either:
Investigations Editor Joel Engelhardt, jengelhardt@pbpost.com
Pat Beall, reporter, pbeall@pbpost.com
If we cannot answer your question, we will put you in touch with one of the reporters who has written on
the subject.

