Covering immigration when you don’t live near a border
2017 IRE National Conference, Phoenix
Daniel Connolly, Author of The Book of Isaias: A child of Hispanic
immigrants seeks his own America
205-807-0608, danieljamesconnolly@gmail.com
www.danielconnolly.net

I've geared this tipsheet to people who haven't
covered immigration before. But hopefully those who are
more advanced will find something useful in it as well.
It's a process approach - how you go from knowing
nothing about an immigrant community to doing complex
stories.
Start with simple stories, build up
You sometimes have to quote advocacy groups and
spokespeople, but make an effort to go out and find "real
people."
Easy stories to write - "Beat sweeteners"
Go to a local festival for immigrants - say the India
Fest in your town - and write a story about it.
Write a profile of a real estate agent who works
primarily with immigrants.
Report about a sports league - like a soccer or cricket
league.
Write about a school system program for students
with a big immigrant student population.
Each of these stories gives you contacts and ideas for

more advanced stories.
Next stage: explanatory stories
The people you meet can help you as you start writing
more advanced stories about policy.
For instance, you can write about mixed-status
families. For instance, Mom and Dad might have
unauthorized immigration status, older siblings might have
Deferred Action for childhood Arrivals, and younger kids
might be U.S. citizens.
Visit your local immigration court. Or if it's far away,
do a feature about someone who's traveling a long way to
get there.
You could write about current controversies - like
changes to the H-1B system for skilled workers.
Next stage: More advanced explanatory stories /
investigative stories / controversial / difficult subjects
The contacts you've made so far can help you.
For instance, you can write about immigration
detention in your area. Start by saying where the nearest
immigration prison is. Then write stories that are
increasingly complex.
You could investigate competition between
Americans and immigrant workers or on-the-job abuse or
worker deaths.
Big trends / stories in the Trump era
An end to the illegal immigration system?
Here's how the illegal immigration system was

created. Businesses demanded a low-cost labor force.
Congress was reluctant to expand legal immigration.
The result: the federal government quietly tolerated
the presence of unauthorized immigrants for decades.
In the illegal immigration system, unauthorized
immigrants could live and work openly in the United States,
but with limited rights.
Today, the Trump administration says it aims to break
up the illegal immigration system.
Deportations are up! The question is, how far will the
government go? Too many deportations could spur a
backlash from businesses.
Language issues
- Spanish language skills are a big help.
- Alternately, you can find immigrants who speak
English.
- Avoid using children as interpreters. They typically
don't have the language skills to do it well, and you may
have to discuss adult topics with interview subjects.
- If you need an interpreter, the best practice is to
hire an interpreter certified to work in court or in a
hospital.
Ethics
- It's often impossible to know how the government
will react to your story. That said, millions of people live
in the U.S. illegally, and portraying this subject accurately
may require using real names and photos.
- If you're not sure how to handle a situation, take

time and think it through. Hold a story for an ethics
discussion internally.
- If you're still not sure, use IRE to contact an
experienced immigration reporter to talk through the
issue.

Resources
For basic background and demographics, the Pew
Hispanic Center is one of the best options.
pewhispanic.org
The Transactional Records Clearinghouse at Syracuse
University has tons of studies and records related to
immigration. The staff will help you out. trac.syr.edu
One new resource created in 2017 for following
immigration news is called "Migratory Notes." It's a
newsletter with a roundup of the week's immigration news.
Sign up here: https://medium.com/migratory-notes
Public Radio International accepts immigrationrelated contributions from reporters across the country and
offers training to those contributors. Contact Angilee Shah,
ashah@pri.org or follow their Facebook community
https://www.facebook.com/groups/globalnation/
If you work for Gannett, ask about joining the Gannett
immigration team. I can tell you more about it. (My
contact information is above.)
Finally, I'll put in a plug for my book, The Book of

Isaias. It's a narrative nonfiction story about Mexican
families in Memphis, it will teach you a whole lot about
immigration policy in a short time, and it's an easy read.
Find it anywhere books are sold.

