Balancing General Assignment with Investigative Stories
By Lydia Hu @LydiaHuWBRC
WBRC Fox 6 News
Birmingham, Alabama
Get to know your PIOs
Becoming acquainted with PIOs before you need documents can potentially
expedite a request. If you’re regularly interviewing certain PIOs for general
assignment stories, this can happen naturally. But don’t stop there. Reach
out to PIOs of other agencies for an introduction before you need them.
Once you’ve become acquainted, try initially asking for records informally.
Some may appreciate an informal ask that allows them to hand over
records without formal procedures. Others will request a formal public
records request, but it doesn’t hurt to try an informal approach first.
Sometimes that can get access to records faster.
Two for one?
When interviewing someone for an investigative story, look for other news
or information that person can provide for a GA story. For example, a
detective could perhaps interview about a cold case, but could that
detective also talk about the latest crime numbers, budget cuts, or new
hires?
Make your “small talk” count
Always use time with an interviewee to find your next investigative story.
Make sure people know that you do investigative stories. Be prepared to
explain what that means, i.e. stories that take time and digging.
For professionals, always find out what’s keeping them busy. That could be
your next GA story, the start of your next investigation, or lead on an
untapped set of documents you can request. If you hear about potentially
interesting records, show your interest and explain you’ll follow up with a
request on how to get the records for review.

Calendar your follow up
Be organized and disciplined about your follow-up and investigative work.
Schedule time for your records requests, calendar reminders for a follow
up. Always have most important documents accessible to you, whether
electronically or in a file folder you keep with you. That way you can read,
summarize, and write on the go.

