Educators' Roundtable
IRE 2017
David Armstrong, Director
The Georgia News Lab
Georgia State University
david.armstrong@georgianewslab.org
Tips for Teaching Investigative Reporting
Recruit: If you have the luxury of doing so, pick your students. Recruit heavily. Hold
information sessions. Talk to colleagues, editors, internship supervisors and student media
advisors. Interview prospects extensively. Look for students who show real passion and
understand what they’re getting into.
Start early: To help ensure a good start, before the semester begins provide students with
opportunities to become grounded in the concepts of investigative reporting. This can include
readings, research tasks, and online training.
Provide upfront training: Before launching a major investigative project, make sure students
have the skills and understanding they need to do the work. Teach them the basics of records
access, data analysis, conceptualizing investigations, interviewing, media law and ethics. Much
of the training can be built around real-world exercises that feed into subsequent investigations.
Also provide readings and examples of previous articles. Provide students background readings
and examples of previous articles on the subject of upcoming investigations. This will give them
context against which to judge new information they uncover.
Pick projects carefully: Particularly in the early stages, select investigations that are likely to
yield stories. Projects in which it is possible to determine at an early stage whether a rule has
been broken or a policy has been violated work well. Projects that require extensive background
knowledge or access to human sources pose a much greater challenge for students. Also
consider practical questions. Are the records students will need reasonably available? Are the
costs affordable? Can the project be completed in the time available? Set students up to succeed.
As they gain knowledge and experience, the degree of difficulty of the projects can go up.
Use the buddy system: Work with professional partners, if possible. This gives students access
to reporters, editors and producers who can provide background and context for stories and can
direct students to potential sources. Such partnerships also encourage students to up their game
and meet professional expectations.
Ensure good communication: For partnerships and team projects to work, everyone must know
what’s going on. Instructors need to let students know what is expected of them. Students must
keep instructors informed of their progress. Professional partners need to know the status of
projects. Establishing effective, reliable lines of communication is essential. Platforms such as
Slack, Trello, Google Drive, and Document Cloud can help facilitate communication and
information sharing. But students and instructors must take responsibility for using them
effectively.

