STUDENT INVESTIGATION TIPS for TEACHERS
Deborah Nelson
Associate professor of investigative reporting
Philip Merrill College of Journalism
University of Maryland
Prep: Identify the project(s), scout them out and submit data/records requests prior to the start
of the semester if you hope to complete before the end. That means you need to have students
propose ideas and start work prior to the start of the semester OR you need to come up with the
project and get the ball rolling on data/records in advance.
Picking the story: For team projects, pick a topic that affects or interests students. Whether team
or individual projects, consider student skill levels and time constraints.
Skill training: Keep lectures brief and focused on one skill each class. Have them use it to
advance the story immediately, preferably during class time when you can provide real-time
advice and feedback.
Writing: Have them write footnoted* stories/scripts early & often. Let them see how dramatically
their first draft changes as they dig deeper.
Debrief students between classes after interviews and reporting forays as often as you can. This
is a great teaching opportunity and also makes sure they are asking the right questions and
staying on track.
As in a newsroom, assign the most important tasks to the most reliable students. Meanwhile
work with struggling students to raise their game.
*Footnotes help:
-reporters keep track of where they got their information
-you assess the reliability of their information
-the fact checker determine accuracy and spot errors
Footnotes should have links to internet sources + Google Drive documents and notes. Info for
human sources: name, title, phone, emai.
Deadline: Set the “final” story deadline at least a month before the last class. Reserve the last
month for polish, fact check, data viz, production. You’ll need it.
Fact check: Assign each student to do a word-by-word fact check of another student’s story –
and give them a grade. I tell the fact-checker and writer that they will get an F as 25-50% of their
grade for the semester if there is an error in the final published version. No penalty if they find
the error before publication – to encourage them to be vigorous.

