Educators' roundtable: Best ways to teach investigative reporting
Investigative Reporters and Editors — 2017 National Conference — Phoenix, Arizona
Brent Walth, University of Oregon School of Journalism and Communication — bwalth@uoregon.edu

Student journalists face many challenges with their work. They’re still gaining experience with the basics of the craft.
Sources often don’t take them seriously. And many want to have an impact with their stories but can’t yet see a path
to publication. It’s all that much more difficult when students are working on an investigative story, trying to turn up
information others are trying to keep secret.
I want students to emerge from my investigative reporting course with a story they can publish. Most do. But I
also open my course by telling students it’s the experience that matters. I want them to learn:
•  
•  
•  
•  

The ways in which investigators think and approach problems;
The skills they’ll need to turn up evidence and get sources to talk;
The best ways to tell an investigative story; and
How to sustain your reporting when people try to stop you—in other words, how to develop
resilience.

I’ve only been teaching journalism full time for a couple of years (after 30+ years as an investigative reporter
and editor). But here are the tips I’ve found most useful:
Story ideas. If they’re new to investigative work, most students will struggle to identify and develop a
project before much of the course is already over. That’s why it’s often better to assign investigative stories
rather than require that students develop their own.
I hand out assignments only after I’ve worked the story myself—I want to make sure there’s a
minimum, publishable story for the students to find. That requires me to do a lot of advance work,
sometimes months ahead of the course. The assignments that I hand out, though, point to a pathway for
a story without giving it all away—the assignments need to provide students plenty of space to make their
own discoveries, find new directions and go down a few blind alleys.
One helpful approach: Look for easily accessible government databases and records—for example,
court documents, inspection reports, campaign finance records, disclosure filings, audits—to serve as the
basis for story assignments. Students can dig in without waiting for results of public records requests.
Story pitches. I require students to scope the story and pitch their project in writing and in front of the
class. The pitches must meet the requirements of an investigative story (territory we’ve covered in class by
this point), and they must include a reporting strategy for getting the story. Students must join
Investigative Reporters and Editors, and then use IRE’s Resource Center, tip sheets and Extra! Extra! to
see how other journalists have approached similar stories.
Teams. I create teams based on the students’ interests (I interview each student ahead of time) and make
sure members of each team have a range of reporting experiences. I also line up teams based on the
students’ availability outside of class—I’ve made the mistake of creating teams, only to find out most
members have conflicting school and work schedules.
Teams have key advantages: Students can cover more ground, dig deeper and learn from each
other. Drawbacks: Students might not get the full experience of interviewing subjects, chasing down
documents and filing records requests. It’s also easy for some students to sit back and let others do the
work.

Weekly meetings. I encourage students to be accountable to each other — and to the assignment — by
requiring that teams hold weekly meetings. At these meetings, students must evaluate their current
reporting strategy, adjust as necessary, and commit to the work they will accomplish during the upcoming
week. I invite myself to the meetings as an observer and adviser. (As time goes on, I might take a stronger
role in directing the reporting steps.)
Weekly memos. Each student files a memo about that week’s reporting goals and the progress he or she
made. They address the memos to their teammates to help keep themselves accountable to one another. I
also get a copy, and I score students on each memo — they see an immediate reward for keeping up on
the work, and a real-time grade penalty if they are not pulling their weight.
Grading the work. Not every team will get a publishable story done by the term’s end. The team gets a
score for the quality of the work they turn in, and students also write up detailed individual reports on
their specific contributions to the project.
Basic backgrounding skills. In addition to the big project, I require each student to background an elected
official by using basic public records searches—courthouse, assessor, campaign finance, and so on. I also
give each a non-profit and a publicly held corporation to research so they get experience using IRS Form
990s, corporate disclosures, and other business records.
Close readings. I also require students to present in class based on their close readings and analysis of an
investigative project—an assignment titled “How’d They Do That?” The presentation asks students to
break down the story, identify the investigative elements, and interview one of the reporters or editors
involved in putting the story together.
Other things to consider:
The teaching doesn’t stop when the course is over. I often work with students for months after the class
ends to help them get published—working on edits, advising on additional reporting steps, and helping
them find publications in which they can land their work. It’s this final push — and experience working
with outside publications — that helps teach students the resilience investigative reporting requires.
Generate buzz. Get out and talk to students about what you’re teaching and how your course works. Ask
other instructors if you can drop in on their classes to pitch the investigative course. You need more than
eager students, so during your pitch be specific about what investigative reporting is and what it’s not,
how the course will work, and why the course will be demanding. (If possible, require instructor approval
for entry into the course. I require writing samples and a reference.)
Seek external partners. In many cases, journalism students publish only in student-run publications. Push
students in to meet professional standards. That means the instructor needs to be matching stories and
students with outside publications.
Seek partners from within. Look for other professors and instructors who are interested in exposing their
students to watchdog and investigative reporting. Instructors are always looking for guest speakers—offer
to present a class session on investigative reporting.
At the University of Oregon, such partnerships have produced the Catalyst Journalism Project, which
we’re using to teach investigative reporting in combination with solutions journalism strategies. The
project will produce a series of stories appearing in professional news publications that help drive the
debate on problems exposed by students’ work.
Thanks to teachers of investigative reporting who have given me terrific advice, helped shape my approach in the classroom, and whose
ideas have informed this tip sheet: Brant Houston, Charles Lewis, Deborah Nelson and Walter Robinson.

