Jacquee Petchel
Carnegie Knight News21 Executive Editor
Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication
Jacqueline.petchel@asu.edu
@JacqueePetchel

My Top Tips
Reporting Reconnaissance: Report on your reporters. Vet your students on their
investigative and depth reporting skills before they start. This helps to identify
their best skill sets and allows you to direct them toward what they know while
introducing all the investigative skills they need to learn.
Data and Documentation: Because students are working at different levels and
the subject they are probing often is a “noun” investigation, for example voting
rights or overprescribing doctors, I push them first toward finding solid data or
documentation on the subject. This potentially sets a (for most students) an
immediate investigative baseline for their reporting and provides opportunities
for data visualization and other multimedia elements. Examples have included
data we assembled as part of our investigation into overprescribing doctors, as
well as a review of the state prescription “fraud alert” system.
https://cronkitenews.azpbs.org/hookedrx/az-penalize-doctors-overprescribeopioids/
https://cronkitenews.azpbs.org/hookedrx/az-pharmacy-stop-opioid-prescriptionfraud/
Central findings: From the start of any project or story, I push students to be
looking for the single most important investigative finding they can uncover – and
preferably, something I don’t expect. I coach them through the process, point
them in the right directions. But the end, I expect them to deliver. A case in point:
How we determined that 2.6 million people live in places where they no longer
can elect their own school board members.
https://votingwars.news21.com/school-takeovers-leave-parents-without-a-voicein-education/

Context and a sense of place: Student journalists often are focused on a single
element of their story or investigation, without considering its impact on the
bigger picture. I use a vigorous vetting process throughout their reporting,
continually asking them pointed questions about what it all means and why
anyone – besides themselves – will care. I use professional examples of work to
showcase instances in which the political or social context is well presented.
https://cronkitenews.azpbs.org/2016/04/29/children-living-in-lower-income-aremore-susceptible-to-asthma/

Visuals, visual, always have visuals: We incorporate visual story telling into every
project or story. For storytelling and social media, it is a critical and poignant part
of investigative reporting.
https://votingwars.news21.com/lawmakers-at-odds-over-voting-rights-forfelons/

