COVERING STATE GOVERNMENT
Eric Eyre, Charleston Gazette-Mail
Jay Root, The Texas Tribune
Barbara Rodriguez, The Associated Press
INVESTIGATING STATE AGENCIES: SIX DOCUMENTS FOR UNCOVERING WF&A
STATE CONTRACTS: Keep a close watch on state contracts. Bid rigging may be
rampant Get the RFPs, bid submission packages, scoring sheets. Attend bid openings
if you get wind that something's awry. What law firms are getting the state agency
work? Do members of the contract scoring committees have ties to businesses
awarded state contracts? What agencies are exempt from state purchasing rules?
Secretary of State/Corporation offices have business ownership filings to see who
are principle owners. Spotlight consultant contracts. What is the hourly rate? What
extra processing fees are tacked on? Temporary workers contracts can be end-run
around nepotism laws.
PURCHASE ORDERS: What are state agencies buying? How are they spending
taxpayer dollars? Be wary of media buys during election years. Routinely pull or
check agency purchase orders online.
AUDITS: Most states have an agency/agencies that conduct performance audits.
Some through state legislature, others through auditor's office. FOIA the supporting
documentation if not included as an attachment to audit.
TRAVEL RECORDS: Where are public officials traveling and who is paying for their
trips? (Vendors pay for demonstration, then get contracts) Do they have a state
credit card or P-card? Does the agency have a "ghost" account (credit card in name
of one employee)?
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES: Most states require public officials to disclose
investments and sources of income. Spouses may
be included. Also some list nonprofit board served on.
EMPLOYEE PAYROLL FORMS: Track agency hires and employee salary hikes and
terminations. Secondary employment disclosures that show state employees second
jobs.
* STATE OF EMERGENCY -- Often state purchasing rules thrown out window,
opening the door for fraud and abuse.

GOVERNMENT REPORTING WITH IMPACT

+ Be politically savvy. Know what’s important to your state’s elected leaders and,
just as importantly, what’s important to their base. Get to know and, when
warranted, quote the people whose opinion (and influence) they value.
+ Lobbyists and reporters represent a natural marriage. We can go in the front door,
they go in the back door. Share information that doesn’t cost you. Be helpful. Get
them to be helpful to you.
+ Don’t call the flaks first. Even if a flak returns the call for the person you’re trying
to reach, you’re making the effort and sending the message that you want real
answers and not just the PR spin.
+ The order in which you do things during an investigation is key. Don’t jump the
gun just to go for what’s achievable or what will get your editors off your back.
+ Use the phone before trying texts or emails; invest time to get cell phones, direct
lines, home numbers, etc. Do it with as many people you call as possible. It's all
about increasing your margins. Even if only one picks up and starts spilling info it’s
worth it.
+ Never assume someone won’t talk to you. Sometimes CEO's pick up their own
phones. Maybe you can at least listen to his voicemail -- which sometimes gives a
cell phone. Bingo!
+ Ask for interviews before you give them questions. At a time when people expect
you to email everything, when the time comes to ask for an official response tell
them you want to interview the director of the agency, the chairman of the board,
the governor, whatever. This signals your seriousness and it allows you to report
that they declined your request for an interview; sometimes people want to avoid
that.

TIPS FOR BETTER BEAT COVERAGE
Define your beat: Capitol reporting is a wide-ranging beast. Focus on one to five
issues at a time that will be of most significance to your readers. Everything else is
the grind of daily coverage. Zeroing in will help you produce the type of
investigative reporting we’re all striving for.

Communicate those terms with your newsroom/editors: You’ll have more buyin if/when you’re giving an ultimatum on what you should be working on. Offer the
choice between something that everyone will have one day versus an exclusive
story a few days later that will have a better payoff.
Keep the email inbox to a minimum: Process then file them away in folders and
sub-folders.
Set traps for yourself: Call/email five sources every day; send a public records
request every day/every few days. The key is to be consistent with the schedule you
set.
Set up a system for tracking notes and files, especially on your five key issues:
Organize by date or topic. You should be able to pull up audio or notes quickly on
anything.
Depending on your legislature’s websites, there should be a system for tracking
certain bills. Get yourself on those email lists to stay on top of any movement on
your key issues.
Excel is your friend: Use it to track your communication with sources, FOIA
statuses and levels of investigation. Keep track of key phone numbers. Try to do
these things in the first hour and last hour of work. Keep your desk clean at the end
of the day.
Random advice: Read the bill, because you’d be surprised at how many lawmakers
don’t; have cellphones programmed in your phones for lawmakers, legislative aides
and lobbyists for quick texts during behind-the-scenes negotiating. Step away from
the PR agency point person and instead talk to advocacy groups, former agency
employees and attorneys; set calendar reminders when new laws are supposed to
take place or long-forgotten legislative reports are due, etc.
Understand the numbers: There’s probably a non-partisan agency within your
statehouse that analyzes bills ahead of their votes; get to know the staff and ask
them questions about all the legislation you’re tracking. The whole staff should
know you by name.
Organize the people around you: If you don’t have a capitol reporters association,
you should start one. If you do have one, make sure you’re a member or get more
involved. Even the smallest erosion of traditional norms between public officials and
the press must be challenged. It’s easier and more effective to do that through an
association.
Set perimeters around your job: Unless you’re on deadline, go home at a
reasonable hour. You’re useless if you’re burned out.

