The following material, from a book by Mr. Tony Scotti, provides
information on the ways governments and non-governmental
organizations plan and carry out physical surveillance. While it directly
addresses terrorist uses of surveillance, this is effectively a primer on the
tactics, techniques, and procedures used in watching – and eventually
ambushing or seizing – targeted individuals. It was provided by Mr.
Scotti with the understanding that it would be used by IRE members for
their personal protection. All other uses are prohibited.
Mark Monday
Theresearchschool.com

THE THREAT
Assessing the threat to your principal is an involved process. Your adversary
has many advantages. One is identification; he knows you and you may not
know him. This is why intelligence gathering is so important. The protector
must have some knowledge of the threat. Furthermore, the adversary has the
opportunity to study your actions for long periods of time.
The following quote from the notes of the Red Brigade concerning the
assassination of Inspector Berardi in Turin is illustrative of this practice.
"He follows the same schedule, takes the streetcar, and has no protection
for at least 3 minutes." In this particular incident the Red Brigade
assassinated Inspector Berardi at the streetcar. Those three unprotected
minutes were enough. Complacency and not changing schedules caused
his death.
In the private sector the number of men available for protection limits security.
Your opposition's numbers may not be so limited. You are often restricted in
your use of firepower, both in quantity and capability; your enemy probably will
not be. Finally, your enemy has that valuable element of surprise on his side.
By not setting patterns, you may reduce this advantage, but you cannot offset it
totally.
Reaction to Threat
The security personnel must do everything possible to counteract the
adversary's advantages. Unpredictability is probably the most important
precaution. This necessitates varying routes, schedules, cars used, entrances
and exits used, etc. Unpredictability applies to all actions. This concept of

1

unpredictability demands considerable cooperation from the protectee and is
something that must be seriously discussed with him.
Intelligence, as it has already been discussed, is another means of
counteraction. The security personnel's physical ability to respond is very
important. Physical agility, weapons proficiency, mental conditioning, and
trained response plans are obviously essential. Good equipment, which is
properly maintained also greatly, enhances your chances for a successful
operation. Organization and having good procedural and immediate action
plans are also necessary. These plans include advance formats, motorcade
procedures, formations, emergency evacuation plans, medical evacuation
plans, etc. Careful planning makes for a professional operation. Your mere
presence as a security agent who obviously knows what he is doing may, in
itself, discourage a less persistent, but would-be attacker.

THE SELECTION PROCESS
Terrorists are very methodical in selecting their final target. They are fussy
about who they select. They do not want or cannot afford a failure. Fitting the
terrorist profile only means that you may become part of their selection
process.
The selection process is a series of steps taken by the terrorist to develop a list
of potential targets. By using a well-organized selection process terrorists will
select a group of people as possible candidates for kidnappings. Terrorists do
not get emotionally involved, they have nothing personally against the
individuals they have chosen. They are interested in only what the potential
victims represent and what they can get from the companies they work for.
What they want from the company is usually money. Your saving grace is - in
any given country there is an abundance of people that fit the terrorist's profile.
As far as the terrorists are concerned, any one of a number of people will
accomplish the same goal. As an example, if you are the manager of an
American oil company and they want to target an oil company, the chances are
there is more than one American oil company executive they can select,
analyze and pick as a target. They will carefully run you and the other
executives through the selection process. Therefore, knowing how the
selection process works is an asset for your personal protection program.

THE TERRORIST SELECTION PROCESS PHASE I & II
In any given foreign country there are a number of people they can pick from
that will fit the terrorist profile and that they can select in the first phase of the
selection process. Once they pick a group of targets they move on to the

2

second phase. The second phase is to lower the number of potential targets
through a process of elimination. This is done by meticulously gathering
information about the lifestyle and habits of each of the potential targets. For
you this information gathering process is the most important phase of the
selection process. If you understand how the terrorists will select their final
target, you can develop a personal security program that will prevent them from
selecting you as the final target. During this phase of the program the terrorist
will gather information by conducting long and detailed surveillance on each of
the potential targets. The most important information they produce from the
surveillance data is the daily time schedule of each of the potential targets.
They will establish this time schedule by carefully monitoring your daily routine.
This time schedule will accurately outline the potential targets every move
during his daily routine. They will document what time you leave for work, what
type of car you drive, what route you drive to work, where you go for lunch,
what time you go for lunch, where you go for leisure time activity. They will
carefully examine your routine, looking for a pattern. Do you always leave for
work at the same time, do you always play tennis at the same time. They will
know your routine better than you and your family.
Once you are on the terrorist's list, they continue on doing research to
determine if you fit their needs. If their needs are money, they will scan the
media looking for articles outlining your net worth. If you contribute to charities,
or anything at all that suggests wealth or that your company will pay a ransom
for your release, the point is that, even if you fit the "terrorist profile", you can
still stay out of the selection process by not attracting attention to yourself,
especially attention that gathers publicity.
PHASE THREE OF THE SELECTION PROCESS
Once they gather all the information about the potential targets they will
proceed to the third phase. During this phase they make a very careful risk
analysis on each of the potential targets. The terrorist will look at who, among
the potential targets, is the easiest to get. After careful analysis of the
surveillance data, they will decide which member of the group they have
selected will be the easiest to kidnap, and will offer the least risk.
PHASE FOUR OF THE SELECTION PROCESS
Once the terrorists have selected the final target they still continue on with their
planning. They know that the key to the success of their attack is that the victim
must be totally unaware they are the target. The victim must be "taken by
surprise".
To insure their actions will be a total surprise the terrorist will go into a fourth
phase which is more surveillance on their victim. The targets' movements will
again be analyzed and pattern of habits re-established. They will take

3

photographs of the target and, in some cases; they will actually practice making
the attack. It is here, during the fourth phase of their surveillance, that the
terrorist will select a time and a place to conduct the kidnapping. They will
select a place and a time in the executive's daily routine that will give them the
highest possible chance of success. For the oil company executive of the
kidnapping who keeps a regimented routine, the time of the kidnapping may be
in the morning as he leaves for work, and the place may be in his car at the
intersection near his house. Their surveillance indicates that he will be at this
intersection at this time and ambush him at that point. Look at it as a
competitive game. The terrorist will find the managers weak point and hit him
there.
If there is anything you can say for certain, it is that if you are the final target,
the terrorists will select a location where they are 100% sure you will be, and a
time they know with 100% certainty you will be there.
COUNTERSURVEILLANCE
Just about all training programs designed to protect individuals from becoming
victims of terrorism recommend that people be alert to surveillance. This is
excellent advice, but, unfortunately, in most instances it is insufficient because
people have had no training in detecting surveillance, and terrorist organizations
are often relatively sophisticated in their surveillance methods. Detecting
surveillance conducted by trained experts is not as easy as most Hollywood films
would lead us to believe. Fortunately, however, the type of surveillance
conducted by terrorist organizations is not normally as elaborate as that done by
intelligence organizations, nor does it involve as many people or as much
equipment. Nevertheless, for people to have a reasonable chance at detecting
most forms of surveillance they would have to be somewhat familiar with the
techniques used.
The purpose of surveillance is to determine:
1.The suitability of the potential target based upon the physical and procedural
security precautions that the individual has taken.
2.The most suitable time, location, and method of attack.
This surveillance may last for days or weeks depending upon the length of time it
takes the surveillants to obtain the information that they require. Naturally, the
surveillance of a person who has set routines and who takes few precautions will
take less time. The people undertaking the surveillance will often not take part in
the attack nor will the attack take place while surveillance is still in progress.
Before undertaking surveillance most experts gather all information that is
available about the subject from other sources. Public records or information

4

made available to the terrorist organization from a sympathetic individual with the
embassy, local police, or other government office may reveal useful facts about
an individual such as the names of family members, an address, a description of
vehicles and license numbers, photographs, etc. The surveillants will also make
a reconnaissance of the neighborhood in which the target lives and works. This
permits them to select positions of observation, the type of vehicles to use, the
clothing to be worn, and the type of ruse to use that will give them an ordinary or
normal appearance and plausible reason to be in the area.
There are basically three forms of surveillance:
1. Foot
2. Vehicle
3. Stationary
A brief description of the most common techniques used for each of these forms
and methods for detecting each one follows:
FOOT SURVEILLANCE
One or more individuals may undertake foot surveillance. One-person foot
surveillance is rather complicated and fairly easy to detect by an adult person.
The surveillant must remain relatively close to the target, particularly in congested
areas, to avoid losing him or her. In less congested areas the surveillant can
maintain a greater distance, but the lack of other pedestrians makes the surveillant
that much more noticeable. The one complicating factor is the use of a disguise to
make the surveillant look different. One indicator of the possible use of a disguise
is a shopping bag or some other container for a change of clothes, particularly if the
shopping bag is from a store not found in the area or the container somehow seems
out of place. Where a disguise is suspected, pay particular attention to shoes and
slacks or skirts. These items are less easily and, therefore, less commonly
changed. In elevators, watch for people who seem to wait for you to push a button
and then select a floor one flight above or below yours.
Two-person foot surveillance is more effective in that the second surveillant
provides greater flexibility. Normally, one surveillant remains close to the target
while the other stays at a greater distance. The second surveillant may follow
the first on the same side of the street or travel on the opposite side. Periodically
the two surveillants change position so that if the target spots one of them, that
one will soon be out of sight, leading the target to think that he or she was
mistaken. Obviously, spotting this form of surveillance is more complicated, but
individuals who are alert to the people in their vicinity will eventually detect the
same surveillant over a period of time.
Foot surveillance with three or more people uses the most sophisticated
techniques and is the most difficult to spot. Generally, one surveillant remains

5

behind the target close enough to respond to any sudden moves. A second
surveillant remains behind the first on the same side of the street with the first
surveillant in sight. A third surveillant travels on the opposite side of the street
parallel with or just behind the target. In areas where the target has few paths to
choose, one surveillant may walk in front of the target, where he or she is least
likely to cause suspicion. The positions of the surveillant are behind the target
and are frequently changed, most commonly at intersections. The surveillant
directly behind the target may move to the opposite side of the street, while
another surveillant moves in close behind the target. With the additional
surveillants, any surveillant who feels that he or she has been observed may
drop out of alert; not only those people behind them, but also those across the
street and perhaps in front of them. If the same person is seen more than once
over a certain distance, surveillance may be suspected even if that person is not
continuously seen.
Common methods for detecting surveillants apply to all three forms of foot
surveillance. Some of the most effective are:
1. Stopping abruptly and looking to the rear.
2. Suddenly reversing your course.
3. Stopping abruptly after turning a corner.
4. Watching reflections in the windows or other reflective surfaces.
5. Entering a building and leaving immediately by another exit.
6. Walking slowly and then rapidly at intervals.
7. Dropping a piece of paper to see if anyone retrieves it.
8. Boarding or exiting a bus or subway just before it starts.
9. Making sudden turns or walking around the block.
While taking these actions, watch for people who are taken by surprise, react
inappropriately, suddenly change direction, or give a signal to someone else.
Surveillants will not normally look directly at the target, but they may do so if they
are surprised or unaware that you are observing them.
Foot surveillance is often used in conjunction with vehicle surveillance since it is
likely that the target will use a combination of foot and vehicle transportation.
BASIC VEHICLE SURVEILLANCE

6

Vehicles used for surveillance are generally inconspicuous in appearance and
of a subdued color. Frequently, the inside dome light is made inoperative so that
it will not illuminate the interior of the car when the door is opened. Vehicles will
have two or more people in them so that if the target parks his or her vehicle and
walks away, the surveillance can be resumed on foot while the driver remains
with the vehicle. While moving, the driver gives full attention to driving while the
observer operates the radio, watches the target, and makes notes on the target's
activities. Sometimes it will be necessary for surveillants to break traffic
regulations to avoid losing you. If you see a vehicle run a red light, make an
illegal U-turn, travel over the speed limit, or make dangerous or sudden lane
changes in an apparent effort to keep up with you, you should, of course, be
suspicious of that vehicle. The distance between a surveillance vehicle and the
target will vary depending on the speed at which the surveillants will try to keep
one or two vehicles between themselves and the target.
As with foot surveillance, vehicle surveillance may be undertaken using only one
vehicle or using two or more vehicles. One-vehicle surveillance suffers from
the same drawbacks as one-person foot surveillance. The target has to be kept
in view at all times and followed by the same vehicle. Surveillants can try to
overcome this disadvantage somewhat by changing seating arrangements within
the vehicle, putting on and taking off hats, coats, and sunglasses, changing
license plates, and turning off onto side streets and then turning back to resume
the tail. This makes it necessary for a person suspecting surveillance to
remember aspects of a following vehicle that cannot easily be changed such as
the make, model, and color of the car and any body damage, such as rust, dents,
etc.
The use of two or more vehicles permits surveillants to switch positions or to
drop out of the surveillance when necessary. One vehicle follows the target
vehicle and directs other vehicles by radio. The other vehicles may follow behind
the lead surveillance vehicle, precede the target vehicle, or travel on parallel
roads. At intersections, the vehicle following directly behind the target vehicle will
generally travel straight ahead while alerting all other vehicles of the direction in
which the target has turned. Another vehicle in the formation will then take a
position behind the target and become the lead vehicle, taking over the
responsibility for giving instructions to the other surveillants. The former lead
vehicle then makes a U-turn or travels around the block to take up a new
position, ready to resume the lead vehicle position again when necessary.
People who have well-established routines permit surveillants to use methods
that are much more difficult to detect. If, for example, you leave the office at the
same time each day and travel by the most direct route to your home or if you
live in a remote area with a few or no alternate routes to your home, surveillants
have no need to follow you all the way to your residence. Two alternative
methods of surveillance in such situations are Leading Surveillance and
Progressive Surveillance. In Leading Surveillance the surveillant travels in

7

front of the target while the observer watches for turns. When the target turns,
this is noted. The next day the surveillant makes a turn where the target did the
previous day. Over a period of time the surveillants will discover the entire route
to the residence while still driving in a position that creates much less suspicion.
There are two forms of progressive surveillance. In the first form surveillants are
placed at intersections along the probable route of the target. When the target
makes a turn, this is noted and the position of the surveillants is adjusted to
check the next intersection. Eventually, this method leads the surveillants to the
residence. In the second form of progressive surveillance, a vehicle will follow
the target for a short distance then turn off. On successive days the surveillant
picks up the target where he or she left off the previous day
.
Leading and Progressive Surveillance is extremely difficult to detect, but you
should not give anyone the opportunity to use these methods.
The most effective methods for detecting most forms of vehicle surveillance are:
1. Making a U-turn where it is safe to do so.
2. Making a turn to the right or left (in general, left turns
create greater complications for surveillants because of oncoming traffic
that might delay a turn).
3. Going through a traffic light just as it is turning red.
4. Stopping just beyond a curve or hill.
5. Circling a block.
In each case, watch for the reactions of any vehicles that you may suspect. Any
vehicles that make unusual maneuvers should be carefully noted. Do not forget
to check for motorcycles or motorbikes, since in many parts of the world they
seem to be favored by surveillants because they move easily through heavy
traffic.
STATIONARY SURVEILLANCE
Stationary surveillance is probably used most commonly by terrorist
organizations. As mentioned earlier, most attacks take place near the residence
because that part of the route is least easily varied. Most people are more
vulnerable in the morning when departing for work, because morning departure
times are more predictable than are evening arrivals.
Surveillants seek a position that permits them to observe the residence or office
clearly without being observed or suspected. If

8

the surveillants decide that it is best not to be seen, they may obtain an
apartment in the area, which provides an adequate view, but such apartments
may not be available and the renting of an apartment could provide clues for a
subsequent investigation. The use of an apartment for surveillance, while
possibly the most difficult to detect, is generally not the easiest or safest method.
Many surveillance teams use vans with windows in the side or back that permit
observation from the interior of the van. Often the van will have the name of a
store or utility company to provide some pretext for its being in the area. The
driver may park the van and walk away, leaving the surveillance team inside.
Some teams use automobiles for stationary surveillance, parking the vehicle far
enough from the residence or office to be less noticeable, using other vehicles for
cover, facing the vehicle away from the target, and using the rear view mirrors to
watch.
Where it is possible to watch the residence unobserved, surveillants must come
up with a plausible reason for being in the area. The types of ruses used are
limited only by the surveillant's imagination. Some of the more commonly used
covers are automotive repairs due to engine trouble or a flat tire, door-to-door
sales, utility repair crews, lovers in a park, walking a dog, construction work, or
sitting at a cafe. Women and children are often used to give a greater
appearance of innocence.
Some things to check for are parked vehicles with people in them, cars with more
mirrors or mirrors that are larger than normal, people seen in the area more
frequently than seems normal, people who are dressed inappropriately and
workers who seem to accomplish nothing.
If you become suspicious of a van, note any information printed on the side of the
van, including telephone numbers. Check the telephone book to see if such a
business exists, or call the number. Note the license numbers of any suspicious
vehicles and provide them to your security officer so they can be checked. Make
a habit of checking the neighborhood through a window before you go out each
day. Consider photographing any unusual individuals or activities, discreetly if
possible.
Detecting surveillance requires a fairly constant state of alertness and, therefore,
must become an unconscious habit that you form. We do not want to encourage
paranoia, but a good sense of what is normal and what is unusual in your
surroundings could be more important than any other type of security precaution
you could take. Above all, do not hesitate to report any unusual event. Many
people who have been kidnapped realized afterwards that their suspicions had
been well founded. If those suspicions had been reported, their ordeal might
have been avoided.
The original idea of having VIP's driving in armored cars with bodyguards was to
harden the principal to the point where terrorist will think twice about selecting

9

them as targets. This works if the threat is kidnapping, but if the threat is
assassination, and that is a big "if". then armored cars and bodyguards are only
part of the security package. To complete the security package the protection
team needs to understand the basics of counter surveillance. In a protection
detail counter surveillance needs to be more than watching if you are being
followed. Everyone involved with the protection of the executive needs to be
constantly on the alert signs on an ambush.
Looking for a terrorist surveillance should not be left to chance. The protection
team must have the ability to accurately describe and record anything they see
that is unusual. Increasing their powers of observation can only do this. As with
the case of Herrhausen the terrorists where obvious enough when setting up the
ambush that it aroused their suspicion of the neighbors
What can be done to decrease the possibility of a being a victim of a
roadside bomb? For this type of an attempt to be successful the terrorist
must have certain environmental factors in their favor. There are defensive
measurers that can be done that will lower the risk of this type of attack.
For an ambush to be effective, it must be laid on a road the target can be
expected to use; assuming that normal precautions are taken and routes
are regularly varied, this means the ambush must be laid close to the
target's home or his probable destination, i.e. his place of work. For the
bomb to be effective, it must be detonated as close to the car as possible.
Ron Massa of Loran Co. has done a great deal of research on these types
of bombs. Ron has developed a computer program that can determine the
effects this type of bomb on a car. According to Ron the difference
between success and failure can be as little as four feet away from the
blast. This means that the closer the car is to the bomb the more likely the
attempt will be successful. This means that a two-lane road –– from the
terrorists' point of view -- is to be preferred over a four-lane road, because it
will force the driver to stay close to the curb. If the driver cannot avoid a
two-lane road then they should stay as far away from the curb as possible.
Persons of prominence are more likely to live in areas of two-lane roads
and work in areas of four-lane roads. Ambushes are more likely to be laid
on a narrow road near the target's home rather than near his place of work.
The likelihood of narrow roads near work is not as high. The location of the
Herrhausen assassination had all those ingredients. The terrorists chose a
site on 500 yards from his home. It was a narrow, two-lane road bordered
by wooded areas.
In most situations involving the protection of executive environmental factors
around the home dictate security. Close and constant observation of dangerous
roads is clearly called for. The protection team should examine the area around
the executive’s home and develop a danger zone log. Careful examination of all
the possible routes is essential. Once accomplished you will find there are many
options available once you leave the area of the home and the office. But as you

10

approach or leave the home and office area the options are less. Defensive
measures, should concentrate on the following:
In a high-risk environment you must change your routes, and developing
alternate routes that begin as close as possible to the individual's home.
If there are limited accesses in and out of the area of work and home meticulous
advance reconnaissance is necessary of all roads that, for whatever reason, the
individual must unavoidably pass.
All terrorist attacks are preceded by surveillance. These surveillances are not
that sophisticated that the average person with some reasonable training could
not spot them.
It is interesting to note that in all the cases mentioned very little thought was
given to changing the routes. This should not be an arbitrary decision; route
planning needs to be an intricate part of the security plan. The higher the risk the
more important it becomes
If the potential target is transported in a two or three car convoy, and driving in an
armored vehicle, plus bodyguards, you cannot become complacent. The
problem of transporting the principal from point A to point B is not solved, you
simply have another problem. While in transit if security is raised to the level
afforded Mr. Herrhausen you can virtually rule out the possibility of an attempted
kidnapping. In this situation if there is a vehicle ambush it is more than likely
going to be an assassination, and lately the type of attack has been a roadside
bomb.

11

