Putting your community under a microscope – and keeping it there
Morgan Cook, The San Diego Union-Tribune
Morgan.cook@sduniontribune.com
IRE 2017 Phoenix

Everyone here has more to do and less time to do it, so efficiency is key. Here are some key multipurpose documents that can help you in a pinch – whether you need to quickly find details about
systems in local government, you need to link together people or businesses, or you just need a quickhit watchdog story to keep your editor off your back while you pursue larger investigations.
Municipal Bond disclosures
What they are: When municipal governments need to borrow money, they often sell municipal bonds.
Part of the bond-issuing process requires disclosure of material facts investors need to make informed
decisions about whether to buy the security. These disclosures often include specific information and
details about municipal governments and systems within municipal governments, such as city water
systems.
Why you should love them: If you know what you’re looking for, these disclosures can come in handy
for finding context on deadline, or quick watchdog stories you can re-visit year after year. Often, you’ll
find more detailed and useful information than you would find in the municipal governments’
comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR).
How to find and use them:
1. Visit emma.msrb.org
2. Type the name of the issuer into the “Quick Search” box in the type right corner of the page
and click the green arrow (or hit Enter).
3. Scroll through results to find your municipality in the “Issuer Name” column.
4. Look at the “issue description” to find the type of security that best meets your needs. For
example, if I want to know about the City of San Diego’s water system, I want to look for
securities issued by the city’s Public Facilities Financing Authority to fund water-systemrelated stuff. Water revenue bonds are a good place to start.
5. Look in the “Dated Date” column for issue dates that meet your needs. For example, if you
want to find detailed information about the water system in 2013, find a security with a
2013 issue date.
6. When you find a date you want, click the issue description. This is take you to the “Issue
Details” page.
7. Look at the gray bar just above the table and click “Official Statement.”
8. Click the link to the PDF of the Official Statement.
9. A document that is typically a couple hundred pages long will show up. This bad-boy is going
to tell you all kinds of stuff – much of which you won’t find in the CAFR. Here are some ways
you can use it:

a. To find details that add context to your story, including how many people live in the
water system’s service area, how much water the system’s reservoirs can hold, what
percentage of water revenue comes from single-family homes, how much water
capacity and demand exists for each water treatment plant, how many miles of
water pipeline the system maintains, how much the system pays for water
purchased from various suppliers, projected water demand, who are the system’s
top water customers, etc.
i. Pro-tip: These statements usually recognize text, so you can do a Ctrl+F and
type in fun search terms such as “mile” or “risk” or whatever you’re after.
b. To find quick-hit watchdog stories you can write every year, such as how top
customers’ water consumption changed in the last year.
10. If you are going to do a year-over-year comparison, look for a security with a “Dated Date”
that is a few years old, and a maturity date that is at least a year in the future. When you
open that security, you want to click the “Continuing Disclosure/Advance Refunding” button
in the gray bar to the right of the “Official Statement” button.
11. Under “Financial Information and Documents” you’ll see “Annual Financial Information and
Operating Data.” Each annual report is basically a quick update of key data in the Official
Statement, so you can compare reports from different years to see trends, such as how
much water top retail customers used compared to the year before.
a. Also under the “Continuing Disclosure/Advance Refunding” tab, you’ll find “Event
Notices,” which can include fun stuff such as rating changes.

Campaign Finance Disclosure reports:
What they are: Candidates for public office who raise money to campaign have to file reports disclosing
their revenue and spending. The reports are filed on a regular basis, and include the name, street
address, occupation, employer, and amount given by each contributor.
Why you should love them: These disclosures are mission-critical for tracking influence in government,
but they can be hugely valuable when you’re trying to find hard-to-find people, pin down someone’s
employment history, connect people to businesses (or businesses to businesses), and find hints about
relationships between people.
How to find and use them: Where to find the reports depends on the election authority overseeing the
type of election. Reports may be filed at the city, county, state or federal levels, depending on the office
sought and the rules in your state. To find reports for candidates for federal office, visit the Federal
Election Commission website (fec.gov) and use the search tool ( fec.gov/data/?search= ).
I’m going to explain how to use the FEC data because it’s relevant to all of us.
How to score contribution/spending data for a specific candidate or committee:
1. Start typing the name of the candidate or committee that interests you into the search box.
Type the full name and hit Enter. You can also just start typing the name and click on the
option when it comes up as possibility.
2. Choose the election cycle that interests you using the pull down menu under the words
“Election Cycle” at the top of the “Financial Summary” page.

3. You can pull all the receipts and expenditures for the filing period in one move using the
“Browse Receipts” option, but the data will not include street addresses, which you might
need to link people and businesses.
a. To get contribution and expenditure records that include street addresses, click
“Filings” in the menu at the left side of the “Financial Summary” page.
i. Next to each document, you’ll see a little gray box with two icons in it. Click
the left side of the box and choose .csv
ii. Open the Excel spreadsheet, which will include all the contributions,
transfers from authorized committees, and expenditures on a single page.
You can save the Excel spreadsheet and then clean and use the data as you
see fit. It sucks, but if you want records with addresses, you have to go
through filing by filing, exporting each and compiling into a master Excel
spreadsheet.
How to look for specific contributors by name:
1. Go to https://www.fec.gov/data/
2. Click “Advanced data” under the search bar for candidate and committee profiles.
3. To find contributors (people and committees who have donated or otherwise contributed to
a campaign) click “Raising” in the menu at the left of the page, then click “All receipts.”
4. In the gray bar on the left side of the page, you can search by contributor name.
a. First, make sure you have the transaction time period you want in the “Transaction
Time Period” section.
b. Next, type the person’s first and last name (for example, Gary Chouest) into the
“Contributor name or ID” box and hit Enter. All Gary Chouest contributions will
come up. This gives you all contributions Gary Chouest made to any committee or
candidate during the time period you have specified.
i. If you only want to see just the contributions Gary Chouest made to a
specific candidate or committee, you’ll want to filter results by typing the
name of the committee that interests you into the “Recipient Name or ID”
box under “Edit filters” in the gray bar at the gray bar.
c. To export the data to Excel, click the blue “Export” button at the top right of the
results page.
d. You can look for specific people or companies who were paid by committees, too,
by repeating the above steps for “Spending” advanced data.
How to look for contributors by employer:
1. Repeat steps 1 – 3 above.
2. Make sure you have the transaction time period you want in the “Transaction Time Period”
section in the gray bar at the left of the page.
3. In the same gray bar, click on the blue circle with the plus in it next to “Contributor details.”
4. Type the employer name that interests you into the “Employer” box (for example, Edison
Chouest Offshore).
a. You can type a partial name of the employer if you don’t know the whole name or
you want to capture variations. You can also type key words to find all employers
with names that include the word (for example, “Health” will give you employers
including “Sheridan Healthcorps”)

5. To see the employer for each contributor, you can either export the data using the blue
“Export” button at the top right side of the results page, or, if you only want to see the
occupation for a single result, you can click the gray arrow next to the amount contributed.
How to look for contributions by occupation:
1. Repeat steps 1-3 above.
2. Type the occupation that interests you into the “Occupation” search box (for example,
“physicist” or “CEO”)
How to use the FEC data to connect people and businesses:
1. Look for a specific contributor for contributions over a long period of time. For example, if
I’m looking for business associates of Gary Chouest, I can look him up and see which
employers he’s listed. Oh, look, he’s listed Edison Chouest Offshore as an employer, and
once or twice he listed Galliano Marine Services or Offshore Service Vessel!
2. Now I’ll start a new search for contributors employed by “Galliano,” to catch Galliano
Marine Services and any variations of the name. Oh look! Roger White III, Dionne Austin,
Ray Brown, Dino Chouest, etc. are all employed by Galliano Marine Service(s)! Nice! Now I’ll
go search their names!
3. Dino Chouest has listed Edison Chouest Offshore as an employer, too, and also United
Marine Holdings, Off Shore Vessel (a variation on Offshore Service Vessel), and … Kwandwe
Game Reserve? That’s weird… I think I’ll look up United Marine Holdings and Kwandwe
Game Reserve as employers. Looks like there’s another person associated with United
Marine Holdings, and that person is Damon Chouest.
4. You know, it seems like a lot of these companies are all in the same place: Galliano, LA.
Maybe I should just search contributions from Galliano, LA, and see what happens.
5. Whoa, lots of people with the last name Chouest here … and some of them are
homemakers. I wonder who is related to whom. Maybe I can get a better idea by matching
dates/contribution amounts/committees supported to see if there are any patterns of
people contributing together.
6. Once you’ve gathered up all your potentially-associated people and companies, it’s time to
verify your information using other sources and/or shoe-leather reporting.

