Finding hidden
hazards near you

Matt Dempsey- Houston Chronicle
For IRE 2017

Who to ask? Where to look?
Risk Management Plan
Tier II
EPA
OSHA

LEPCs
Local fire department

Risk Management
Program/Plan
What is it?
Risk Management Program was created during
the Clean Air Act. Filed every five years. EPA
hosts the data.
What you can find:

www.rtk.net
Worst case scenarios (EPA Reading Room for
full reports)
Incidents, injuries, deaths, processes,
chemicals, ID’d hazards

Tier Two inventories
What is it?
Created by EPCRA. List of materials at a
facility.

How to get it?
Not online! EPA DOES NOT HAVE THIS. Ask
your LEPCs, your state, local fire deparmtent,
the companies themselves.
Note that even though there’s a Right to Know,
local records laws can block this entirely.

Tier Two Inventories
What do you get?
A list of the materials and range of how much of it is on site.
Why not just rely on RMP?
T2s apply to all haz chemicals over a certain threshold. RMP
relies on a fixed list of chems. Many hazards NOT covered by
RMP at all.
T2s are filed every year.

EPA ECHO
What is it?
Enforcement history for the EPA. Includes violations, fines,
when they’re out of compliance

Where do I get it? https://echo.epa.gov/facilities/facilitysearch

EPA ECHO
What do I use it for?
After an incident or to investigate a company and see their
compliance history. Will tell you pollution problems as well
as process safety stuff.
You can see when recent inspections occurred too.

OSHA Inspections
What is it?
When OSHA inspects a facility, you
can often see simplified versions of
those reports on OSHA’s website.

Where do I get it?
https://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/est
ablishment.html

OSHA inspections
What do I use it for?
One of the first places to go after an incident. Should tell you
if they’ve been inspected and count/type of violations.

What to watch for:
Company names can be a mess. Addresses can be tricky
too. OSHA doesn’t always update the site as often as it says
it is. Stuff is definitely missing. Also important to ask local
OSHA for the complete inspection report, if available.

LEPCs
What is it?

Local Emergency Planning Committee. They
are usually organized by county. They should
have Tier IIs and might be able to give you
more detail about hazards in your area.
The catch?
Many of them are defunct/barely exist. Some
are so industry friendly that they won’t be
much help. Still yours might be doing training
or planning for incidents.

Local fire dept or fire
marshal
What would they have?
Local fire inspections. Tier Two
inventories. Incident investigations.
Its own assessment of chemical
hazards in your area.
Also good sources both before and
after an incidents.

CSB and what’s missing
CSB:
Chemical Safety Board does incredibly detailed investigations on major incidents.
Worth seeking them out if someone in your area has the same chemicals.
What’s missing?

There is no national chemical incident database. The National Response Center
data is garbage. EPA only tracks RMP incidents and only within that program. Not
all incidents create OSHA reports/inspections.

CSB and what’s missing
CSB:

Chemical Safety Board does incredibly detailed investigations on major incidents. Worth
seeking them out if someone in your area has the same chemicals.
What’s missing?
There is no national chemical incident database. The National Response Center data is
garbage. EPA only tracks RMP incidents and only within that program. Not all incidents
create OSHA reports/inspections. The CSB relies on media reports for its own incident
tracker, which is scary cause we don’t cover every incident that occurs.

