Finding hidden hazards near you
Matt Dempsey | Houston Chronicle | IRE 2017
OVERVIEW
There’s so many resources available on chemical hazards. This tipsheet will run you through
some of the best and what to watch for while using them.

Risk Management Program
Risk Management Program was created during the Clean Air Act. Facilities with a threshold
amount of certain chemicals have to file an RMP every five years with the EPA. It includes worst
case scenarios, incidents, injuries, deaths, processes, chemicals, and identified hazards. In order
to read the complete RMP, you need to schedule an appointment at an EPA reading room or
federal courthouse. www.rtk.net includes most of the info you’d want outside of the detailed
descriptions.

Tier Two Inventories
Created by Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act. It is an inventory of all the
hazardous materials at a facility. Heck, sometimes it includes non-hazardous materials too. Tells
you what each facilities has and the range for each chemical.
Filed annually. Many more facilities file these than RMPs. The catch is they’re not online and the
feds to not have them. There is no central database of Tier Twos. You have to ask for them from
LEPCs, your state, or your fire department. Some state records law blocks the release of Tier Two
inventories.
How to read a Tier Two: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2856513-HoustonChronicle-Tier-Two.html

EPA ECHO Search
Enforcement history for the EPA. Includes violations, fines, and when a facility is out of
compliance with the law.
Where to get it: https://echo.epa.gov/facilities/

OSHA Inspections
OSHA’s inspection search allows you to see summary inspection data on a facility. Shows you
how often a facility is inspected, the types of inspections, number of violations, type of violations,
and fines paid. Good for helping cover a breaking news incident. Full inspection reports need to
be FOIA’d from your local OSHA office. Worth it cause the details can be illuminating.
Link: https://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/establishment.html

LEPCs
Local Emergency Planning Committees were created by EPCRA. They are usually organized by
county. They should have Tier Two inventories and might be give you more details about hazards
in your area. The problem is many are defunct or barely exist. We found one that was run by a
retired man out of his home. Still, yours might be doing training or planning for potential disasters.

Local Fire Departments/Fire Marshal
Your local fire department should have Tier Two inventories as well. It will also have local fire
inspections and incident investigations. Chemical incident investigations at a local level in
Houston are handled by the county fire marshal’s office. Yours may differ. It’s important to ask
whether the fire department has assessed chemical hazard risks in your area. It’s possible it
hasn’t. The City of Houston had not. While working on our series, we found out we had better
and more complete data than the city.

