TIP SHEET
Where are kids being poisoned?
Tracking lead poisoning locally and nationally
IRE Conference, 2017
Joshua Schneyer, Reuters
After news broke of the Flint contamination crisis, Reuters sought to
pinpoint other areas where exposure might be just as bad or worse,
including communities unaware of local exposure risks.
We launched a broad data-gathering project, seeking childhood blood lead
test results at the neighborhood level across the country. When we
published an investigation last December, its main findings were:
“Flint is no aberration. In fact, it doesn’t even rank among the most
dangerous lead hotspots in America.
In all, Reuters found nearly 3,000 areas with recently recorded lead
poisoning rates at least double those in Flint during the peak of that city’s
contamination crisis. And more than 1,100 of these communities had a rate
of elevated blood tests at least four times higher.”
By areas, we meant zip codes or census tracts. In most cases, publicly
available data on childhood blood lead exposure has been national

(https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/national.htm),
state or countywide, too broad to identify troubled neighborhoods and
track health disparities at the local level. We knew we needed more
granular data.
By elevated, we meant a blood test on a child under six at or above 5
micrograms per deciliter of lead, the CDC’s current threshold for an
elevated level warranting a public health response. Some states define this
level as lead poisoning, others put the poisoning cutoff higher or don’t
define it. There’s no safe level of lead in blood, and even at 5

micrograms/deciliter the impacts can include lower IQ, developmental and
attentional disorders, and other irreversible health impacts.
During the peak of Flint’s crisis, the CDC found 5 percent of small children
tested there had high levels. In some neighborhoods across the country –
including spots in cities like Cleveland, Philadelphia and Buffalo – local data
shows the rate of children who tested high in recent years was 40-50%, or
nearly 10-fold Flint’s rate.
Decades of U.S. efforts to eradicate lead poisoning have made great
progress in lowering average lead levels among children, but the job is far
from complete.
Many states (justifiably) boast of a sharp reduction in the percentage of
children who test high, but this doesn’t mean there aren’t lingering
exposure hotspots where the numbers are far higher. Localized data can
help identify these areas.
We got neighborhood data covering about two thirds of US states and
three fourths of the child population, mapping it out in an interactive:

http://www.reuters.com/investigates/graphics/leadwater/en/
This data has limitations (for instance, many children are never tested for
lead), but it can help raise community awareness, pinpoint areas in need of
more resources, testing and lead remediation, and challenge the narrative
that lead poisoning is a bygone problem.
This reporting, in many localities, could go much further than we’ve been
able to take it. Virtually all states have the ability and tools to boost
surveillance of lead poisoning and share the data. We make the case that
all of them should be sharing localized testing data.
In seeking this type of data from local, state or federal health authorities –
on lead exposure or other health metrics – here are some of the roadblocks
reporters encounter:

a) Hyper-local health data, with small sample sizes, can run up against
privacy/HIPAA concerns
b) States (and even counties) take different approaches to gathering
the data and reporting it, making comparisons challenging
c) Health departments lack funding for robust surveillance efforts –
some don’t geocode it
d) Officials can be reluctant to release data that show their efforts to
combat exposure to lead (or other toxins) are lacking in troubled
neighborhoods
e) The data often contains errors, or sample sizes are too small to draw
valid epidemiological conclusions about risk
Many of these challenges can be overcome:
a) Government agencies can de-identify privacy-protected data
b) Reporters, with help from epidemiologists and health
researchers, can build databases and frameworks that maximize
the comparability of disparate data-sets, while explaining the
limitations they face (in a methodology or “nerd” box attached to
the story)
c) It’s crucial to point out areas where health surveillance has been
lousy, due to funding gaps or other lapses. Health officials are
often forthcoming about these problems, and reporting on it can
help them get funding or improve surveillance
d) If the data exists in public records, and doesn’t run afoul of
privacy standards, the law is on the reporter’s side to obtain it
e) Experts are usually ready and eager to help reporters identify
faulty data, which should be excluded from analysis. Journalists
usually aren’t qualified epidemiologists, but we use reporting
tools that many health researchers and scientists don’t always
know how to use: FOIA, deep sourcing at government agencies,
community ties and local reporting chops, etc.
OBTAINING AND INTERPRETING LEAD TEST DATA

There are many approaches to finding communities where childhood
lead exposure remains a risk. Areas with old housing and infrastructure, a
history of industrial activity involving lead/Superfund activity, polluted soil,
corrosive water and heavy metal emissions are all suspect; low-income
areas, food deserts, and areas where the consumption of certain imported
remedies and foodstuffs are common; areas experiencing demolition and
construction booms, and remodeling of old housing stock without proper
precautions.
Here’s an excellent recent story that relied on soil testing in
Philadelphia to identify problems:

http://www.philly.com/philly/news/special_packages/toxiccity/philadelphia-lead-soil-fishtown-construction-dust.html
At Reuters, we concentrated on blood test results, analyzing them,
and then visiting communities where they suggested ongoing exposure
risks, to conduct local reporting.
Blood tests can’t determine the source of a child’s lead exposure, but
they can often pinpoint where exposure is happening at the highest rate.
1.)

Obtain data from your state department of health or the CDC,
or both. You can request the number of children tested and
the number of children with elevated blood lead levels (EBLLs)
broken down by zip code or census tract. Often, a standard
verbal or written request to a PIO will do the trick. In some
cases, a FOIA may be necessary.

2.)

Some state health departments only initiate a public health
response when a child tests at 10 micrograms/deciliter (or
even higher). The higher the lead burden, the worse the
potential health impacts. It may be worthwhile to ask for data
that breaks out results that were at or above 5 mcg/dL AND 10
mcg/dL, as well as those below 5.

3.)

Seek to get this data in a multi-year time series, ideally one
that shows the evolution of both testing rates and high results

in a community or neighborhood. This can indicate whether
testing has fallen off or increased, whether health officials and
pediatricians are having success combatting lead poisoning, or
whether there may be new and emerging exposure risks in a
community. It can also help increase sample sizes of children
tested, making results more reliable to report on. (The proof
that children were being poisoned in Flint largely hinged on
one pediatrician’s tracking a sharp rise in high tests
immediately after the city switched its water source.)
4) With data in hand, you can identify neighborhoods where either a
high percentage of tested children had elevated lead levels or where
children are not being tested for lead poisoning, which may be required by
state or federal law. US Census data can help to identify how many small
children live in a tract or zip code, and thus how many were eligible (or
required) to receive one or more lead tests. The American Academy of
Pediatrics recommends testing at ages 1 and 2, when children are
becoming increasingly mobile and have hand-to-mouth behaviors.
5) Due to privacy concerns, the data won’t lead you directly to
specific patients who tested high. However, many families whose children
have tested high are willing to share their experiences. State, county and
local health officials, who work with these families, can be helpful in
connecting with them. Local clinics, pediatricians and children’s advocacy
groups often have an interest in shedding light on the problem, and can
connect reporters with families.
Other possible stories/considerations:
Flint drew attention to concerns about lead in water, but many other
exposure sources exist. Old household paint and paint dust is the most
common one, and polluted soil is another. Soil testing is relatively
uncommon, but can be done through labs at relatively low cost.
Each community where children test high has different risk factors,
and getting to the bottom of local exposure sources is a challenge. Less
common, but often very dangerous, exposure sources include some

imported home remedies or foods. In the past, lead has been found in
certain Mexican candies, South Asian spices and remedies, etc.
Pre-natal exposure can be particularly dangerous, and many pregnant
women aren’t screened for lead, despite exposure risk factors.
Home remodeling and renovations in older housing is often under
regulated, and can poison kids when old paint, plumbing, or outdoor play
areas are disturbed.
Deep proposed federal budget cuts may represent a step backwards
for lead poisoning prevention around the country, since many local
prevention efforts depend on assistance or grants from agencies like CDC,
HUD, EPA, CMS and others. The next few years represent a good time to
follow the money, and how these cuts may affect health outcomes.
To paint a full picture, blood lead testing data can be used in
conjunction with many other data sets: Census data, ECHO data, water and
soil tests, building permits, housing code violations, demographic trends,
etc, etc.

ENDS

