In the Public Interest’s reports,
briefs, and guides
Resource Guide · In the Public Interest · June 2017
In the Public Interest is a nonprofit research and policy center committed to promoting
the democratic control of public goods and services. We help citizens, public officials,
advocates, and researchers better understand the impacts that government contracts
and public-private partnerships have on service quality, democratic decision-making, and
public budgets.
For hard copies of these resources, contact Jeremy Mohler, In the Public Interest’s Communications Specialist, at jmohler@inthepublicinterest.org or 202-429-5091.

Privatization and responsible contracting
How privatization increases inequality
A report examining the ways in which public-private partnerships and outsourcing public
goods and services harm poor individuals and families, and people of color.
Cutting Corners: How Government Contractors Harm the Public in Pursuit of Profit
A report detailing the negative impacts of cost-cutting by contractors across public goods
and services and at every level of American government.
Closing the Books: How Government Contractors Hide Public Records
Case studies illustrating how government contractors hide the fees they charge the public; how they spend public funds; and details on the quality of public services.
Race to the Bottom: How Outsourcing Public Services Rewards Corporations and Punishes the Middle Class
A report detailing how outsourcing sets off a downward spiral in which reduced worker
wages and benefits can hurt local economies and middle and working class communities.

Criminal justice and immigration
Private companies profit from almost every function of the criminal justice system
An infographic depicting the possible paths of people charged with different offenses,
revealing the various privatized services provided by the corrections industry.
The Banks That Finance Private Prison Companies
A report revealing how financial institutions, including Wall Street banks, profit from providing financing in the form of credit, bonds, and loans to private prison companies.
How Private Prisons Companies Increase Recidivism
A research brief detailing how private prison companies and prison telephone and video
call companies increase the chances of prisoners being rearrested.
inthepublicinterest.org | Democracy, shared prosperity, and the common good

Download at bit.ly/itpiresources

Infrastructure
Understanding and Evaluating Infrastructure Public-Private Partnerships (P3s)
A guide to help better understand and analyze public-private partnership (P3) infrastructure proposals, contracts, and related legislation.
Lessons learned from the Australian "asset recycling" program
A brief outlining Australia's failed attempt at "asset recycling," i.e., selling off existing
public infrastructure to pay for new infrastructure.
Best Practices for P3 Infrastructure Projects
A report describing practices to ensure public-private partnership (P3) infrastructure projects tackle inequality and create middle class pathways for disadvantaged communities.

Public education
The Failure of Policy Planning in California’s Charter School Facility Funding
A report revealing that a substantial portion of the more than $2.5 billion in tax dollars or
taxpayer subsidized financing spent on California charter school facilities in the past 15
years has been misspent.
The Public School Accountability Agenda
An 11-point program to ensure that charter schools, which are publicly funded but privately operated, are fulfilling their role in public education as lawmakers intended.
Making the Grade: Questions to Ask About School Services Privatization
Important questions that decision makers should consider when faced with a proposed
effort to privatize school services like bussing, food services, and grounds maintenance.

Social services
How privatization increases inequality
A section of a report describing how programs that provide and deliver critical support to
the poor, like Medicaid and food stamps, are often subject to privatization experiments,
many times with tragic results.
A Guide to Evaluating Pay for Success and Social Impact Bonds
A guide helping communities and policymakers identify critical issues surrounding Pay
for Success (PFS) contracts and Social Impact Bonds, particularly their impact on
vulnerable individuals and the public.

inthepublicinterest.org | Democracy, shared prosperity, and the common good

Download at bit.ly/itpiresources

