2017 IRE Conference – Phoenix
Broadcast Deep Dives
KARE 11 Investigates
A. J. Lagoe
Investigative Reporter
alagoe@kare11.com
@AJInvestigates

Steve Eckert
Executive Producer
seckert@kare11.com
@Steve_Eckert

Some investigative units target big topics and map out a strategy to attack them. That
certainly works. But we often take the opposite approach. Start with a simple story – even a
small one – then look for ways to expand it over time into a powerful series of reports.
Rolling Investigations: A single tip about a Minnesota veteran who was having trouble
getting traumatic brain injury benefits launched a two-year rolling investigation documenting
how the VA used unqualified doctors to examine tens of thousands of veterans nationwide.
Our first year of coverage won an IRE Award. Our second year of digging won a Polk Award.
Watch: http://kare11.tv/2lx22Ko
How do we apply that formula to other stories?
Unanswered Questions: After a story, we ask if there are still unanswered questions. For
example, we did a simple story about a contractor who took down payments, but failed to do
the work. (Watch: http://kare11.tv/2hK5kIJ ) Afterword, we wondered: How did the
contractor earn multiple “Best of Minneapolis” Awards he advertised? That prompted an
investigation of how businesses can buy bogus awards. Watch: http://kare11.tv/2cWJyyU
Keep ‘Pulling the String’: Victims in the same bad contractor story told us they had trouble
getting their money back – even after they got court orders. So, we wondered: How often are
court orders for restitution simply ignored? That prompted an investigation into a broken
restitution enforcement system in which those court orders often aren’t worth the paper
they’re written on. Watch: http://kare11.tv/2mi8IZZ
Flip the Question: Next, try looking at stories from the opposite perspective. When we looked
at restitution, we didn’t stop with the money that wasn’t paid. We wondered: What happens
when restitution is collected by the courts? Does that money really reach the original victims?
Too often, it didn’t. Records revealed that in recent years more than a million dollars in
restitution collected from convicted criminals failed to reach the money’s rightful owners
because officials made little or no effort to find them. Watch: http://kare11.tv/2kTbbc7

In addition, here are some general tips that apply to almost any investigative project:
Don’t accept denials: Demand documentation. When we first asked Minnesota VA officials
about improper TBI exams, they claimed we’d found an isolated example. We forced them to
disclose records showing that only one of 21 doctors doing the exams was properly qualified.
Be transparent, especially when you hit roadblocks: Amid growing distrust of the news media,
people want to know how you got your story. Be transparent about the process and honest
about the limits of your information. And if officials withhold information – or take weeks or
months to respond to records requests – include that in your report, too.
‘Prime the Pump’: If you plan to get official reaction to your investigations, don’t assume
officials are always watching. Before we break stories, we alert key officials – and say we’ll want
their reaction. That paves the way for instant follow-ups and often sparks calls for reform.
Keep a clear focus: The strongest stories have a clear focus and a central theme. Trying to
cram too many elements into a single report can confuse your audience. It’s better to sharply
define your story – and, thus, make time to let great moments with your characters breathe.
Tell powerful personal stories: Whenever possible, find poignant personal stories to illustrate a
problem. Data is important and instructive, but richly reported personal stories can be critical to
engaging your audience. We shouldn’t just be investigators; we should be great storytellers.
Make it a Journey of Discovery: Try to structure your stories as a series of reveals. When you’re
searching for answers, let the audience follow along as you uncover important information.
Remember the old saying about effective storytelling: Build Up, Don’t Let Down.
Capture informal moments: In addition to formal interviews, try to capture key subjects in
informal settings. Sometimes while they’re just walking or driving. Magic happens in relaxed
moments when true feelings often surface.
Use Natural Sound: It not only improves pacing and helps viewers feel a part of the scene, a
simple NATSOT pause can give your audience a chance to let the last important thought sink in.
Working with sources and victims: Take time to build trust. When possible, meet them in
person. The more comfortable they feel with you – and the better they understand the
important role they can play in your investigation – the stronger your actual interviews will be.
Records requests: Be aggressive and persistent in requesting records. And do some homework
before you make request so you can ask for specific records. That can speed up a response.
Use your IRE contacts: Don’t be afraid to ask the people you meet here at IRE for help. After all,
IRE is all about sharing tips and techniques.

