INVESTIGATING SEXUAL ABUSE
IRE Phoenix, June 24, 2017
4:30-5:30 p.m.

Sexual assault among K-12 students
By The Associated Press
schoolhousesexassault@ap.org
https://www.ap.org/explore/schoolhouse-sex-assault/

BIGGEST LESSON
Don’t assume you can’t get records because students and juveniles are involved. Privacy laws may block access to most
everything about a case, but what you do get may be a difference-maker.
BIGGEST CAVEAT
States don’t often vet what school districts tell them, and districts have incentives to shield cases. So the reports you get
are likely a tip of the iceberg: only those the districts felt they had to disclose. (Story idea: Try to find cases that districts
failed to disclose or downgraded to avoid having to disclose.)
PLACES TO GO
 Big-picture statistics from states: Some state education agencies are a repository for incident information, down to
the district or school level, and share that via online data tools or annual reports. Others provide information if you
request it; try to talk to their data experts to understand what’s collected or ask for a data dictionary. And then there are
states that don’t collect and will refer you to local districts, so try them as well. (Story idea: Compare the different
statistics and check whether local districts told their states everything.)
 Case-level information from districts: Schools are usually the first ones to hear about reports, so their districts become
a primary source for incident-level details.
--As noted, privacy laws may let district withhold many records, but they sometimes will be forced to release
something. That something may help pin down your story. We won redacted investigative notes in one closed
sports sexual assault case, including a coach’s handwritten letter minimizing the incidents to his school
supervisors.
--FERPA doesn’t extend to law enforcement records, even those of a school district police force. We received
redacted incident reports about at-school assaults investigated by school police.
--Get creative with the requests: By seeking records about the creation of a district’s written public statements,
we received emails between district police and the PR office. In another case, we saw how the district softened
the final version of a statement by editing out a reference to a sex assault allegation that had been in the draft.
(Story idea: Compare what the district knew to its official public statement to see what it withheld from parents
and taxpayers.)

 Records from alternative sources: Think beyond the district.
--Some states have agencies like human rights commissions that investigate complaints of anti-discrimination
laws, which victims in sexual violence cases often use for redress. Sometimes they interview parties, hold
hearings and request and review records from schools.
--In one state, a board of education served as the final arbiter in student disciplinary appeals and posted its
decisions online. The students were identified only by initials in the decisions, but the districts and schools were
named. The decisions described the incidents in quite a lot of detail and quoted testimony from the local
disciplinary hearings.
--Local police may receive reports, too, though victims often don’t turn to criminal authorities. One request to
try, if you’re not searching for a particular case: All calls for service to the school’s street address (or addresses if
it has more than one, due to its physical size).
--If someone has filed a complaint against the district with the U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil
Rights, you can get copies of various records from that investigation, such as notification letters to the district,
resolution agreements, findings or investigation notes. (Story idea: Look at whether school districts make
required changes or adhere to other terms of resolution agreements they sign with the Department of
Education. We found school districts that were investigated multiple times over a 10-year period.)
 Court cases: Legal hurdles are high for successfully suing a public school over mishandling sexual violence, so much so
that some lawyers won’t take many of the cases brought to them. While lawsuits can’t help you quantify how often
these incidents happen, they can provide a window into cases. These are typically filed as civil rights or negligence
claims, so state and federal courts can serve as the venue.
--Tip 1: In the federal PACER repository of cases, narrow searches on a particular district by the “nature of suit”
field. By selecting “440 Civil Rights: Other” or “448 Civil Rights: Education,” we found a number of relevant suits
and avoided having to read through unrelated disputes.
--Tip 2: Use variations of district’s proper name when searching. “ABC Independent School District” may be
listed as ABC ISD or ABC School District.
--Tip 3: Search for appeals under all named parties, too, because those often produce full transcripts of prior
testimony.

A NOTE ON INTERVIEWING
Victims: There are important considerations of approach, tone, etc. to think through before approaching victims, some
of whom were not just sexually assaulted but also bullied about it by other students or dismissed by adults who were
supposed to protect them. These conversations are not typical and you need to prepare appropriately. The Dart Center
for Journalism & Trauma has a good guide (https://dartcenter.org/content/ethics-and-practice-interviewing-victims).
Offenders: While we found few were willing to talk, those who were could be surprisingly open and appreciated a
chance to be portrayed as three-dimensional characters. As with any subject, treat them fairly and honestly.

