Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953 kidsvoog@kent.edu

Production Tips for Skype/Facetime Interviews – IRE 2017
1. Double check your record settings. On Call Recorder, you want REMOTE ONLY
so you have video of only your subject. Picture-in-Picture is Distracting.
Skype

Facetime

Get Call Recorder at http://www.ecamm.com/mac/callrecorder/

Avoid picture-in-picture:
2. Help your subject improve the frame. Is there a light/window behind the subject so the
subject’s face is dark? Ask the subject to close the blinds or turn direction. Is there too
much headroom? Ask the subject to tilt the monitor to improve the frame.
Too dark

Tilt down please

3. On Facetime, remind the subject to shoot horizontally, not vertically.

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953 kidsvoog@kent.edu

4. Light yourself. A single light can significantly improve your video quality.
With a single umbrella, have the light high so it throws shadows down.
An umbrella provides a diffuse, soft light.

BHPhotoVideo has lots lighting options: http://www.bhphotovideo.com

5. Watch your background. Are you against a blank wall? Do you want the logo for your
news organization? Make yourself and your organization look good.

6. Mic yourself. The built-in audio on the Skype or Facetime call may work fine. But give
yourself some editing flexibility. Mic yourself with your camera. Dress the cord. With
both Skype and Facetime, you occasionally can get funky audio. With a mic on yourself
from your camera, you’ll have solid audio to edit for your questions.

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953 kidsvoog@kent.edu

7. IF YOU HAVEN’T DONE MUCH ON-CAMERA INTERVIEWING
A. Practice. Turn your camera on; ask your questions. Play it back. How do you
sound? How is your on-camera presence. Do you let your voice die? Are you
enunciating or mumbling your words?
B. Avoid verbal agreement. When the subject is talking, don’t screw up the audio track
saying “uh-huh, uh-huh.”
C. Don’t talk over each other. You want clean edit points. So if you stumble on a
question, or you’re talking over each other, ask the question again.
D. What are your potential key performance questions? In other words, what
questions do you think you’ll want to be asking in the completed piece?
Practice. Say them out loud. What’s your phrasing? What’s your emphasis?
8. Audio Sync troubleshooting. You do your Skype/Facetime. Play it. It’s fine. You
import into Premiere or Avid, and the audio is out of sync. If that happens, try this.
A. For Avid, don’t link to the video. Import it.
B. For either Avid or Premiere, open the file that plays correctly. Then
export it and try that version.

C. If you have a password protected Youtube or Vimeo account, upload the video.
Then download the Youtube/Vimeo encoded version. Pop that into your editing
software. I’ve had the Vimeo encoded downloads play fine when the original won’t
play properly in the editing software.
9. Take advantage of the technology. Experts are worldwide. You can interview anyone
with high-speed access.
10. If you work in local TV, use Skype/Facetime to hold your member of Congress
accountable on substantive issues. And when they are in D.C. and refuse to be
interviewed, produce a short video. For example, “What Congressman X says about
Climate Change” or “What Congressman X says Healthcare.” Then when you hit play,
you simply have a picture of the Congressman with your voice saying, “Congressman
X refused our request to be interviewed.” Keep doing that, most likely Congressman
X will reconsider.
###

Karl Idsvoog - Training for Multimedia Journalists 513-646-4953 kidsvoog@kent.edu

