IRE Tipsheet
By Jon Craig
Starting over: When you move to a new market
— Protect your creative space, your investigative instincts, your topic interests, your passions to
investigate, write and make a difference in the world, or your community.
— The world has changed. Don’t let the media spinners, politicians or ignorant public distract
you from your core values or gut rational beliefs.
— A free press makes a difference. Our nation was founded on these principles, but these
powers and truths have been chipped away slowly and surely since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks.
— Do not be afraid to push back, to questions authority, to “pick fights” whenever necessary.
(“Toys for Boys” story post 9-11 labeled "unpatriotic" by government officials. Rural county
emergency management director spent millions on ATVs and anthrax suits and state police
bought a Lake Erie yacht. EMS director was eventually convicted for stealing public funds.)
— But you do need support from an editor/publisher to pursue your tips/gut on more sensitive
stories. ($172 records request for 30th anniversary of Kent State University shootings. (Dozens
of boxes of FBI records and original autopsy photos unearthed for the first time.)
— Don’t overthink public records requests. Not all of them have to be formal FOIL written
requests. Many government agencies will reply to basic records requests by phone or email,
and you can set many of these in motion for short- and longer-term projects or simple curiosity.
(Think of it like casting numerous fishing lines, even if you don’t fish! You WILL catch a big one
every once in awhile.)
-- State transportation records are ripe for the picking. All you have to do is ask: (i.e. overtime
used to replace road signs, wrong-way crash statistics, car-pedestrian accidents, most
dangerous roads, car-deer accidents. Or state police or county sheriffs departments: repeat
drunk driving offenders, sex offender registries, gun permit holder statistics.)
— Think out of the box. Immerse yourself in what has already been reported on a community or
topic by searching the Internet, but remain detached, independent, skeptical.
— Source development is critical. Identify the best “go-to” people in the community you cover
and develop trusting relationships with them. It always pays off in the long-run. (i.e. police cam
videos and audio of state Supreme Court justice's drunk driving arrest with help from state
police sources.)
— Get out of the office, house or wherever you work. it is critical that you get out into the
community you cover, meeting readers, business people, sources, sites. (i.e. cruising past a
fatal railroad crossing regularly en route to routine reporting assignments.)

— When you “land the big one,” so to speak, authority figures will push back. They will ask your
bosses to kill a story. They will disparage you publicly or to your co-workers, sources or other
members of the press corps. Politicos may check your voter enrollment, to see if you have
unpaid parking tickets, your credit history, so you need to keep your own side of the street
clean.
— So if you love muckraking, it helps to keep your personal life as private as possible. (An
angry reader upset with media disclosures posted a photo of Craig's home on the Internet.)
Jon encourages anyone with questions on this tip sheet or the examples cited, or seeking
advice on any of these points to email JonCraigNY@aol.com

