Building Your Career Roundtable
IRE Annual Conference 2017 Phoenix
With Christine Mai-Duc LA Times, Hilary Powell, Jill
Riepenhoff
STEPHEN STOCK Tipsheet
June 25, 2017
 Stay connected… push yourself to stay in contact…
 Treat your career like you would a good story. Stay on it. Be
relentless. Be passionate. Be dogged. Don’t give up.
 Work your craft. Do good work wherever you are and no matter
what the circumstances. Bloom where you’re planted knowing that
good work will be rewarded in due time.
 Invest in yourself. Go to conferences like this. It’s a good start. But
take it even further. Go to Poynter. Seek other opportunities to learn
and to network. For ten years I paid for myself to go to IRE. It cost
between 2 and 3 thousand dollars but my wife and I agreed it was an
investment in me and my career. And if I didn’t think it was worth it
why would a manager or someone who might hire me? Believe enough
in yourself to invest in yourself.
 Get out of silos. Get out of your comfort zone. Constantly
challenge yourself. Make yourself uncomfortable. Dive in Deep and
swim to the surface. When you get there get out of the pool and find
another, deeper pool and dive in again and swim to the surface.

 Expect hardship. Expect low pay and abusive assignments. This
business sucks. But it is the best thing in the world if you’re called to do
it.
 Network, network, network
 Find good mentors and be a pain in their ass
 Practice. Practice. Practice your craft. Run out every ground ball.
 Go to where opportunity takes you. Be ready to move
 Dive in deep, swim to the top. Always grow.
 Stand out and be unique. Tell stories no one else can or will tell.
Learn skills few if anyone else knows or can do. Find a niche.
 Adapt
 Find your passion.
 Do the work you are meant to do…do it well. Do it with passion
and with a focus that comes with knowing you are doing God’s work.
You are among a select and important group of people who can and
will change the world.
 It is a calling. Remember that! You are witnessing and writing
history. You are serving as the voice for the voiceless. You are holding
the powerful accountable. You are changing the world.

