Backgrounding businesses, #IRE17
Becky Yerak, Chicago Tribune, @beckyyerak, byerak@chicagotribune.com, becky.yerak@gmail.com
(besides this tip sheet, 30-40 pages of supporting material that illustrate some of these points were also
handed out to attendees)
--Checking federal (Pacer) and local courts for lawsuits is a must whether you're writing about large
corporations or mom-and-pop operations. Besides lawsuits, look at divorce records, which sometimes
can provide insights into someone’s business.
--On Pacer, take advantage of the "nature of suit" search function when you're in a backgrounding
rush. On deadline recently, I had to check whether Barack Obama had ever filed a trademark
infringement lawsuit in federal court against anyone. Imagine how many hits you get if you just plug in
"Obama," but searching by "Obama" and plugging 840 (see supporting “nature of suit” codes, or just
Google the codes) into the "nature of suit" box yielded a manageable number of trademark case results
and gave me what I was looking for almost immediately. Or if you want to find out whether a certain
airline has ever roughed up a passenger before, consider plugging in the airline's name and 360 for
"other personal injury."
--Wayback Machine, aka archive.org, can be helpful if you want to look at a website that you suspect
might have been updated or scrubbed. Example: when Bruce Rauner, then a private equity executive,
began running for Illinois governor and I wanted to go back to look at some older material at gtcr.com,
his firm.
--Try whois.sc to see who might be behind a domain name.
--Try fishing on Sec.gov on a wide range of business topics, not just ones involving public companies. To
do so, put "full-text search" in the website's search field. Then type in what you're interested in,
whether it's "dwyane wade" or "phoenix suns" or "chicago" or "illinois" or "beyonce" or "the walking
dead." A sample search for my favorite TV show turned up 97 matches.
--SEC documents with a wealth of information include 10Ks (annual reports), S-1s (IPOs), proxies (aka
DEF 14A, which include compensation of top executives, and conflicts of interest, aka “related party
transactions”), 10Qs (quarterly reports), 8Ks (significant or unscheduled events) and 13Gs and 13Ds.
Compare risk factors in 10Ks from one year to the next to see what new concerns the company might
be raising. One year, Allstate suddenly said it was concerned about driverless cars. After Donald Trump
was elected, one local company cited him as a risk factor in a 10Q, so check those quarterly reports, too.
If you don't have a service like FactSet or Bloomberg that make it easy to see changes in 10Ks, then
plop the relevant text into a Word document, go to the "review" tab, and then compare two versions
of a document. Besides risk factors in 10Ks, you might also want to compare/contrast "legal
proceedings." 10Ks also show companies' effective tax rates, how much money they're parking
overseas, locations of their properties, and how much they're spending on research and development
and on capital expenditures. You might also want to do key-word searches in that include "foreign
corrupt practices act," "FCPA," "Trump," "restructur," "wells" (for Wells Notice), "subpoena," "justice,"

"investigat," "going concern," "accident" (and related words like "injure," "hurt," "harm," "dead,"
"killed," as well as "worker," "employee" and "union." Compare the numbers for a few years. Also,
compare your company to its peers. eg. research and development spending as a percentage of sales.
How does your company compare to its peers? In S-1s, two key areas to look are the “use of proceeds,”
which shows how the company plans to use the money it raises from selling securities, and "selling
shareholders," which shows how much existing stockholders own now and how much they'll own after
the offering is completed. 13Ds and 13Gs both show that someone or something has taken a significant
stake in a company, but 13Gs are generally filed by more passive investors and 13Ds by activists who
might want to shake up a company. Easy way to remember the difference: G = good, or benign to
management. D = danger, to current management. In proxy statements, you’ll also want to see if there
are any shareholder proposals.
--If you’re writing about securities dealers, you’ll also want to visit such sites as
https://adviserinfo.sec.gov/IAPD/Default.aspx and https://brokercheck.finra.org/ to check on
complaints.
--Does your city have a data portal? I recently used Chicago's when I was looking for businesses named
"Obama," checking not only current active business licenses but also any issued since 2002. The current
data shows only the Barack Obama Foundation, but the database going back to 2002 also shows J
Obama J Fish & Chicken, Obama's Hair Design and Obama Food Mart.
--Property records. For example, Cook County delinquent property tax search. Look for websites similar
to cookcountyassessor.com and cookrecorder.com. Consider also looking for building inspection
records, including building permits showing names of applicants, address of construction, perhaps
estimated costs, names of builder or contractor. A colleague looking for details about an upcoming
outdoor festival got a copy of the park permit, which helped, but even more valuable was an
accompanying map, so see if there are any ancillary materials.
--Secretary of State's office. Invaluable particularly when writing about mom-and-pop businesses, when
information from other records might be scarce. https://www.ilsos.gov/corporatellc/ and and
http://www.dleg.state.mi.us/bcs_corp/sr_corp.asp Recently used it for a story I did on businesses that
named themselves after Barack Obama (where are they now?). Also plugged in Trump's name, and also
found one new business inspired by the election. The records generally include an address and a name
or two affiliated with the business. Hoovers.com is also worth checking out when doing research on
private companies, as it provides some information for free. For individuals, it might be worth plugging
someone’s name into brbpub.com, a one-stop shopping site for records.
--Twitter Advanced Search. Google "advanced twitter search" to see what people in your geographic
area might be saying about a company. I've used this, for example, to see if people in the Chicago area
are complaining about a certain bank's online system being down. Also look at other social media sites,
like Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, to see if the company has an account there. Check for current and
former workers on LinkedIn.

--U.S. Patent & Trademark Office. Go to advanced search and plug in company's name in the query box,
or search using several other options presented. http://patft.uspto.gov/netahtml/PTO/search-adv.htm
--Sqoop.com. Alerts you to patents, SEC filings, lawsuits.
--Pitchbook. Good resource for information on mergers and acquisitions and particularly on privateequity and venture-capital industries. Invaluable when I wanted to do a story looking at how companies
bought by GTCR fared when firm principal Bruce Rauner ran for Illinois governor. Pitchbook gave me a
list of about 200 GTCR deals, and I focused on the Illinois companies that the firm had bought and what
had happened to them since then.
--FDIC.gov has loads of information on your local banking scene, from specific information about a
particular bank to market share held by different banks in particular metro area.
--Consider searching by address, not just name, for different entities that might be owned by the same
person or business.
--Google advanced searches to better refine your searches. https://www.google.com/advanced_search.
After getting results, consider going to "tools" and then refining the time period. eg. if you want to find
out what was going on with a person or executive before all hell broke loose at a company or in an
executive's life. Or let's say you want to find references to a certain topic on a website: In the Google
search field you might type: Chicago cubs site:chicagotribune.com. I did that a lot of during the 2016
presidential race when I was doing a big package on presidential candidates' positions on various
pocketbook issues (that was when there were still 17 or so still in the GOP field). I'd type in the Google
search field, for example: wages site:xxxxxxx.xxx as a way to generate all the references to wages on a
candidate's website. In the case of a business, if you want to get hits on government websites try:
napleton dealership site:.gov or "martin produce" Illinois site:.gov. Besides site or domain, you can
also search by file type, such as ppt, doc or pdf. xls might yield a useful spreadsheet. When you're doing
a Google advanced search related to a company, consider some of the same key words mentioned early
in the SEC part of this tip sheet.
--Try different search sites, including Bing and Yahoo.
--To see how a website might have been updated, check out changedetection.com. I personally haven’t
used it, but have heard about it at past IRE conferences. If I were covering a particular agency, or was
still covering particular companies, I’d consider signing up for it.
--Local governments. Meeting agendas and minutes. Videos of council meetings. I was recently asked
to do a spot news story about a suburban amusement park planning to expand. The company wasn't
talking, but I went to the suburb's website, and it had a video of the meeting in which plans were
discussed on YouTube. http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ct-key-lime-cove-0212-biz-20170210story.html . Talk to neighboring businesses.
--Executive search professionals. It's worth trying to cultivate relationships with executive search
executives in your area. They might get wind of expected comings and goings at companies.

--Equilar.com. If you’re writing about a publicly traded company’s executive compensation or corporate
governance practices, consider checking out, or contacting, or signing up for research or emails, from
Equilar. It can help put what your company is doing into perspective.
--Become a regular at IRE/NICAR conferences. You don’t just go to the gym once and declare yourself in
shape, do you? For backgrounding businesses, also check out tools and webinars at Sabew.org and
Businessjournalism.org. I favorite a high percentage of @bizjournalism tweets.
--Regulators. Figure out which local, state and federal agencies, such as FDA, EPA, labor, OSHA, fire
departments provide oversite, inspections or licenses for the company that you’re writing about, and
contact them to see if their records have any interesting information on operations, workers and
owners. Is the company unionized? If so, contact the union.
--Be careful when writing about a big jump in earnings or stock prices over a one-year period. Maybe
that company was doing poorly the prior year, and that’s why it’s up so much. I like to at least look at
numbers over three years.
--Check for old clips on Nexis that mention the company, and scour the company’s website and reports.
I’ve even gotten an interesting story out of a company’s corporate responsibility report.
--Violationtracker.org combs various government databases for companies that are skirting safety,
medical and other regulations.

