Unearthing Property Tax Scandals Tip Sheet
Overview
This tip sheet accompanies the IRE conference session of Matt Clark, who conducted Newsday’s
Separate and Unequal property tax system investigation that was published in 2017. A
PowerPoint presentation presented during the session reviews the basics of property tax
systems and how to investigate them. Those topics are not covered in this tip sheet. The
PowerPoint presentation will be printed and appended to the end of this tip sheet before it is
uploaded to the IRE website, but can also be downloaded in its original format here:
https://tinyurl.com/yc9ohaxn.

Story Ideas
Who runs your assessment department or decides the outcomes of assessment challenges? Are
they politically-connected people? Do they have significant experience in assessing property?
Look up the homes of your public officials, including those involved in the assessment process.
Are they assessed at a lower level than they should be? Check if any have sold recently or check
for sales of similar homes in the area for comparison. If there are LARGE gaps between how they
are assessed and how other properties are assessed you might have a story.
How well are the most expensive properties in your area assessed? Look at the assessments of
malls, large office buildings and other high-dollar properties. If they are owned by a public
corporation, check their SEC filings to see what they value the property at. If the assessor is
significantly undervaluing them this can have a huge impact on the tax bills in your area.
Check into property tax exemptions. Be sure to get the specifics on what is allowed and not
allowed for each exemption, because there are many loopholes. Look for an assessor's manual
on the website of your state property tax office.
•

Are homes listed as a rental property carrying an exemption available to owneroccupied homes, including exemptions for the elderly?

•

Are people claiming an owner-occupied exemption listed as living at a separate address
in voter registration data?

•

Are properties owned by nonprofits that pay no tax under a nonprofit exemption
renting out the building to for profit businesses? Search for the address on Google or in
corporation databases on your state website.

Obtain ratio studies conducted by your assessor or your state's property tax office. Your local
assessor is conducting ratio studies, right? If not, how do they know whether they are doing a
good job? How good is the coefficient of dispersion, the price-related differential and/or the
coefficient of price-related bias? How do the ratios in your area compare to others in the state?
How have they changed over time? Have they gone downhill since the new assessor took office?
File a public records request for data on assessment challenges, including those filed on
commercial properties. Have any political contributors or large corporations received large
reductions in their assessments in a challenge?
How many assessment challenges are filed in your area and how does this compare to other
areas of the state or the country? Is there a large industry of tax appeal firms in your area? Have
MATT CLARK, NEWSROOM • 235 PINELAWN ROAD • MELVILLE, NY • 11747
EMAIL: MATT.CLARK@NEWSDAY.COM

–2–

June 29, 2017

they made political contributions? Have their clients been awarded large reductions in
assessment challenges?
How does your area handle property tax scofflaws? Are tax liens sold to private investors who
foreclose on properties that have failed to pay small amounts of taxes?
Bonus points: Look up U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey Five-Year data on
American Factfinder for your area or state. Look for the tables that list the aggregate tax burden
in portions of your coverage area or your area's census tracts. By dividing that aggregate tax
amount by the number of households, which is also in the data, you can determine the effective
tax rate in each area. Are low-income or minority areas paying a higher rate?
Examples of Major Property Tax Series Published in Recent Years
Newsday’s 2017 investigation, Separate and Unequal, included a wide-range of analyses of an
assessment system overhaul conducted in Nassau County, NY. The investigation included ratio
studies of how the county’s assessments have changed over time and how they have affected
property owners in predominantly minority communities. The investigation also revealed how
much tax money was shifted from those who appealed to those who did not, how much the
county’s budget saved through the overhaul, how much money often politically-connected tax
appeal firms generated during the overhaul’s first six years and how tax bills have changed in
various areas of the county for those who appealed and those who did not.
Story 1: http://bit.ly/2k3gZAw
Story 2: http://bit.ly/2kBIDI4
The Chicago Tribune’s 2017 investigation, Tax Divide, focused on how assessment fairness and
accuracy have dwindled in Cook County, IL. The investigation included a series of ratio studies
and an analysis that compared the effective tax rates of various areas of the county. The
investigation also reviewed the county’s assessment challenge process.
Series landing page: http://trib.in/2rXmsMm
The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel’s 2014 wide-ranging investigation examined assessment
accuracy and fairness, property tax exemption administration and assessment challenge results
throughout Wisconsin.
Series landing page: http://bit.ly/2rXrAA4
The Washington Post’s 2013 investigation, Homes for the Taking, of the District of Columbia’s
handling of property tax scofflaws found the district was selling tax liens to private investors who
would then foreclose on properties that owed far less in taxes than their properties were worth.
Series landing page: http://wapo.st/2sT03DJ
The L.A. Times has reported steadily since 2012 on the criminal case against the former L.A.
County assessor and some of his employees. The assessor is accused of taking bribes in exchange
for lowering the assessments of certain properties.
Story from 2012 on arrests: http://lat.ms/2ssFbTj
MATT CLARK, NEWSROOM • 235 PINELAWN ROAD • MELVILLE, NY • 11747
EMAIL: MATT.CLARK@NEWSDAY.COM

1

$540 billion collected nationwide, more than state and local income taxes ($437 billion) or
sales taxes ($375 billion)
Property tax bills can be quite large and in many areas such taxes are the top political issue.
There are taxes on land, buildings and some personal property such as boats, RVs and other
vehicles. We will be focusing on land and building taxes.
Property taxes are often the primary source of revenue for school districts, but are also
used by many other types of governments, particularly special districts.
Things can vary from state to state, and I will try to point out how they differ but this
presentation will not cover all of the differences. There are numerous resources available
on the web to help you determine how your state is unique. A top resource is the
International Association of Assessing Officers.
Property tax systems are complicated

2

There may be a county assessor or a town assessor. In at least one state, New York, there
are sometimes multiple assessors assessing the same property — one at the county or
town level and one at the village level.

3

Assessments are set to a particular day, known as the valuation date or taxable status
date. When did the home burn down? Was it before or after the valuation date? That will
have a big impact on its assessment.
State law often mandates assessment accuracy, but the rules often aren’t followed or
enforced.

4

More expensive homes pay more, less expensive homes pay less.
This is just one government, but a typical bill would list multiple governments.
This example is also a perfect system. All the properties have been perfectly assessed. That
doesn’t happen.

5

The assessor screwed up and valued a $300,000 home at $200,000. The school district
didn’t change its levy. Instead, the tax rate increased so that $10,000 could be collected
from a tax base that shrunk by $100,000. The result is that $1,000 in taxes was shifted from
the $300,000 home — possibly the richest homeowners in the system— to the other two
homes.

6

The assessor starts with an appraisal of the home, which may be the assessment. Then, the
assessment gets lowered by any exemptions, producing a taxable assessment.

7

Assessment rolls can be enormously useful outside of any story on property taxes.
They list the owner of the property. Is it a public official? Is it the Russians?
They list property tax exemptions for the property exemptions can be used to find sources

8

Assessment is different from appraisal in that it is done on a mass scale, with the goal of all
property being assessed using the same method.
Often, sales of similar properties are used to estimate value. Sales prices are adjusted when
the sold property is different. A sale with more space or a pool will have its price adjusted
downward to use it as an estimate of a property that doesn’t have those features. The sale
price will also be adjusted to the valuation date to account for market changes between
the date of the sale and the valuation date.
Commercial property is sometimes valued based on how much money it generates for its
owners — data you won’t necessarily be able to access.
All of this requires good data on the condition of property, known as inventory. Did the
property sustain damage? Was the property recently renovated? Does it have any
apartments in it? Is there a pool?

9

If a $300,000 property sold around the time of the valuation date for $300,000, but is now
assessed at $150,000 than it is assessed at 50 percent of its value. This is called a sales
ratio, and is crucial in determining assessment system accuracy.
But what if the property didn’t sell? Well, are there any properties nearby (in the same
school district/neighborhood) that are extremely similar and did sell or have much higher
assessments?
Be careful of sales that are not arms‐length transactions. Did the sale occur between
friends? Did it involve a foreclosure? Then the sale is not representative of the market.
Often, your local assessor or state property tax office will have already figured this out —
get the data from them with details on what sales they found to be valid.
Sales price data is exempt from disclosure in a few states. In those cases, you may need to
rely on appraisals list prices or experts’ opinions. If you find yourself in such an area, figure
out how your assessor determines value and try to replicate it or obtain their data.

10

A system’s assessments are regressive when they over‐assess lower‐valued homes in
comparison to higher‐valued homes. They are progressive when the opposite is occurring.

11

Fractional assessments are used in many states.
In most states that use them, the rates are set by the state, but in a few states assessors get
to choose their own rates or do so regardless of what state law says.
IAAO recommends against the practice, prefers “full value.”
To the uninformed property owner, fractional assessments make it seem like their property
is assessed less than it is worth, which can discourage assessment challenges.
In either type of system — full value or fractional — the actual ratio of each property’s
assessment must be the same across all properties in a system or a class of properties
within a system. Though the fractional assessment rate might be 50 percent, if the assessor
mistakenly appraised a $300,000 property at $150,000 and then multiplied that by 50
percent to get $75,000 then the property is not assessed at 50 percent, it is assessed at 25
percent. So, they might all say they are assessed at 50 percent, but if the appraisal is wrong
the property is not actually assessed at 50 percent.
Property owners can challenge the assessment ratio, “other homes in my area are being
assessed at a smaller percentage of full value than mine”

12

13

