Easy, free online dataviz tool
(Storymapjs)

Arun Karki
Director, Center for Data Journalism Nepal
Twitter: @aroonkarki
#ire17

StoryMapJS is a free tool to help you tell stories on the web that highlight the
locations of a series of events.

Quick Look:
Add a slide for each place in your story. Setting the location is as easy as a
text search for the name, address, or latitude and longitude. You can change
the visual style of your map with a few presets, or you can use Mapbox to
create your own style.

Storymapjs

 Go to storymap.knightlab.com
 Create a new map and give it a title
 Click into the add slide ( The first slide, title slide, will show the points from
other slides)
 Add a headline and any intro text content

Storymapjs (Lets begin…)

 In the “Options” area ( upper left corner), choose the type of map you prefer
to use as a base map.
 In case you’d like to use other, you can connect your StoryMap to a map
from your Mapbox account or to a custom map of your choosing.

Storymapjs
Connecting custom base map from Mapbox

 After selecting Mapbox https://www.mapbox.com/studio/styles/
 In case you’d like to use other, you can connect your StoryMap to a map
from your Mapbox account or to a custom map of your choice.

Steps to a connect a custom base map from Mapbox
Step 1. Create a token or copy Default Public Token (account sign up
needed) from https://www.mapbox.com/studio/account/tokens/

Steps to a connect a custom base map from Mapbox
Step 2. Click “Options” at Storymapjs and paste the copied content inside
“Access Token” box .

Steps to a connect a custom base map from Mapbox
Step 3. Type mapbox.styles (shown below) and copy it.
i) mapbox.streets ii) mapbox.outdoors iii) mapbox.dark iv) mapbox.light
v) mapbox.satellite

Steps to a connect a custom base map from Mapbox
Step 4. Again click on the “Options ” at Storymapjs and paste the copied
mapbox styles into Map ID box.

Creating Map Placeholder
Once you finish adding basemap , i) Add new slide (red color box upper left corner
side) search for the specific place ii) Get the map pointer and move its placement
as per your choice

Adding media
If you have web link of photo, GIF, video, wikipedia, twitter, vimeo, sound
cloud of the place you searched , you can paste it into “URL to your
media” (photos can be uploaded separately as well )

Adding Headline and Text
The headline and text can be added into two separate boxes.

Changing or Replacing Marker/Pointer
In case to change map placeholder, go to “Marker Options” and upload
any image file as pointer icon of your choice.

Storymapjs

Mapbox ( YouTube Tutorial)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0BSD_7a5O9g

Check this out (just a practice sample)

https://uploads.knilab.com/storymapjs/2458
713ce67623d5ac773bce4e54318c/rain-godchariot-procession/index.html

Hope you can tell great stories with
Storymapjs.
Thanks !

