Quick hits!
d

Ron Lin, Twitter: @ronlin

¡ Let’s do a simulation.
¡ Split up into groups.
¡ Goal: Be presented with these scenarios and

consider how you’ll handle them.

¡ A local newspaper reporter tweets that up to

20 people are wounded in San Bernardino.
What do you do?

¡ Call local authorities, but no one picks up
¡ Check local fire department’s Twitter: “There

are reports of 20 victims involved in a
shooting, and they are in the 1300 block of
Waterman Avenue.”
¡ Photographs on social media show heavily
armed police surrounding a neighborhood in
San Bernardino. Sheriff’s confirm active
shooter in area

¡ Brainstorm

¡ Look up on Google what’s on the 1300 block

of Waterman Avenue.
¡ Call local businesses and see what they say.

¡ i) Answer I: Hi. Yes, this is that business. No, I

can’t talk to you. Goodbye.
¡ ii) Answer II: Click.
¡ iii) Answer III: We aren’t allowed to talk. Click.

¡ iv) Answer IV: Hi. Oh yes, I see police all

around.

Tom Brown said he and countless other employees and
customers at San Bernardino Golf Club were on lockdown
Wednesday afternoon after reports of an active shooter
across the street.
¡ “We’re not allowing anyone on the golf course. We got a
big helicopter sitting in the middle of the No. 1 fairway,”
Brown told the Times. “We’re several hundred yards away
from the area. We can see fire and SWAT from here but
we’re not allowed to go any farther.”
¡ Brown said his coworker told him that about 10 minutes
before he got to work, she heard gunshots from the
industrial park across the street. He couldn’t say how
many she heard.
¡

Fred Henning was holed up inside the paralegal’s office where he
works with his wife, about a block from the scene of the shooting.
Henning said they were standing outside as helicopters swooped
over the area, but fled back into the building as police began to
flood the area.
¡ “We just came inside because it could be stray bullets, who
knows?” Henning said. “We did mill around outside for a while but
we decided the better plan was to stay in. We’re stranded in here
… we’re in an office building.”
¡ The block where the shooting took place is home to a number of
businesses, Henning said, including a three-building complex that
houses his office and roughly 140 others. He described the
structure where the shooting took place as a “county building.”
The street has been completely shut down.
¡ “I see squad cars like you won’t believe,” Henning said.
¡

¡ Listen to radio dispatch calls:

http://graphics.latimes.com/sanbernardino-police-dispatch/
¡ Ways to listen to police dispatch: 5-0 Radio
Police Scanner app

¡ Feed 1: 1:33: Marybeth Feild (cq), board

president and CEO of the center, said the
shooting occurred in a large conference room
that had been rented to a health care
provider. The conference, which holds up to
200 people, were decorated for a holiday
party, she said. She was working to identify
the healthcare provider.

¡ Angela Stutte stood on the corner of Waterman

Avenue and Orange Show Road with her phone
clutched in her hands. Her 21-year-old daughter,
Miranda Stutte, was inside the building when
the shooting occurred.
¡ The younger Stutte, who works for the
department of public health, was attending a
meeting, her mom said. She called her dad after
the violence. Then she spoke with her mother.
¡ "She's scared," Stutte said of her daughter. "She
was evacuated to the golf course.“ …

¡ The younger Stutte, who works for the

department of public health, was attending a
meeting, her mom said. She called her dad
after the violence. Then she spoke with her
mother.
¡ "She's scared," Stutte said of her daughter.
"She was evacuated to the golf course."
¡ What would you do based on this
information?

¡ Felisa Cardona, deputy public information

officer for the SB County, said she would not
comment on whether employees of the
public health department were having an
event in the room where the shooting began.
¡ “I understand what you are trying to confirm
and I can’t do so right now,” Cardona said.
¡

¡ 2:42: Veronica Rocha: Marybeth Feild, the

center’s board president and CEO of the
center, said the San Bernardino County Public
Health Department rented the conference
room and they were hosting a banquet.
Employees began decorated the conference
room on Monday for the holiday banquet.
¡ What do you do with this information?

From Louis at Arrowhead Regional Medical Center: It was
2:45 p.m. when Denise Peraza, 27, called a relative who
was waiting outside of the Arrowhead Regional Medical
Center. As friends and relatives crowded around the
phone, they listened as Peraza provided details of the
shooting.
¡ She said the the doors of the environmental health
services office of San Bernardino County opened and two
men dressed all in black wearing black face masks entered
with “big ol guns” and started shooting randomly.
¡ “Everyone dropped to the floor. It was during a holiday
party.” Denise told relatives. “The guys opened fired for
30 seconds, randomly, then paused to reload and began
firing again.”
¡

¡ Multiple sources from multiple agencies

identified one of the three attackers at the
resource center to a news network as Syed
Farook. No other information was available,
but a knowledgeable source said another
member of the trio is believed to be Farook's
brother.
¡ What do you do?

A LinkedIn search pops up a profile page of Syed Raheel
Farook, a business taxes representative for the California
State Board of Equalization. A stringer is sent to the door
of a home in Corona, where a man at the door says, “My
name is Farook. When asked if he knew Syed, the man
said, “Of course I know him, but I have nothing to say.”
When asked about Syed being named as a suspect, he
said, “I Have nothing to say.” Behind Farook was a brightly
lit home with low-slung sectional couchyes and boxes for
appliances. The smell of basmati rice cooking came
wafting through the door. Five minutes later, the man got
into a white car and drove away, answering questions
with, “I have nothing to say.”
¡ What do you do? Report this or not?
¡

¡ 6:11 p.m.: On the person detained who was

running away: The San Bernardino police
chief, Jarrod Burguan, said there were only
two people who were found in the SUV and
were declared deceased. A third person was
seen running away, but officers don’t know for
if that person was involved in the shooting,
and remains detained. “It’s possible that they
were not [involved],” he said.

¡

¡ At a press conference, the police chief ID’s

the wife as Tashfeen Malik. A relative of the
couple insists the name of his sister is
Tafsheen Malik. Some editors in the
newsroom say the standard Romanization of
the first name is Tafsheen, but many other
publications use the spelling Tashfeen, using
the police chief’s spelling. What do you use?

What to do?

¡ Call experts who might be able to diagnose

the problem.
¡ Get city records to see who built the
structure, and do lawsuit scrub of
contractors.

¡ Deaths occurred at county fairgrounds that’s

a nonprofit

¡ Jared Lee Loughner is named the suspected

shooter of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords
¡ We know where he went to school.

¡ “Pima Community College Department of

Public Safety reports mentioning Jared Lee
Loughner .”
¡ And there was tons of stuff in there, leading
up to his suspension from the school,
including a Youtube video where he says,
“This is genocide in America.”

¡ College didn’t initially release the video, but

my coworker demanded it

¡ Tip on rape at hospital
¡ Tip on fatal overdose

¡ 13. Form 2567
§ These are inspection reports for hospitals, nursing

homes collected by the U.S. Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services and the state public health
department (ask from both)

¡ It looks like Coliseum, but no obvious features

except for a second of the tape

Author of

