Open
Records/FOIA

Randy Evans

Erin Jordan

Executive director of the Iowa
Freedom of Information Council,
a nonprofit education and
advocacy organization that
works for government
transparency

Investigative reporter for The
(Cedar Rapids) Gazette
Board president for the Iowa
Center for Public Affairs
Journalism (IowaWatch.org)

When to file an open records request
• There’s been a surprising announcement (Someone fired/put on
leave/demoted, program eliminated, major gift)
• There’s a new contract or relationship between entities
• It’s the end of the fiscal year or calendar year
• You become aware of a specific document that could be interesting
• Sources are speaking in generalities, but you want specifics
• Any time you feel like people aren’t being straight with you

Verbal request or written?
VERBAL
• Quick, easy
• Have the same legal weight as
written
• Good for routine requests from
sources who know the drill

WRITTEN
• Use email or snail mail for more
unusual requests
• Allows you to be specific, and
detailed, about what you want
without as much confusion
• Creates a record of your request
• Starts the clock ticking

What can I get with a public records request?
• Iowa Code Chapter 22 describes Iowa’s Open Records Act
• Applies to government agencies, public schools, county hospitals, local
drainage districts, intergovernmental agencies
• Reports, documents, memos, contracts, emails, recordings, billing statements,
checks issued -- even text messages *
• *Some (a lot of) exceptions apply. See Randy Evans about personnel records and “secret”
settlements.

For best results…
• Narrow your search as much as possible
• Who specifically should you query? Don’t overdo it.
• Assume everything from a public institution is open. Be aware of exemptions,
but don’t be limited by them.
• Ask for electronic records in the form you’d like (Excel, text file, etc.).
• Tell them you want the estimated cost in advance. Then let the negotiations
begin! (More on this later.)
• Offer to adjust your request slightly if it makes things easier (cheaper for you)
without degrading the quality of information significantly.

I would like to request correspondence under Iowa’s Open Records Act (Chapter 22).
I’d like to view correspondence since Sept. 18 to or from Carmen Dixon, Jane Fry, Kristin Pedersen and
Stephen Murley that concerns seclusion/time-out rooms in the Iowa City Community School District.
Please provide these records electronically. If there’s a cost associated with this request, please let me
know in advance so I can get clearance from my editor.
If you determine portions of the requested records are exempt from release, please redact the material you
believe is exempt and provide me access to the remaining, non-exempt material. If you deny this request,
or a portion of it, please list the specific exemptions you are relying on (Section 22.7 of the Act) to justify
that denial.
I look forward to hearing from you within 10 working days of your receipt of this request. If you have any
questions or if I can adjust the request slightly to make it easier to compile the information, please let me
know.

This is a request for copies of public records under the federal Freedom of Information Act, Title 5, USC 552. Please send
me a list that Includes the total dollar amount of Department of Homeland Security Readiness Grants that went to each
state since Sept. 11, 2001.
As you know, the amended Act requires your agency make a determination as to whether it will comply with this request
within 20 working days of this written request. If you determine you will comply with this request, please promptly
forward the records requested.
If you determine portions of the requested records are exempt from release, I will expect, as the Act requires under
552(b), that you delete the material that you believe is exempt and send me copies of the remaining, non-exempt
material within the same time period.
Also, If all or any part of my request is denied, please list the specific exemptions under the Act on which you rely to
withhold the records. Please provide me with the name and address of the official to whom I can appeal and a copy of all
rules, regulations or forms I must follow or use to appeal. I am prepared to pay reasonable, standard charges for
document duplication.
I look forward to hearing from you. If you have any questions or need to communicate with me, I would greatly
appreciate your calling me at (319) 331-0343. If there is something unclear about my request, or if you find that it may
be unduly burdensome, I would ask that you give me a call so that I may clarify the request or reduce It to manageable
proportions. If other media have requested similar Information, perhaps you could send that to me immediately, as that
may meet my needs.

Cost of public records
• Public records custodians “may charge a reasonable fee” for copies of
records or the time of the person putting the records together.
However…
• Free Examination: The governmental body cannot charge the requester a fee

simply for examining an open record. Iowa Code sec. 22.2(1). Charges are limited
to the costs of retrieving records, making copies of records, or supervising
records. https://www.iowaattorneygeneral.gov/about-us/sunshineadvisories/charges-under-the-public-records-law-impose-only-actual-costs/
• Actual Costs for Copies: The cost imposed for providing a copy of an open
record "shall not exceed the cost of providing the service." Iowa Code sec. 22.3.
Officials must determine how much the copy really costs excluding ordinary
expenses of the office like a computer system's depreciation, copy machine
maintenance, overhead, electricity, and insurance.

“Everything is negotiable. Whether or not the
negotiation is easy is another thing.”
Carrie Fisher

Sunshine Advisories
• Personnel records: https://www.iowaattorneygeneral.gov/aboutus/sunshine-advisories/access-to-personnel-records-of-publicemployees-whats-open-whats-not/
• Citizen letters: https://www.iowaattorneygeneral.gov/aboutus/sunshine-advisories/contacting-government-bodies-are-citizensletters-confidential/
• Electronic records: https://www.iowaattorneygeneral.gov/aboutus/sunshine-advisories/public-access-to-electronic-records/
• Free peek: https://www.iowaattorneygeneral.gov/about-us/sunshineadvisories/personally-examining-records----giving-a-free-peek/

Iowa Public Information Board
• Good info, including Iowa Code Chapters 21 and 22 and sample Open
Records request letters https://www.ipib.iowa.gov/
• Filing a complaint: https://www.ipib.iowa.gov/file-complaint

This is us.

This also can be us.

Get in touch!
Randy Evans
Phone: 515-745-0041
E-mail: IowaFOICouncil@gmail.com
Twitter: @DMREvans
Erin Jordan
Phone: 319-331-0343
E-mail: erin.Jordan@thegazette.com
Twitter: @erinfjordan

