Building An Accountability Culture In The Newsroom

12 slides, three steps on what you need, how you can you make it work and have some fun

Step 1: Understand newsroom’s mission, appetite
All journalism can be inquisitive, investigative,
revealing and impactful.
What is your goal? Why are you here? Do you
want to change the world? There are a lot of ways
to do exactly that. Understand your team’s
motivation. (Have a playbook.)
Have that conversation/understanding with
newsroom manager.
If needed, use facts to prove your point. Metrics:
time on page, community impact, audience
feedback, awards, etc. (Price, DEA, Weinstein)

How we are trying…
Multi-platform investigative unit housed in larger
public radio newsroom. Work with colleagues
internally, as well as web, print, television
partners externally.
Goal: Impact… promote transparency, root out
wrongdoing, hold officials accountable.

Mission: Make Kentucky a better place to live.
Since: Build newsroom, boost culture throughout
larger organization

Step 2: Use watchdog skills… all the time, every time
Two key things to use, remember and assign.
Make sure these practices part of the routine:
A) SCRUB. Learn to scrub. Scrub everyone and anyone.

When news breaks, you need a scrubber, a go-to person for
fast facts who can find a needle in a haystack. Colleagues will
love them. Managers will love them.

Step 2: Use watchdog skills… all the time, every time
Example…
A shared Google doc, that becomes a
repository for phone numbers,
addresses, tidbits, details.
MAKE THIS PART OF YOUR BREAKING
NEWS PROTOCOL. MAKE SOMEONE
THE SCRUBBER.

Step 2: Use watchdog skills… all the time, every time
B) GET/BUILD A FOIA TERRORIST
- Make a newsroom FOIA template (I sent
some out this morning during sessions.)
- Make a newsroom case law/denial
document
- Share your FOIA successes and failures.
(ex. “Kate is hostile”)

- Follow FOIA fiends (Muckrock, Leopold,
etc)

Step 2: Use watchdog skills… all the time, every time

Step 3: Institutionalize it
Benefits of a watchdog culture should
be clear. Now, how to make it stick…
- #FFFY (FOIA Friday F*** Yeah) - Slack
channel for all things records,
including tips, trash talk, roll calls and
more. Goal is to have one everyone
file a FOIA on Friday.
- Brown bag lunches, training (Kate’s
scrub sesh, conference takeaways)
- Require it. Make it part of the routine.
Hold yourself, your colleagues, your
team accountable

Step 3: Institutionalize it
About routines…
ONBOARDING - Bring new reporters to the courthouse. Do field trips. Leave
the office. This is team building, not just skill building.
BEAT REPORTERS - From arts/culture to higher education, a few times a year,
scrub the nonprofits and entities in your orbit. Annual reports? Complaints?
Calls for service?(Remember what Topher & Angilee said.) Put it on the
calendar. Maybe it’s tax time or pegged to something.
BRING FOLKS IN – invite your lawyer in to talk shop, invite concerned
citizens in to meet the team, share their stories and ideas. Also… talk to
other journos.

Step 3: Institutionalize it (with fun)
- Contests (FOIAugust) –
who can file the most
records requests in a
month?
- No one says FOIAs have to
be super serious.
- Spin the FOIA wheel.
- FOIA magnetic poetry

Challenges
- Training/Tools. Don’t assume everyone has been shown how to watchdog. Goal
is to give everyone the basics – job of a manager. Find the opportunity, maybe
it’s a field trip.

- Not everyone has the bite… or wants the bite. (Not everyone needs it. But
when they get it, it’s spectacular – ex. “That was really fun.)
- Every accountability piece, every FOIA doesn’t have to be confrontational.
Knock down that notion w/ colleagues.
- Culture doesn’t happen/change over night. But the enthusiasm, fun and sense
of mission can be shared by all. (ex. “Dance in the hall.”)
- What reporter doesn’t want impact??? This goes back to newsroom mission,
identity, goals.

Next…
- Have the conversation in your shop.
- Share stories, tips, insight with your IRE allies.

- I’m here. Let me know what does/doesn’t work:
- Twitter: @bmccarthykycir
- Email: bmccarthy@kycir.org
- Phone: (502) 814.6541

