Mc Nelly Torres
Investigative Journalist
Torres.McNelly@gmail.com
@WatchdogDiva
Manny Garcia,
Executive Editor - East USA TODAY NETWORK

@manny_garcia1

Before & after the storm: Prepare to cover natural disasters
Catastrophic events include natural disasters biological threats, large-scale industrial accidents,
infrastructure failure &terrorism, so be prepared ahead of time, ready to cover beyond the
obvious stories afterward, so don't follow the herd.
The first question your newsroom needs to ask: Are we ready? Do we have a action plan?
What is it? Do we know what the government plan is at local, state and even federal level?
• Have drone, will fly it, before & after.
• Dolphs –paper mapbook.
• Gather contacts: local, state and even federal level. Know each player, his/her role. Who
is the emergency management director? Spokesperson for FEMA? National Guard once
activated? Where are the shelters? Which ones are pet friendly?
• Identify stories early before anything happens: If a hurricane is coming your way or if
you are in the midst of tornado alley, you should think about possible stories before
anything happens. This is also a good way to start getting human sources that you can
perhaps follow on social media.

Useful databases
Property records, Flooding zones maps
Building permits. Unsafe structures
Dam inspections. Bridge inspections
Census data: identify your low-income areas if you don’t know already.

Databases to help you after the disaster

•

FEMA.gov: Look for public assistance grants to repair or replace disaster-damaged
buildings, infrastructure. Who’s eligible? Be aware to know that those seeking assistance
have been truly affected because there has been a history of fraud and waste on this area.
• SBA disaster loans: This database, maintained by NICAR, includes individuals’ name or
company name, the mailing address, a code for the type of disaster that occurred, the date
the disaster loan was approved for an SBA guarantee, the amount of the loan, and
whether the loan was fully paid or charged off (went bad).
• Federal contracts: (kept by NICAR) The Federal Procurement Data System, maintained
by the U.S. Services Administration, includes all transactions worth more than $2,500.
• Toxic Release Inventory: https://www.epa.gov/toxics-release-inventory-tri-program
TRI consists of information about on- and off-site releases of chemicals and other waste
management activities reported annually by industries, including federal facilities.
• FEMA guide to understanding the Disaster Declaration Process and Federal
Disaster Assistance:
https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/6094

What to keep an eye on?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Price gouging: Typical here in Florida with gasoline, but it also happened in Puerto Rico
with bags of ice, generators and food. (State & Local hotlines.)
Fraud at all levels: From contractors, roofers to people applying and getting grants from
FEMA. (Must pull contractor licenses unless there is a state emergency waiver.)
Questionable FEMA contracts: No-bid contracts, (Whitefish in Puerto Rico to the
electric company to make repairs
Medical examiner – daily checks, calls & websites.
Local emergency contracts – money is in debris renewal. New corporations created.
Environment: Natural disasters impact the environment. Examine federal / state level for
databases on water contamination and also air and so forth. (EOCs also source.)
Forgotten areas: Politically-connected & affluent areas might get help faster than if you
are low-income living in a forgotten area. (Where are your trailer parks.)

Social Media – Crowd sourcing:
•
•
•
•
•

Google Trends
Hashtags
DataMinr ($)
Facebook
Law enforcement. Governor. EOCs.

