Investigating inequality

Focusing on race-based inequality
or the racial wealth gap

“Race-based economic inequality is both a
defining and persistent feature of the United
States that is at odds with national narratives
regarding progress toward racial equality.”
Source: September 2017, PNAS, Michael W. Kraus, Julian M.
Rucker and Jennifer A. Richeson

“We started our analysis with an overriding
question: Why has economic inequality become
so entrenched in our post-Civil Rights era of
supposed legal equality?”
Source: Feb. 2013, Institute on Assets and Social Policy, Thomas
Shapiro, Tarjana Meschede and Sam Osoro

Biggest drivers of the
racial wealth gap
• Years of homeownership
• Household income
• Unemployment
• A college education
• Inheritance, financial support from families or
friends and preexisting family wealth
Source: Feb. 2013, Institute on Assets and Social Policy, Thomas
Shapiro, Tarjana Meschede and Sam Osoro

How do you turn such a
big issue into stories?

Almost five years ago, Chicago Public Schools
closed 50 schools, the largest closure at one
time in the nation. Most of the closures were in
African-American neighborhoods.

Schools are an integral part of a community’s
social fabric, and they are at the intersection of
many issues: neighborhood vitality, educational
opportunity, property values, to name a few.

So we decided to spend a year looking at the
impact of the closures – from proposals for
reusing the schools to where students went
when their schools were closed.

The remaining vacant schools are concentrated
in poor, black neighborhoods on the city’s West
and South sides, where a legacy of
disinvestment and segregation led to enrollment
declines, and eventually, the school closures.

Making public data transparent
Chicago Public Schools had data on what was
happening to the closed schools but it wasn’t
organized or easily accessible to the public. So
we created a database for the public and
updated it when a school was sold.

Closed school map

The backdrop to the closures
As the series continued, we began to examine the context
in which the school closures were playing out.
• Chicago’s black population has been declining for at
least two decades.
• The number of black students in Chicago Public Schools
has also been declining. In the past decade, the district
lost more than 52,000 black students.
• Student decline coincides with population loss in some
of the city’s poorest and most crime-ridden
communities.

The myth was that poor black students were
likely going to greener pastures.
The reality is …

Key findings
• About a third of students leaving segregated,
low-income Chicago schools end up back in
majority black and poor suburban schools.
• Three-quarters of the 50 Illinois districts most
affected by transfers from predominantly
poor, black Chicago schools are also in dire
need of more state education funding.

How we did it
• Submitted Freedom of Information Act
requests to the Illinois State Board of
Education for eight years of transfer records
(mid-2009 through mid-2017) from CPS to
other Illinois districts, which includes transfer
records for schools that have since closed.

How we did it
• There were limitations to the data. For
instance, ISBE records do not indicate the
transferring student’s race, ethnicity or
income. To report on the general migration of
African-American students from low-income
households, we ran specific queries that
focused on CPS schools with populations that
are at least 80 percent black and 80 percent
low-income.

How we did it
• We concentrated our analysis on these
segregated schools and looked at the
destinations where their students tended to
transfer.

From education to employment

Our first stories focused on high
unemployment in the city’s
predominantly black communities.

And with the city losing manufacturing jobs to
the suburbs, transportation now becomes a
barrier to employment, said Mark Sanders of
the North Lawndale Employment Network.

Back to the man with the long
commute …

What experts call “job sprawl” and “spatial
mismatch” — the disconnection between where
people live and where they work – is changing
the commute for some residents. Spatial
mismatch disproportionately affects AfricanAmericans in metropolitan areas with high
poverty rates and high levels of segregation.

In 14 of Chicago’s 77 community areas, at
least half of all public transit commuters
spend an hour or more getting to work. All
but two have majority black populations.

Manufacturing was historically concentrated in
Chicago and near communities of color. But
between 2001 and 2015, the South and West
sides lost 45 percent of these jobs, significantly
outpacing regional and national trends,
according to data from the Illinois Department
of Employment Security.

Where did the jobs go?

Manufacturing, transportation and
warehousing jobs are clustering in the
suburbs.

“I think a lot of people recognize the fact that
our transit service is not really designed for
people to get to the suburbs,” said Yonah
Freemark, project manager at Metropolitan
Planning Council, a nonprofit planning and
development agency.

“The results are people are not able to access
jobs, and that increases the level of poverty for
people, reduces their access to opportunity and
employment.”

Takeaways

The importance of context and
intersectionality
Empty schools, empty promises

• Intersection of
depopulation and education
• Looked at school closures in
the context of a larger trend
of black outmigration as
well as residential
segregation and housing
affordability

The reverse commute
• Intersection of
unemployment and
transportation
• Looked at unemployment in
disinvested communities in
the context of where jobs
were being created as well
as how regional
transportation systems are
designed

“If you want to do powerful investigations
into racial inequality, you need to
become an expert in the laws and
policies that deal with civil rights.”
– Nikole Hannah-Jones, The New York
Times Magazine
Source: IRE Journal, Third Quarter 2015

Know the scholars and researchers
who study inequality.

Some important scholars in the field
• Raj Chetty, Stanford, The Equal Opportunity
Project
• William Darity Jr., Duke, Network on Racial
and Ethnic Inequality
• William Julius Wilson, Harvard, author of
ground-breaking books, including “When
Work Disappears” and “The Truly
Disadvantaged”

Think in terms of systems, structures
and institutions
It’s easy to get caught up in individual
behavior and miss how systems, structures and
institutions affect people’s lives and their
choices.

Get out of the office
At the Reporter, we have a saying, “from the
streets to the spreadsheet.” The best reporting
on inequality comes from a combination of
reporting and building sources in the affected
communities and knowing the scholarship
around inequality.

