One person,
one vote?

Absentee votes determine
election in Missouri
By Stephen Deere and Doug Moore
St. Louis Post-Dispatch

T

12

of absentee ballots determined the outcome in
that Aug. 2 race for Fifth Ward committeeman.
After the election, a source called us and
suggested that there were documents to support
Franks’ allegations that Hubbard had unfairly
used absentee voting to win the election. Those
documents were soon leaked to the newspaper.
The documents included duplicate and triplicate
applications for absentee ballots — indicating
someone, other than the voter, might have filled
them out.
In the two years since the Ferguson unrest
touched off a national movement, several
Ferguson activists had unsuccessfully run for
office. Now, two of them, who had never run for
office before, had challenged the city’s political
machine and nearly won, save for absentee
ballots.
We agreed that we needed to pursue the same
records over which Roland had sued. If he won,
we would get them too, so we filed our own
request.
At the Aug. 22 trial over the open records
violation, the board’s attorneys focused on a
provision of the state’s election law that makes
ballots and “ballot materials” closed records.

The law does not define what constitutes ballot
materials, and the Election Board’s attorney
seemed to stumble in front of the judge. Given
the statute, the lawyer said, that’s the best he
could do.
That admission told us that we were on to
something. Missouri’s Sunshine Law presumes
records to be open unless explicitly closed. If
the lawyer knew he didn’t have a good case for
closing the records, why not release them?
TIP 1: When a governmental body erects
barriers to information, there’s usually
newsworthy information behind them. Keep
trying to access it.
In a ruling on Aug. 23, St. Louis Circuit Judge
Julian Bush said there is nothing in state law that
addresses keeping absentee ballot applications
confidential. The phrase “ballot materials,” Bush
said, “is awkward at best and gobbledygook at
worse, and it is certainly not self-evident that
absentee ballot envelopes are such things.”
Two days later, election workers unsealed
boxes of absentee ballot applications and
envelopes in front of Roland. To more quickly
access the records, the Post-Dispatch asked to
review the records simultaneously.

Bruce Franks Jr. celebrates his victory in the Missouri 78th District House seat special election as he
stands on a bar at Yaquis on Cherokee Street in St. Louis and thanks his supporters.
THE IRE JOURNAL

Photo by David Carson/ St. Louis Post-Dispatch

he July email that led to one of the more
noteworthy St. Louis Post-Dispatch
investigations of 2016 was first met with
a collective shrug.
An attorney representing a few unknown
candidates in the state’s Aug. 2 Democratic
primary was alleging anomalies in the use of
absentee ballots, particularly in races in which a
“member of the Hubbard family has been on the
ballot.”
Allegations about misuse of absentee voting
abound during election season. Missouri doesn’t
allow early voting, but residents can vote
“absentee” six weeks before an election if they
can’t get to the polls.
Some candidates provide absentee ballot
applications to voters while canvassing
neighborhoods. There’s nothing illegal about
that. But every so often, you hear about a person
on the ballot sending in multiple applications
themselves, or that a number of the applications
came from the same address.
Those allegations are hard to prove and often
involve small cities.
But lawyer David Roland had amassed years’
worth of election data that suggested that the
Hubbards, a well-known political family in the
impoverished neighborhoods of North St. Louis,
might be gaming the system. It wasn’t proof, but
it was interesting. It became more interesting
when the St. Louis Election Board refused to
allow Roland to review the applications for
absentee ballots and the envelopes in which
voters had returned their ballots.
Roland sued, arguing the board had violated
the state’s open records law. We wrote a couple
of short stories that ran inside the paper.
Then came the election. In the race for the
78th District state House seat, Bruce Franks, a
31-year-old tattooed battle rapper and Ferguson
protester, lost by only 90 votes to incumbent
Penny Hubbard. More than 4,300 people cast
ballots. Absentee votes were a major factor in the
race.
Roland filed another lawsuit, urging that the
election results be tossed out.
Rasheen Aldridge, 22, another Ferguson
protester, lost to Rodney Hubbard Sr., Penny
Hubbard’s husband, by 55 votes. A large number

Photos by David Carson/ St. Louis Post-Dispatch

It became apparent that the Election Board
had accepted ballots in envelopes that were
incorrectly marked or should have been notarized
but weren’t. Franks would show the envelopes to
an Election Board employee and ask why it was
accepted.
“Human error,” they repeatedly said.
There was also a separate box of applications
for absentee ballots from people who voted in
person at the Election Board before Election Day.
These applications did not have corresponding
envelopes. The in-person absentee voters had
filled out paper ballots or used a touch screen. We
didn’t think anything of it.
We read through the state’s election statutes to
better understand the rules about accepting and
rejecting ballots. In the minutiae of Missouri’s
absentee voting provisions, something stood out:
The process for how absentee ballots are to be
accepted, stored, opened and counted always
involved sealed envelopes. Under the law, it did
not seem possible to vote absentee without an
envelope. But would a lawyer read the statutes the
same way?
We posed the question to a few sources,
including Election Board directors and Roland.
The board said it had to provide access to
touchscreens so visually impaired voters could use
audio ballots.
To Roland, the line of inquiry was a legal
windfall. He rushed off to court to amend the
lawsuit he had filed requesting a new election for
Franks.
We wrote an article titled “Could the failure
to use envelopes doom an election?” that was
published in the print edition on Sunday, Aug. 29.
TIP 2: Read the law that relates to whatever
subject you are investigating. It may be tedious
and confusing, but it will provide questions to ask
and describe documents to request.
After writing the envelope story, we huddled
with editors. The absentee ballot applications
included cell phone numbers. We needed to
make a lot of phone calls. But Franks’ bench trial
was scheduled for Aug. 31. Disclosures at the trial
might make some of the reporting obsolete.
We had less than four days.
That Sunday, we followed an attorney and
notary from Franks’ campaign as they visited
a public housing complex to collect affidavits
from voters claiming they had unwittingly voted
absentee. Within minutes, we met a man who said
he provided his blank absentee ballot to a woman
representing herself a member of Penny Hubbard’s
campaign. The man became the lead of the story.
As we drove back to the newspaper, a
woman we had just interviewed called. Penny
Hubbard’s Toyota Camry was circling the block
of the housing complex. The caller described
the individualized license plates issued to each
Missouri state representative. The occupants of the
vehicle were taking pictures of people with whom
we had spoken.
FOURTH QUARTER 2016

Attorneys David Roland (left), Mike Colona (center) and Jane Dueker discuss potential evidence
before the start of a court hearing in St. Louis about possible absentee voting irregularities in the 78th
District Missouri House seat primary election. Both Dueker and Colona were representing Missouri
State Rep. Penny Hubbard in the case. Roland was representing Bruce Franks Jr., who lost the
election by 90 votes to Hubbard and appealed the election.

Deirra Paster, 27, stands in the doorway of her home in St. Louis. Paster filed an affidavit saying she
felt intimidated by people who claimed to be from State Rep. Penny Hubbard’s campaign after she
told them she planned to vote for Bruce Franks Jr.

Now we had our kicker.
The Aug. 2 election data also revealed
that hundreds of applications for absentee
ballots had come from just a handful of senior
apartment complexes. The Hubbards aggressively
campaigned in those buildings. But we noticed
that one of those applications came from a
woman who voted in person at the Election
Board instead of mailing in her ballot. Why would
anyone do that? In an interview, the woman

said she feared the candidates could manipulate
the process. She had also once worked for the
Election Board and claimed she had witnessed
Rodney Hubbard routinely delivering stacks of
absentee ballots, a violation of state law which
states only a second-degree relative, such as a
parent or sibling, can deliver ballots for a voter.
Earlier, we found another former employee who
told us the same thing. Election officials dispute
that this practice takes place, but we now had two
13

14

Rasheen Aldridge, 22, (left) and Bruce Franks Jr., 32, acknowledge a friend driving by the Civil
Courts building while they wait for a ruling by Judge Julian Bush, who eventually ruled that a new
election should be held.

Mary Wheeler-Jones (left), the Democratic Director of the St. Louis Board of Elections, takes a formal
complaint about absentee ballots in the 78th District State Representative race from Michael Berg
at the Board of Election headquarters. Bruce Franks Jr. lost the Aug. 2 primary for the 78th District
to incumbent Penny Hubbard by 90 votes. In his challenge, Franks contends absentee ballots were
“obtained illegally, were tampered with, or both.” Edward Berg, 4, is on his father’s shoulders.

Rodney Hubbard Sr. in the results of that Nov.
8 do-over election for Fifth Ward Democratic
committeeman.
Throughout the course of our reporting, we
tried repeatedly to reach the Hubbards for
comment. They never commented to the PostDispatch on the allegations or the outcome of
the election.
The fallout from the stories went beyond St.
Louis. We found that four of the state’s largest
election authorities also allowed absentee voters
to vote without envelopes. Now they had to
change that.
Stephen Deere has been a general
assignment reporter for the Post-Dispatch since
2006. His profile of an Indian doctor took first

place honors for feature writing in the 2015
Great Plains Journalism Awards contest. He was
part of a three-reporter team that took first place
in the same contest for investigative reporting
in 2016 for coverage of St. Louis County’s
municipal court system.
Doug Moore has been a reporter for the
Post-Dispatch since 2000. His current beat is
diversity and demographics, which includes
covering issues involving race, gay rights,
Census trends, refugee resettlement and
immigration reform. Recognition of his work
includes a first place feature writing award in
2014 from the Missouri Press Foundation for a
look at the region’s Bosnian population 20 years
after they began arriving in St. Louis.
THE IRE JOURNAL

Photo by J.B. Forbes/ St. Louis Post-Dispatch / Photo by David Carson/ St. Louis Post-Dispatch

former employees contacted independently from
one another providing identical details.
TIP 3: Pay attention to people behaving
differently from those around them. Their
motivations can be revealing.
On the applications for absentee ballots, we
noticed that many people under the age of 50 had
claimed to be “incapacitated” and could not get
to the polls. Incapacity is the one reason for voting
absentee that does not require the ballot envelope
to be notarized. More than a dozen of those
younger voters told us that they never claimed
to be incapacitated as their applications to vote
absentee showed. Some said they didn’t even
remember applying.
On Aug. 31, the day of the trial, the PostDispatch published a story based on hundreds
of documents and dozens of interviews. The vast
majority of the reporting occurred over a three-day
period.
During the trial for a new election, we noticed
that Hubbard’s attorney, Jane Dueker, a wellknown figure in the state’s Democratic Party,
repeatedly looked over her shoulder at the
Election Board. It was curious since she didn’t
represent the board, only Hubbard, who was not
in the courtroom.
We filed an open records request for any
record of communication, including “voicemails,
emails, text messages, phone logs, handwritten
notes, recordings and letters,” between Dueker
and Election Board officials. We made the same
request for communication between board
officials and anyone with the last name Hubbard.
We learned that Rodney Hubbard had parked
his Mercedes a few feet away from the entrance of
a polling site and watched voters enter a building
at a low-income housing complex he manages.
The documents and interviews resulted in
another front-page story about allegations of voter
intimidation.
TIP 4: Don’t be afraid of fishing expeditions,
especially those that don’t take much time. They
can be fruitful.
During the trial, Roland focused almost
exclusively on the Election Board’s failure to use
envelopes for the 140-plus in-person absentee
voters. Since Franks lost by only 90 votes, Roland
argued that those improperly cast ballots were
sufficient to call into question the election results.
On Sept. 2, St. Louis Circuit Judge Rex Burlison
released a 22-page decision that said the Election
Board violated the law by accepting ballots not
contained in sealed envelopes and ordered a new
election.
Shortly after the trial, Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon
replaced the top two members of the Election
Board, saying the board “was not doing its job.”
In the do-over election on Sept. 16, Franks won
76 percent of the vote.
A couple of weeks later, Judge Bush granted
Rasheen Aldridge a new election, also because
of the envelope issue. Aldridge defeated

