Education Civil Rights Data
The good, the bad, the dirty

Alex Harwin

Jennifer LaFleur

Data editor, Investigative
Reporting Workshop
lafleur.irw@gmail.com

research analyst at Education
Week Research Center
alex.harwin@gmail.com

Kameel Stanley
podcast producer at St. Louis
Public Radio
kmsjourno@gmail.com

Stories With Federal Data

What Has This Data Told Us?
- Nearly 70,000 special education students restrained or secluded
- Black students more likely to be arrested at school
- Students experienced corporal punishment in 21 states and more
than 4,000 schools nationwide
- 1 in 4 teachers miss 10 or more school days
A lot more topics, such as juvenile justice and others upcoming.

Messy But Powerful
The data is messy and the findings are troubling. More work to do!
However, it’s worth it in terms of impact:
- RI Governor responded to our findings
- King wrote a letter to end corporal punishment
- White House Brief referenced our analysis
- Other local and state level results

So, How Do You
Work With It?

- Start by looking up comparisons
at the school and district level
- Larger analyses its a bit more
complicated and require feedback
loops and teamwork

Stories with state data

The Story We Told
There are countless examples across the
country where data show that when it comes
to school discipline, all kids are not being
treated equally. In Missouri, this is especially
true for black students … who get 40 percent
of the suspensions yet only make up 16
percent of the student population. Even the
young ones. Our analysis of state school
discipline data found that in Missouri, when
white kids in the early grades act out,
they’re kicked out of class. But the black
kids? They get kicked out of school.

The Data We Got
●
●

●
●

Five yrs of discipline data for public/charter schools in MO
Narrowed in on K-3 suspensions, and quickly saw stark differences in ISS v.
OSS, which broke along racial lines.
○ One in every 7 OSS goes to black students. One in 76 goes to white
students.
○ Black kids = 17 percent of K-3 students in MO; they received almost
70 percent of OSS .
SLPS issued 857 K-3 OSS in the 2014-15 school year -- the most of any district.
They ALL went to black kids.
DIY data - surveys of resources, counselors, bias trainings gave more context.
Roughly ½ of SLPS’ 46 elementary schools didn’t have enough staff to cover ISS

Lessons We Learned
● Grassroots, public, parental and media pressure can
have an impact
● A day after we published our episode, SLPS banned OSS
for K-2. Within six months, 20 other districts had
pledged to reduce suspensions
● Different media, different approach. We created a
public database for people to check their own district

Tips

Where to get the data
● Civil Rights data collection:
https://ocrdata.ed.gov/
● Order CD of full data or download
● NCES: https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/elsi/
● State departments of education

Bulletproofing the data
● Watch for data entry errors.
● Check against state or NCES data.
● Look for impossible data.
● Verify with schools/districts if possible.

Story ideas

New Data

(ask Jim: jim.bradshaw@ed.gov)

New Data Points:
- School staff (e.g. social workers/nurses/etc)
- Sexual orientation and religion harassment and bullying
- Number of documented incidents or threats (rape/robbery/attacks/etc)
Stories to Consider:
- Number of school days missed by students who received out-of-school
suspensions
- Are there more security guards or counselors?

Questions?

