The only one
in the newsroom
Tim Broderick @TimBroderick
Alexandra Kanik @act_rational
Lisa Pickoff-White @pickoffwhite

Tim: Code Clinics
DO
-

Set a time to meet
Create, locate and share training materials
Identify people who may benefit
Communicate regularly with people who express interest

DON’T
-

Set unrealistic goals
Sweat it if no one shows up - it’s a newsroom
Sweat it if YOU can’t show up - YOU’RE in a newsroom!

Lisa: Make Reporters Part of the Process
Some reporters are used to just handing off data to a graphics desk or
producer. But, if they’re not involved they can’t learn.

Lisa: Make Reporters Part of the Process
Problem: A reporter needs your help on a data project. They don’t
know how to approach you or the data.
Solution: Have the reporter write questions for the data set.
Set-up a meeting to review the questions and how you can approach them.
Discuss dataset limitations. Create a plan for the next steps. Check-in.
Making a visualization? Draw it out or work on a paper prototype together.

Lisa: Pair Programming
Problem: You show a reporter how to do something. They forget.
Solution: Make them do it (with you). People remember things they do.

Lisa: Pair Programming
What exactly is pair programming?
Two people sit at one computer. The person at the keyboard types the
code (or Excel formula), the other person focuses on detecting bugs,
problems and what will come next. Switch roles often.
Newsroom examples
Erika needs to make a pivot table. She is at the computer, I talk her
through each step.
Devin needs a countif. I’m typing, so he Googles how to write a countif.

Allie Kanik

Documentation & Reproducibility

Documentation & Reproducibility

The importance of
seeing working code

Documentation & Reproducibility

Collaboration across newsrooms

Documentation & Reproducibility

Sharing is fun!

Data journalism
is different in
every newsroom
What works for one newsroom might not work for another.

Data journalism looks different in every newsroom

Just because you aren’t using python or R doesn’t mean you’re not
doing data journalism.
If I’m working on a one-off project or have a small data lift that needs
to be done quickly, I will use Excel.

Data journalism looks different in every newsroom

Sometimes, you start learning code simply because you have to.
Once you do enough data work, you’ll come up against something
that Excel can’t open due to size.
Or a set of relational databases that you just don’t want to use
=vlookup on 90 times.

Managing managers
Time restrictions and expectations

Managing Managers

Give your managers options.
Prepare the way you know you can do a thing…
… and the way you want to be able to do the thing.

Managing Managers

Build your timelines based on TASKS.
Estimate the amount of time each task will take (1 day, 1 week, etc)
and the order of operations for each task (this needs to happen
before that… but that can only happen if that other thing is done)
Then put the tasks together and talk about best case and worst case
scenarios.

What counts
as success?
Success doesn’t have to mean getting everyone in your newsroom
coding or creating maps for every story.

What counts as success?

-

Reporters telling me that they used an excel function or a
program we went over
Reporters telling me that they used a data function or program
I’ve never heard of
Reporters asking me to explain how I did something
Being asked to create an interactive for a story and having a
framework ready to just plug and play the data
Reporters coming to me before they file a record request or start
a big data project
Learning something new that I can implement in the future

Questions?

