#NICAR18
Putting your town under a microscope -and keeping it there
Kate Howard, Kentucky Center for Investigative Reporting - @JournoKateH
Matt Kiefer, The Chicago Reporter - @matt_kiefer
John Diedrich, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel - @john_diedrich

Getting started on a new beat
Flood the zone
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Read the archives. Seriously. Every time you have a bright idea.
Employee list with salary data
Ask for emails even if you don't necessarily need them
Get a list of record retention schedules.
Request a list of internal audits completed and planned. Find external audits, too,
such as state or federal.
Annual reports
Utilize your resources - IRE/NICAR tipsheets and colleagues
FOIA the FOIA? Gauche, perhaps, but you find gadflies this way.
Pick a time, such as FOIA Friday, to send out a request - ANY request, any size.

By this point, you know a lot about your town and your issue. Now what?
● Go further. Follow-ups are crucial, and do not skip the reaction story even if it’s
awkward.
● Don’t hide from criticism. Own it and earn respect.
● Don’t be satisfied with breaking that story. Who’s fault is it? Who is in charge of that
person?

Big investigations and how to follow up
● Get organized and stay organized.
● Start a timeline, source list at the beginning (sortable by source type) and follow-up
story candidates as you report out the main investigation.
● Put key documents in three-ring binders, helping to get the most out of them. Use
DocumentCloud to feature the best for online and to share with co-reporters.
● Use LinkedIn journalist account to find those key sources, especially helpful for
former regulators and those who have left an employer or industry, to dig into
follow-ups.
● Use Indeed.com, the job hunting site, to find factory workers, chemical technicians,
food service industry workers and everyone in between.
● Use Google alerts for developments.
● Be sure to keep an SEC documents for disclosures after publication for publicly
traded companies.
● Think about unorthodox places to find people and whether hiring subject-matter
experts (like environmental testers) would elevate your reporting and findings.

Publishing data
Before you commit to doing a web app, think about whether you intend to keep the data up to
date. This is usually a good idea because the upfront work of developing the app is behind you,
and you may only have marginal work to do in collecting and deploying new data.
A few thoughts on this:
● Budget for costs of upkeep. Over the long term, this could cost you more resources than
the initial launch.
● Consider hiring interns to do data updates. They'll get more out of it than your reporters.
● Automate as much as possible.
● Document everything.
Example cases:
● What happened to the closed school in your neighborhood?
● Settling for Misconduct
● DOJ Tracker

