 Accountability reporting for Native American communities
Mary Hudetz, AP Law Enforcement Reporter in New Mexico, @marymhudetz
CAR 2018 | Tip sheet for obtaining documents and data for stories
Overview
Native Americans make up about 2 percent of the U.S. population, and belong to more than
500 federally recognized tribes, often making for a hard-to-reach yet diverse population to
cover.
In most cases, tribes also have close relationships with federal agencies, which are
obligated to provide or fund a range of services on reservations as the result of treaties or
other agreements. And this means there are almost always documents and data for
reporters to obtain for stories --if you know what you’re looking for and can work past the
challenges.
Sourcing
This worksheet focuses largely on ways to seek out data and documents for public safety
stories in Indian Country, but the most efficient and authentic route to finding stories in
Native communities is still rooted in sourcing.
You’ll need contacts in the federal government, tribal government and on the local levels,
such as on police forces. But community members affected by the bureaucracies that are
part of your beat may be the most important. They’ll tell you things the officials won’t, and
that you can then work to verify independently with documents and more interviews.
Also, the more community-based sources you have, the easier it is to work through the
cultural questions and nuances that are inherent in Native American-focused reporting.
While more than a decade-old, this Neiman Report is still helpful on this front:
http://niemanreports.org/issues/fall-2005/ (See “Covering Indian Country: How an Outsider
Gets In” and “When Reporters Lack Access and Knowledge”).
Key Federal Agencies
Numerous federal departments interact with tribes on some level or they have had an office
dedicated to Native American affairs. These offices should track progress and spending on
federally operated or funded reservation hospitals, jails, schools, and housing projects. Here
are some key agencies on my beat:
Interior Department oversees the Bureau of Indian Affairs and other agencies that work
almost exclusively with tribes.
Justice Department includes Office of Tribal Justice, and dozens of U.S. Attorneys’ offices
responsible for prosecuting reservation crime.
Federal watchdogs: When reporting on a story, don’t forget the GAO and each federal
department’s Office of Inspector General. It’s a good get in the habit of running a search of
your story topic on the GAO and OIG sites too. Too often, there are reports showing the
issue you’re covering had been flagged as a problem in the past, and that it has failed or
struggled to make significant progress over the years.

FOIA Tips
Indian Country data collection has improved significantly, especially with criminal justice
programs, in the past decade, though it’s still not great. Here are suggestions on strategy for
determining the right documents to request from massive federal bureaucracies:
1. Think about which documents change hands between agencies, or that tribes must send
to the federal government to report on programs. Tribes aren’t necessarily obligated to
respond to your FOIA requests, but the feds are. If you can think about the sort of
documents a federal department would need to collect or use to report to Congress,
you’ll start to zero in on the right document requests.
(For example, the BIA collects loads of documents from juvenile and adult detention
centers on reservations, whether they run them or contract with tribes to run them.
Consider regularly asking for booking logs, and Serious Incident Report logs, which
provide an incident number. If a case jumps out at you, request its full file with the
number.)
2. If you don’t have a ton of story tips yet, submit a FOIA requesting a blank copy of the
forms a federal agency sends to a tribe in your region for reporting back on its federally
funded programs. This can help in determining the data collection activities on your beat,
and even help in thinking about story possibilities. Hint: The more focused your request,
the better your chances. So think about asking for forms that one federal office sends to
a department within one tribe.
3. Think about the data collection that federal agencies with similar missions but serving
different demographics undertake. For example, VA hospitals and Indian Health Service
Hospitals are both federally funded and provide health care. Are there data and
documents the VA makes public that the Indian Health Services does not? You can
trying asking for similar documents from the IHS, and cite the VA docs as a reference.
What you don’t have to FOIA. Go-to data and docs:
National Institute of Justice
NIJ released survey results two years ago on violence against Native American women
and men with new figures, data and findings: https://www.nij.gov/topics/tribaljustice/Pages/welcome.aspx.
Bureau of Justice Statistics
The Indian Country Justice Statistics page includes yearly tribal jail reports. You can look
at totals for bookings and reasons people were charged year-over-year across scores of
tribal jails nationwide: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=200000.
Investigations and Prosecutions
Under the 2010 Tribal Law and Order Act, U.S. Attorneys and the FBI are obligated to
report each year on investigation and prosecution data showing how many investigations
were referred for prosecution, and how many cases prosecutors declined and why. This
mandate came after concern arose around the significant percentages at which
prosecutors were declining cases, often citing lack of evidence. These reports are
available online.

