QGIS I - workshop, Nicar 2018, Chicago
Christine Jeavans & John Walton, BBC Data Journalism Team
@chrisjeavans @walt_jw
QGIS is a powerful and complex piece of software but journalists can get
excellent results from a couple of relatively simple functions. It’s useful
for data exploration as well as for producing data maps for publication,
and it’s open source.
These are the full follow-along instructions from the NICAR session with a worked example.
You will find the data and shapefiles ​here​ - download them before starting.
What you are aiming for by the end of this tutorial is a plot of all the licensed tattoo parlours
in Illinois, laid over some demographic data.
It will look something like this:

Opening QGIS
Latest download ​http://www.qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html
Earlier versions, inc the one we are using today ​http://download.osgeo.org/qgis/windows/
And earlier versions for Mac ​http://www.kyngchaos.com/software/archive
There are lots of versions as it is frequently updated. The version we are using here is ​2.14
or ​Essen, ​it's not the newest version but it should be robust.
TIP​ Be aware that QGIS projects are not always backwards-compatible so when you update,
you may have to rebuild old projects.
Finding your way around
Your QGIS should look something like this. It may not be exactly the same, depending on
the edition and whether the panels and toolbars have been moved around but it should have
these functions. The version for Mac looks slightly different.

You need two basic ingredients for most QGIS maps 1) a ​shapefile ​which is the map on which you will display your data.
2​) a ​data file​, usually a CSV, which contains the information you want to display
(There are other options - for example you can bring in a highly detailed aerial photograph)

Adding a shapefile
When people talk about a shapefile, or you go looking for one, you actually need a collection
of files which all correspond to each other. They are often found in zip files.
If you have not already done so, go to the ​folder for this workshop​, find the sub-folder called
Shapefiles ​and download all the files in there. They are Illinois county boundary files.

There are nine files which all start IL for Illinois, BNDY for boundary, County the level of
geography, and Py for polygon - telling you it is an area file rather than a line file (eg roads)
The extensions tell you what type of file they are. They include
●
●
●
●

.shp ​the geometry drawing file. It's a "​vector​" file
.dbf​ a database file with all the text based information such as the name of a
county or the ID code
.shx​ an index file which ties the two together
.prj​ contains the projection information

IMPORTANT​: You need to keep these files in a single folder so QGIS can reference them
and they must all keep the same prefix as each other.

Go back to QGIS and click the button which looks like a V with dots on it - this will ​open a
vector​ ​layer
Browse to the folder we were just looking at and select the shapefile itself
IL_BNDY_County_Py.shp
Hit ​open ​and you should see a map forming and you have a layer in your layers panel
(​You could also ​add a shapefile by ​using the dropdown in the Layer menu, or by dragging
and dropping from the folder​)
Save your project!
TIP​ - QGIS works in projects which are temporary arrangements of the files which you have
told it to look at. This means that if you move or rename a file then it will no longer appear in
your QGIS project. For this reason it is a good idea to keep your files for a map all in one
folder. Your map is not a permanent object until you export it in some form. Beware having
some files on pen drive only!
Finding your way around the shapefile
You should have now have a map of all of the counties in Illinois.
You can easily zoom in, either with the mouse wheel when the touch zoom button is
selected (PC only) or with the other zoom buttons at the top.
Avoid using the trackpad on a Mac as you will skeeter all over the place.

Pan

​to grab and move around

Zoom​

use in normal way or draw rectangle of the view you wish to zoom to

Full extent​

is useful if you get lost in the map. It resets to the original view

Previous & next​

zoom levels step you back/forwards through previous views

Notice as you zoom in and out the lines stay crisp. That's because a vector file is generated
mathematically, rather than being an image. So in theory you could magnify this to any size
and it would stay true.
This also means that you can project the map in different ways - ​more about projections
here​.
To make Illinois look the correct shape, in the main QGIS menu go to ​Project>Project
properties>CRS​ and search for 3528 which should bring up NAD83(NSRS2007)/Illinois
East.​ Apply ​and ​OK.
TIP ​if you have a very detailed shapefile and moving around is slowing you down, toggle off
the render button at the bottom right, perform your move or zoom, then switch it back on. It
means QGIS is not trying to constantly draw.

Identify features

This button
or a point.

is ​identify features​, which reveals the information attached to an area

If you click on one of the counties you will see the ​Identify results panel​ open. ​On some
versions this is a tab, with the Layers panel, on others it is a separate floating panel.

The panel shows the information which the shapefile already holds about this county​: the
county name, and it has a field called CO_FIPS which is an ID number that will be important
later.
Attribute table
We can look at this information another way by viewing the attribute table.
It will show all the data in the shapefile as a table with, in this case, one row per county.

Styling
Final thing before we add some data - you may want to change the background colour.
Double click on the layer name in your Layers panel and it will bring you up a menu.
Select the second item: ​Style

Several ways to change the colour ● Simple: the dropdown next to Color gives you recent and standard colours
● Full: clicking on the colour itself, gives you a full range of options.
● Or click on simple fill and you can also change the colour there

TIP​ When you use QGIS regularly you can set your own colour palettes and save them as
style files which can be shared with colleagues or reused by you. Eg house mapping style,
political parties' colours.
Choose one which you like, hit apply and OK
Save your project

ADDING DATA
There are two main ways of adding data - adding point data and joining area data.
Your data needs to be a ​delimited text file​ - most often this will be a CSV file. You can't
import an excel workbook.
In your data:
● Make sure your first row has column headers
● Keep column headers short - and some versions of QGIS need single words
without spaces (use underscore)
● Do not have notes in columns, it should just be the data
● Try to make sure that your data is as clean and consistent as possible,
sometimes text in a numbers column can mean QGIS thinks the whole column is
text.
● Keep symbols out of the data - eg don't have 100% in a cell, just use 100

Adding area data via a join
Now we will look at the first key way of entering data - joining it to your map.
We do this by using a common ID shared by the shapefile and the data, and we will display
the results by county. Often called a heatmap but it's properly called a ​choropleth​.

●
●
●
●
●

Use the ​add delimited text layer ​button
Browse in ​illinois_pop_age_income.csv
It’s a CSV so keep that button checked
Discard 0 lines and the first record has field names
There is nothing inherent in the file which tells you how to map it straight away so
choose ​No geometry

You get a preview of the data - it shows various demographic data ​per county

●

●
●

First column is the county code - that’s what we are going to be using to join the data
to the shapefile. It is sometimes also called a FIPS code (​Federal Information
Processing Standard) ​and can appear with a state code at the start eg 17001 but in
this case it is purely the county code.
County name
Other data columns - total population, male and female population, median age etc

Hit OK
Joining data
We’ve now imported the data and you will see it in the layers panel.
But nothing will show up on the map until we integrate the data with the shape file. We do
that with a join.
●
●
●
●
●

In your layers panel, highlight your ​shapefile ​(IL_BNDY_County_py)
Double click to open the Layer properties
Go to ​joins
Click the green plus at the bottom
Join layer - ​illinois_pop_age_income

●
●
●

Join field​ - this is where you have to tell it which column to use in the ​data​ - the
County code ​column.
Target field​ - this is the corresponding column in the shapefile. It's called ​CO_FIPS
OK

Now hit apply and OK.
Nothing has changed.... or rather it ​looks ​as though nothing has changed but if you use the
identify features ​button again, this time you will see that it gives you some extra fields in
your results panel which come from the data so we know the join has worked.

Styling the area data
This is where you will tell the shape file how to display the data it now contains
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

With your shapefile still highlighted in your layers panel, double click and open Layer
properties > Style
Pick the third dropdown option: ​Graduated

Column​ - it offers you the columns which it thinks are numbers. NB if you hadn't
have done the join, it would not see the options starting illinois_pop in there as your
shapefile wouldn't know about them.
You can choose whichever column you like, the eg we are using here is the female
median age:​ ​illinois_pop_age_income_​Female - Median age (years)
Colour ramp​ keep as blue for now but there are lots of options in there
Mode​: This is where you decide on a way of splitting it up - see below for more info
on these options. It defaults to ​Equal Interval. ​And near that you can set the number
of classes.
Hit Classify, Apply, OK

Now your map should colour up and look something like this, depending on what options you
chose.

TIP​ It sometimes can be hard to find data with geographic codes already attached. Often it
will have county name but not the code. You may have to do some wrangling to get your
data in a format which can join to your shapefile. It is sometimes possible to join on name
but really not recommended as punctuation and abbreviation etc can cause problems. Eg
"City of London" is the same as "London, City of" but QGIS won't spot that.

Changing the break points
Experiment with the other breaks by opening up the Layer properties menu again and
choosing one of the other options. They are all algorithms
● Pretty Breaks​ - Creates recognisable class boundaries in whole numbers - see what
happens when you use it for this dataset
● Equal Interval​ - creates classes which have the same range as each other. So in
this case, the maximum average age in any county is 49.1 and the lowest is 28.3. If

●

●
●

you have 5 classes then they will each have a range of one fifth of the difference =
4.16 years. Doesn’t make much sense for this data but can be useful in other cases.
Quantile​ - This method will put an equal number of counties into each class. There
are 102 counties so if you have five classes you will find about 20 counties in each
class. You could try it with 10 classes to add greater detail
Natural Breaks (Jenks)​ - This tries to group data in clusters with the biggest
variance between the classes
Standard Deviation​ - This method will calculate the mean of the data, and create
classes based on standard deviation from the mean.

You can also edit the breaks yourself and make the classes bigger or smaller. You can edit
the key separately to make it more human-readable, like this:

We can edit these colours too by double clicking on the colour in the layers panel or in the
Layers properties>Style menu.
TIP ​as with the project itself, the join is temporary. If you delete the data layer, the join will
disappear. You can save the map as a new shapefile (using Save As) but be aware that your
column headers may change.
Adding point data
A second common form of data for mapping is point data using Lat Long.
Import the data in the same way:
● Add delimited text layer - and bring in ​tattoo_parlours_customers.csv ​- which is all
the registered “Body Art Establishments” in Illinois.
● Keep all the options as default apart from this time we DO have ​Geometry definition
- because this data has something in it which means it could be plotted on a map: Lat
Long. Therefore ​Point coordinates ​is appropriate in this case.
● If necessary, use the dropdowns next to X field and Y field to tell it ​X field is
Longitude and the Y field is Latitude​. - they may already be filled in correctly but
this won’t always happen.

MEGA TIP!​ - ​X is LONGITUDE and Y is LATITUDE!
If you find all your points all bunched up in one spot or you map looks otherwise wrong,
check that you have the X&Y fields pointing to the right columns

●

Click OK

In the new window QGIS wants to know the ​CRS
This is the Co-ordinate Reference System and it tells QGIS how to plot the points
Choose ​WGS 84
If you don't see it then search ​4326

And now you SHOULD have a whole lot of points on your map. Quite likely in garish colours
but as with the shapefile that is easy to fix using style.

You can use the ​identify features​ button to click on your circles - make sure you have the
data layer highlighted in your layers panel.
Right click and select Open Attribute Table to see the data as a table.

You will see the name of the tattoo parlours, a unique ID, their registration status and over
on the right is an column called customers which is an ​invented​ ​customer base​ for the
purposes of this tutorial only!

Categorising
One way of looking at point data is by using categories, and the Registration column is a
good candidate for this because there are only three possible options - active, applied and
paid or applied and not yet paid
Go back to styling and this time instead of ​Single symbol​ choose ​Categorized

Now go to the Column dropdown and you will see it offers you all the possible columns
which we just looked at in the attribute table
● Choose registration
● Hit Classify and you should get four symbols with different colours and values
● Uncheck or delete the bottom one, that's no data.

Experiment with turning the categories on and off in the layers panel
Change colour
Just like with the map, the colours of these points are easy to change
● Either double click on the layer name to bring up the style panel again, then
change the colours in a similar way to the shapefile, by clicking on the symbol
and choosing a colour there. Note that there are preset colour ramps which you
could choose to use.
● Or you can double click on the symbol directly in your layers panel. This brings
you straight to colour editing that symbol.
● You can copy and paste a colour

Scaling the points
Another useful way of visualising point data is to scale the points according to a column in
the data. Let’s scale our tattoo parlours by how many (invented!) customers they have.

● In Style, Single Symbol, click the
button next to the size
● Select ​Size Assistant
● This brings up a second dialogue box with a dropdown to choose which column you
want to use to size the symbols

●
●
●
●

●

In Field choose ​customers
And for scale method choose ​surface​, other options are radius or ​Flannery
Size from - experiment here. 1.0000 may be too small
Back in the main style menu it's also a good idea to make the symbols slightly
transparent so that they don't blot each other out. You can do that on the
transparency slider scale, go for about 20%.
Apply and OK

Now you should have a range of dot sizes

Again zoom in and out to see how they change
Use ​identify features​ to look at some you are interested in
Note that you can end up with several points highlighted at once when you use identify
features. The expanders in the features panel allow you to look at each one.
TIP​ in some other versions of QGIS the option to scale by the value of a field is in an
advanced setting at the bottom of the style window
You should now have something which looks closer to a finished map:

Labels
To label your county map, either bring up the Layer properties menu again or use the ​abc
button on a yellow background

●
●
●
●

Choose Show labels for this layer
Label with - and choose what you want to show eg: Name, Values
You can change the font, size, colour - again you can match this to house style
Buffer tab can be useful to make the text stand out from the background

If you have chosen county names, you will see that they don't all show up on the map,
because they won’t all fit. There are ways to manually change the placing - ​more details
here
Saving as image and exporting
Simplest way of getting a map out is ​Project>Save As Image​ which saves the main window
as a png. Quick and easy but lacks the legend and is quite small.
Better option: ​Project>New Print Composer
It prompts you for a title and brings you to this window

●
●
●

Click add map and then draw a rectangle with the cursor on the blank page.
Map will appear
Click on Add legend and Add scale and drop them where you want them

Finally you may want to add a title
●
●
●

Still in the print composer - use the ​Add label button​ or from layout menu
Draw a fairly big box and it will put the word “QGIS” in tiny font on your page
Go to​ Item Properties​ and edit the text, set the font and colour

To export your map
●
●
●

Composer>export as image​ to save as PNG
Or ​export as SVG​ to save as vector graphic for Adobe Illustrator or similar
Or ​export as pdf

You're done!
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Useful data source links
Illinois data portal
Illinois ​tattoo parlour registration data
FIPS codes
US Census fact finder
Census ​Cartographic boundary shapefiles
Census ​Maps and data main page
Natural Earth​ - for lots of useful country files

