Finding People with Data
Michael J. Berens – Chicago Tribune
NICAR 2018

Inevitably, no matter the story, an editor will ask: Who is your signature victim?
Memorable stories often have that one perfect profile, that one perfect case that reflects every thematic
finding. There are many ways to find victims, from sources and advocates to police records and court
cases. But these methods often rely on chance or a dose of luck.
Data can be used as a compass to find story candidates – both people and cases. These basic strategies
work with databases acquired or created. Let’s examine two real-world pursuits.
Case example #1: Hundreds of low-income victims died after a state program prescribed a pain
medication, methadone, which carried undisclosed and deadly risks as sales soared. How do you zero in
on a victim?
Track extremes (high to low)
Prepare the data foundation. Let’s first track methadone sales through a national database via the Drug
and Enforcement Agency’s ARCOS system: www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/arcos/
Strategy: From a narrative viewpoint, your ideal story subject received methadone during one of the
years that sales spiked – as states steered more low-income patients to a low-cost pain drug.
Quantify the data
Use death certificate data to track victims of methadone overdoses. Also sort and map deaths by city or
zip code. Match locations to census data to determine high and low-income areas.
Strategy: Identify areas with highest clusters of deaths, which sharpen the reporting.
Segregate the data
Not all methadone deaths are equal. Sort the variables. How many victims had other prescription drugs
in their body – like benzodiazepines which can have deadly interactions? Were illegal drugs present?
Were there compounding medical issues like heart disease or cancer?
Strategy: Create lists of victims based on story themes. For instance, victims who died of methadone
only – no other drugs present.
Grade the data
For each victim list, grade the cases that appear to be your best story prospects. In Excel, for instance, I
create a column and rank each case on a scale of 1 to 10. I sometimes use color coding. This is very
subjective of course. Zero in on an ideal case: Perhaps a middle-age person from a low-income area who
died from methadone overdose during the years when sales soared, and there were no other medical
factors or illegal drugs present.

Gumshoe reporting
Yes, it’s time to step away from the computer. Cold call, knock on doors, do whatever you have to do to
find families and verify the data and gained the narrative texture that will complete your profile. Hint:
IRE has a variety of applicable tip sheets: IRE Resource Director Lauren Grandestaff recommends this
free tool: https://www.familytreenow.com/
Outcome
The data helped point to Angeline Burrell, a young woman and 911 sheriff’s department dispatcher, who
developed unexplained and debilitating post-operative pain, lost her job and went on Medicaid; state
officials mandated that she receive methadone to fight the pain. She died within days. Link to series:
http://www.pulitzer.org/winners/michael-j-berens-and-ken-armstrong

Case example #2: Track the trail of death and injury inside state-licensed group homes for adults with
disabilities.
Use the same strategies as above. The difference is that instead of acquiring databases, this story hinged
on a self-created database.
Track the Extremes (Best to worst)
Build the foundation. File a FOIA for state investigative reports of group homes. Place information in a
spreadsheet; segregate every variable. The more columns in the spreadsheet, the more textured the
story.
Strategy: Determine which group home provider/company has the most deaths and injuries.
Quantify and Segregate the Data
No piece of information is too small. Every variable gets its own column. How many choked to death on
food? How many were left alone without supervision? How many cases resulted in criminal charges?
Layer your spreadsheet with information from other sources like court and law enforcement records.
More variables equal bigger dividends.
Grade the Data
Rank cases by desired story elements. For instance, maybe you want to profile a victim who died in the
care of a provider with the most violations. Cases will get higher grades, perhaps, if there are police or
court records, which enhances narrative detail.
Outcome
Data pointed to the state’s largest provider where Thomas Powers was found dead next to a soiled
mattress on the floor of a storage room in a home condemned by the county. Link to series:
http://www.pulitzer.org/finalists/michael-j-berens-and-patricia-callahan

