#NICAR18

Wielding data to investigate police misconduct
3:30-4:30 pm Thursday March 8th
This tipsheet: ​https://tinyurl.com/nicar18police

Panelists:
MaryJo Webster, data editor, Minneapolis Star Tribune, @StarTribune,
maryjo.webster@startribune.com
Gina Kaufman, investigative reporter, Detroit Free Press, ​gkaufman@freepress.com​,
@ReporterGina
Andrew Fan, data team lead, Invisible Institute, ​andrew@invisibleinstitute.com
Philip Stinson, professor of criminal justice, Bowling Green State University
Phone: 419-372-0373
Email: ​stinspm@bgsu.edu
Twitter: @philstinson

Q&A:
Q: What data might you be able to find at the ​state ​level?
-- If your state has a statewide licensing authority/board, that agency should have data on
licensed officers. Try to get full name, date of birth, any other identifying information they will
provide, employment history (if possible), date license was issued, type of license (full-time,
part-time?), license expiration date. Also find out how the licensing process works. In
Minnesota, an officer is required to have a valid license in order to be employed. If they lose
their job, the license becomes “inactive” but can be reactivated if they get a job before the
license expires. The licenses are valid for three years, then they have to apply again.
--State licensing agencies may maintain employment history reports, investigative reports when
officers are involved in high-profile cases or there is a complaint, background information on
officers applying to be re-licensed after a license lapsed.
--The licensing board should also have data on officers they have disciplined -- revoked license,
put on suspension, or other types of discipline.
--Board meeting minutes sometimes contain information.
--If you have full names and dates of birth from the licensing agency, you could match this to
state court records to find criminal convictions. To match thousands of names, you’d want to get
bulk data from the court system that you can import to a database manager software. For
Shielded by the Badge, we paid to use ​Dedupe.io​, an online tool designed to do this kind of
messy matching.

Q: What data might you be able to find from your ​local ​jurisdictions?
-- Your local police department may have an oversight board or office that processes citizen
complaints. Look for records and data those boards collect and generate.
--Does the department maintain (and make public) data on disciplinary actions against officers?
--If your state doesn’t have a statewide licensing system, look for a way to get employment data
from local police department(s) if you want to try to use criminal conviction data to find cops with
off-duty crimes. Try to get names, date of birth, dates of employment, job titles, and anything
else that is deemed public.
--Was/is the police department you cover under DOJ oversight? If so, they may have mandates
for how they maintain records or even what issues they are required to track and report to the
federal monitor (i.e. police pursuits, treatment of inmates, use of force complaints,
police-involved shootings)
Q: What tricks could you recommend to others for finding other unexpected, but useful,
data sources?
--Read police department policies. They often detail how the agency keeps records.
--Look for records that aren’t directly about misconduct (and that a department might be more
willing to provide). Use of force reports, unit histories, and even awards data can help point to
systemic issues or problem officers.
-- Read meeting minutes of local oversight boards or your state’s licensing agency.
-- Read police union publications (newsletters, member updates). The unions often play a role in
crafting policies pertaining to misconduct and oversight. They often make an effort to detail
those systems to their members.

Q: Knowing your public records laws will be key to figuring out what you have access to
and what you don’t. What tips do you have for not only figuring out your local law, but
also putting up a fight when necessary?
-- Read your state’s open records laws and become an expert. Use the law to make your case
when fighting for records.
--Don’t settle for merely a “no you can’t have this” kind of answer. Make sure they legitimately
aren’t allowed to make it public.
-- Statewide journalism associations often have lawyers and experts in FOIA to help answer
questions or provide guidance.
--Finding allies in other fields who have similar data needs. Civil rights and defense lawyers may
be interested in getting access to certain types of misconduct records and academics
sometimes make similar FOIA requests for police misconduct files.

Q: If data is not accessible (or not easily accessible), what other options are there?
--Build your own database from media reports, lawsuits and criminal case records.
--Tap into other collections, such as Philip Stinson’s database: ​https://policecrime.bgsu.edu

--Find back-door or proxy datasets that get you a step closer (i.e. pension records might identify
police officer names if you can’t get a list of licensed officers)
--Write a story about the process in your state or local community for disciplining bad cops and
how data isn’t publicly accessible. Talk to lawmakers about changing the law to make it
accessible.

Q: Once you find data on police misconduct -- either on-duty or off-duty -- what advice do
you have for measuring whether the regulatory processes (either at the state or local
level) are failing in their job to weed out bad apples?
--In Minnesota, we discovered that it was key to understand exactly how the state licensing
board operated in order to determine which of the criminal convictions we found were missed by
the licensing board. Some key questions to ask: How do misconduct incidents rise to the
board’s attention? What kinds of misconduct triggers automatic license revocation? What
discretion does the licensing board have to revoke or suspend licenses for other misconduct? At
what point in the criminal justice process does the board step in? (In MN, we discovered that
they waited until person was sentenced, even if that was months after the conviction)
-- Figuring out how the state agency itself handles misconduct when confronted with it may also
be key to understanding whether there are systemic failures. For example, does the agency
have a way for officers to reactivate their license if it lapses? If so, what does the state agency
do to figure out whether an officer has a history of misconduct problems? And has the state
allowed officers with histories of problems to get their police licenses back?

Q: No matter which dataset(s) you are working with, we can say with near certainty that
you will encounter problems with the data (i.e. dirty data) or will have limitations about
what you can say. What are some key things you should watch out for?
--Names, dates of birth and other identifying information might not match from one dataset to
another. A couple of us encountered dates of birth with transposed numbers (i.e. 1917 instead
of 1971 as birth year), and of course name misspellings are quite common in every dataset.
--In Minnesota, we weren’t able to get employment history. We only had the date a license was
issued and (if applicable) the date it expired or was revoked. As a result, we couldn’t say in our
stories that the officers we found with criminal convictions were “employed” at the time of their
conviction. We could only say that they had an “active license.”
--Changes in the underlying data systems. We received complaint data in Chicago that spanned
multiple complaint management systems, requiring extra care in connecting records and making
claims about data that draws from both sources.
--Things that look like identifiers but aren’t. Police star numbers are often unique to officers and
help identify them to people, but in many jurisdictions officers also frequently change stars as
they change roles. Stars may also be passed down from parents to their children, which can
further complicate matching.

Q: We all wrestled with this question and came up with different answers: How much
information do you publish online about the officers?
-- In Chicago, our project releases the names of all officers with complaints lodged against
them. There are several reasons we decided to make names accessible. First, roughly 85% of
active CPD officers have a complaint, many have dozens. While media outlets in Chicago
frequently cover individual officers with problematic records, we wanted to make it possible for
ordinary people to see the official records of the police they encounter in their neighborhoods.
Second, we try to make our raw data publicly available so other organizations and reporters can
work with it.
--In Minnesota, we debated the merits of publishing a searchable database of the more than
500 officers we found with criminal convictions. There were two key things we took into
consideration: the first was that we were essentially creating our own data, by matching police
officers full names (including at least a middle initial) and dates of birth against criminal
conviction data. But we didn’t have the resources to hunt down every match and confirm that it
truly was the same person being matched. The second was that we wanted the focus of our
work to be on the broken “system” and less on the bad apples. So we balanced these factors
against the idea of full transparency with a searchable database. We decided it wasn’t worth it.
The possibility of having a bad match (potentially shaming the wrong person) alone made this a
legal and ethical minefield that we didn’t think was worth stepping into.

About our work:
MaryJo Webster, Star Tribune, ​Shielded by the badge
--This four-part series documented that hundreds of Minnesota law enforcement officers have
been convicted of serious criminal offenses in the past two decades without ever facing
discipline by the state’s police licensing board. The reporting showed that more than 140 of
these officers are still on the job today, including many with convictions for violent crimes, and
that Minnesota has one of nation’s lowest license revocation rates for law enforcement officers.
In addition, Bjorhus and Webster found that many of the convictions involved domestic violence,
in incidents that raised grave questions about officers’ judgment and temperament.
Gina Kaufman, Detroit Free Press, ​How problem cops stay on Michigan's streets
-- The Detroit Free Press investigation found that there is weak oversight of police officers in
Michigan, allowing problem cops to move from job to job, despite alarming conduct, lawsuits
and, sometimes, criminal histories. The newspaper identified about two dozen officer who
landed new jobs despite problems. Reporters found that officers are frequently given breaks
and allowed to resign in lieu of firings, given plea deals in criminal cases and hired by
communities despite background checks that raised red flags. The state’s police licensing
agency can only revoke a license when an officer is convicted of a felony or handful of
misdemeanors. The stories, videos and interactive can be found here: ​Disorderly Conduct

Andrew Fan, Invisible Institute, ​Citizen's Police Data Project
-- The Invisible Institute created and maintains the Citizen’s Police Data Project (CPDP), which
displays 125,000+ allegations of misconduct lodged against Chicago Police officers between
2000 and 2016. Our analysis found that less than 2% of all complaints resulted in discipline and
that there are wide ​disparities​ in how complaints from Black and White complainants are
resolved. The data tool allows people to see trends citywide and also search for specific CPD
officers. We have worked with outlets like the ​New York Times​ and ​FiveThirtyEight​ to publish
stories about our data, in addition to publishing our ​own​ ​reporting​.
Philip Stinson, Bowling Green State University:
--Collection of data on police arrests across U.S. from 2005-present:
https://policecrime.bgsu.edu
--Worked with other news organizations: Wall Street Journal, ​Why Some Problem Cops don’t
lose their badges​, and Washington Post, ​Thousands Dead, few prosecuted

