Wagging the Dog
Using Campaign Finance Data to Cover the Midterm Election
Christopher Schnaars, USA TODAY
cschnaars@usatoday.com, @chrisschnaars
This tipsheet will walk you through how to download and analyze campaign finance data downloaded
from the Federal Election Commission. Specifically, it will show you how to research all contributions
made by a specific donor, how to find reports for a specific PAC and what to look for in those reports. The
tipsheet also provides tips on what to look for and gotchas that can trip you up if you’re not careful.

Why Should You Care?
When I wrote this tipsheet, individuals were limited to giving a candidate’s campaign $5,400 per election
cycle: half for the primary election and half for the general. Despite this modest amount, the Center for
Responsive Politics calculates that the 2016 election cost $6.5 billion, which, when adjusted for inflation,
is slightly less than the $6.3 billion spent in 2012. And these numbers don't include the tens or even
hundreds of millions of dollars in dark money contributions. Most of the contributions we know about
come from an elite group of mega-donors who give millions of dollars to Super PACs, which can accept
unlimited contributions but are not supposed to coordinate with campaigns.
These donors want something in return for their investments. Let’s look at one of them.

Finding Contributions From a Specific Donor
Richard Uihlein is a billionaire shipping and packaging magnate – the CEO of Uline – whose family
founded Schlitz Brewing. He’s a huge supporter of free markets and limited government and gives heavily
to conservative candidates and causes. He's contributed more than $20 million so far during the 2018
election cycle, including $19.5 million to Super PACs. He lives in Illinois, but his company is based in
Wisconsin, where he's spent heavily to support Kevin Nicholson's Senate campaign and had backed
Scott Walker's bid for the White House.
Let’s look at his contributions. Note that if you follow along with this tipsheet, you probably will get
different results because this tipsheet was written in March 2018.
First, go to https://www.fec.gov/ and then click the dropdown arrow for Campaign finance data. Click the
button on the right that says, “Look up contributions from a specific donor.” (see screenshot below)

On the next page, type "Richard Uihlein" (omitting the quotation marks) in the "Contributor Name" search
box and then click the arrow to the right of the box.

You’ll see a list of all the contributions Uihlein has made so far during the 2017-18 election cycle (150 at the
time of this writing).
Note that your search is limited to the 2017-18 election cycle. This is one shortcoming of the FEC search tool:
You can search only one two-year cycle at a time. Most of the time, this is what you want anyway, but if you
want to go back in time to research a donor's contribution history, you'll have to run several searches. On the
plus side, you can search for contributions back to 1979, which predates the first electronically filed reports
by about 20 years.
Here are the results of our search:

Under each contribution there's a hyperlink you can click to see a summary of how much the PAC has raised
and spent. If you click the link for House Freedom Action, for example, you'll see that Uihlein has contributed
$250,000 of the $260,000 this group has taken in since last year. It is not unusual to find Super PACs with just
one wealthy patron. In fact, there's another Super PAC called Solutions for Wisconsin. Uihlein has given them
$3.5 million, and he's the ONLY donor so far.
On the far right of each contribution, you'll see an arrow you can click to see more details about the
contribution. For example, this is what you'll see if you click the arrow button for the $250,000 contribution
to House Freedom Action:

From this details page, you can click the "Open original image" button to open a PDF of the actual report:

Back on your search results page, you'll see an export button in the top-right corner. After you click this,
you'll see a pane with a download button open at the bottom of your screen. Click this button to get a CSV
file of your data.
One note of caution here: You can just open the file directly in Excel, but a CSV file is just a comma-delimited
text file. It does not contain any information about the data type in each column, so Excel must guess, and
sometimes it guesses wrong. You will lose leading zeros in fields that contain only digits but are really text
fields, such as Zip codes, and fields with long ID numbers in them will be displayed in scientific notation. If
you don't care about these fields and just want a quick look at the data, it's fine to just open the file in Excel.
But if you want to preserve everything, save the file first and open the file in Excel using the Import Wizard,
which will let you specify the data type of each column.
You can download a spreadsheet I made to show you how the data looks when it's formatted correctly:
https://s3.amazonaws.com/nicar2018/uihlein.xlsx

Downloading a Report From a Specific PAC
For this exercise, we're going to look at John Bolton Super PAC. Richard Uihlein is just one of several
megadonors who has given to this group.
From the FEC homepage, click the dropdown arrow for Campaign Finance Data and select "Filings and
reports."

On the next screen, click either "All filings" or "PAC and party committee reports." If you're ever doing a
search and you're not sure what to pick, just go with "All filings."

For the committee name, just start to type "Bolton," and you'll get a few choices. Select John Bolton Super
PAC and all reports filed recently by the Super PAC will show up in the right pane.

On the next screen, you'll see four filings. Starting from the bottom, you'll see the PAC's February report,
which, in fact, is financial activity from January, and we're going to take a closer look at that in a minute. Then
there's a document the Super PAC filed with the FEC to let the FEC know they'll file reports monthly in 2018.
Next is the FEC's acknowledgment of that notice. And finally, there's a 48-hour notice of an independent
expenditure. An independent expenditure is just money a PAC spends to advocate for or against something.
It's usually media buys or mailers.

I want to segue briefly on the independent expenditure. If you click the hyperlink that says "48 hour
notification 2018," you get this screen:

You can see that the Super PAC spent $50,000 to either support or oppose Kevin Nicholson, who is running in
the Wisconsin Republican primary in August to try to unseat Sen. Tammy Baldwin. Uihlein backs this guy, and
he's been in the national news lately because his own parents contributed to Baldwin. What's odd about this
page is you can't tell whether the Super PAC supports or opposes Nicholson. To get that information, you
must click the download button and pick .pdf. When you do that, you can see the PAC supports Nicholson.

Back on the search results page, where you can see the February monthly report, if you just want to eyeball
the report, you can click the "February Monthly 2018" hyperlink and drill into the report. But what if you
want to download the data so you can analyze it in Excel or another spreadsheet program? Well, you can do
it, but the intuitive way is not the correct way. Let me show you what I mean.
In the top-right corner of the screen, you'll see an Export button, but that's only going to download the list of
reports you see on this screen. (Go ahead and try it, if you like.) You're probably thinking that if you click the
download button for the report, you could download the data as a CSV. You can, but it's a mess. This is what
the file looks like when you open it in Excel:

The first thing you'll notice is that there are no headers. Why? Well, FEC reports remind me a lot of tax forms
because there are different schedules filed with each report. Schedule A is for receipts. Schedule B covers
disbursements and so on. Each schedule has its own set of headers, and there are more than a dozen
different schedules. That is why you won't find headers here, because they're different for every form and
every schedule.
I developed an Excel template a few years ago that allows you to add headers to this data. If you're
interested in that, you can download the current version (8.2) of the headers here (but spoiler alert: I'm
about to show you why you probably don't need these templates):
https://s3.amazonaws.com/nicar2018/fec_headers_template_v82.xltx

For complete instructions on how to use the template, see pp. 14-19 of my tipsheet from 2016:
https://ire.org/resource-center/tipsheets/4861/download/?fileid=4780

I also have header templates for versions 8.0 and 8.1, though again: you really don't need these templates
unless you just prefer to work with the raw data:
https://s3.amazonaws.com/nicar2018/fec_headers_template_v80.xlt
https://s3.amazonaws.com/nicar2018/fec_headers_template_v81.xlt

When I developed the templates, this was really the only way to look at the data with headers. But the FEC
has greatly improved its website during the past couple years, and there is now a much cleaner way to get
the data. You just need to know where to go to get it.
Go back to the search results screen and click any of the hyperlinks for John Bolton Super PAC in the first
column. It doesn't matter which one you click. This brings up a summary of the PAC's activities for the twoyear election cycle.

If you now click the "Browse Receipts" button, you'll get a list of all itemized receipts. From here, you can
click the "Export" button to download all data from Schedule A. If you go back to the Financial Summary page
with the "Browse Receipts" button and scroll down, you'll also see a "Browse Disbursements" button. If you
click this button, you'll be taken to another screen where you can export all data from Schedule B.
Below is a snippet of what the data look like in Excel. You can download a formatted Excel file, which includes
data for both Schedules A and B:
https://s3.amazonaws.com/nicar2018/john_bolton_super_pac.xlsx

You'll note that the FEC website exports all data for the election cycle. But what if you just want data from a
specific time period? Candidly, I'd just download everything and filter it in Excel, but you can hack the
querystring in the URL to tell the FEC website to give you data for specific dates. (A querystring is the portion
of the URL after the "?" that passes query parameters to the FEC website, which uses those parameters to
query its database and spit out the results you want. If that doesn't make sense do you, don't worry about it.
It's kind of geeky and unnecessary. Just open everything in Excel, sort by the contribution or expenditure date
field and filter out or delete the data you don't want.)
If you use the FEC data that already has the headers, you're limited to data from Schedules A and B. If you
want data from other schedules, such as loans and independent expenditures, you're going to have to either
eyeball the reports online or the PDFs or you're going to have to work with the messy data that doesn't have
headers. In those cases, the header templates referenced above will come in useful for you.

So Now What?
Once you've got the data in Excel with nice, clean headers, what exactly should you look for? Here are a few
ideas to get you started.
•

Follow the money: I'll start with the obvious: How much money did the committee get in
contributions this period? If it's a candidate, look at how contributions compare with those made
earlier in the election cycle. Is the money raised consistent? Is the candidate faring better or worse?
You also can compare a candidate's fundraising with that of other candidates. Don't forget cash on
hand, particularly as the election nears. If a committee or a campaign enters the home stretch with
little or no money, they're in big trouble.

•

Small donors: For candidate committees, pay attention to unitemized contributions. PACs only must
itemize contributions of more than $200. At USA TODAY, we routinely look at the percentage of total
contributions that are not itemized as a crude measure of grassroots support for a candidate. In
other words: how much of a candidate's money comes from small donors?

•

Large donors: Because of contribution limits, there aren't any megadonors to campaigns. But you
can look to see how much money comes from out-of-state donors, businesses and organizations
with special interests. You also can look for Super PACs that are spending heavily on the race and see

who their donors are. Who are the donors, and how many are there? Is it hundreds or thousands of
people or just one or a handful?
•

Loans: Check Schedule D to see if a candidate is borrowing money to run the campaign. Is the
candidate loaning the campaign a ton of his or her own money? In other words: Is the candidate
trying to buy the election without the financial support of voters?

•

Pick up the phone: Call donors and ask why they gave money. I'm the data geek at USA TODAY and
work a lot with our campaign finance reporter, Fredreka Schouten. One piece of advice I've heard
her give other reporters is to never assume someone won't talk to you. Sure, a lot of them won't, but
many are passionate about their reasons for giving and are eager to talk. Uihlein doesn't call her
back, but she's been able to interview the Koch brothers.

•

Expenditures: How is the campaign spending its money? If you look in Schedule B, there is a field
that gives the purpose of the expenditure. A lot of times I'll create an Excel pivot table of these
expenditure purposes and then try to consolidate them into broad categories such as consulting,
payroll, travel and media buys. Because Trump has proven adept at enriching himself, we keep an
eye on how much the campaign spends at Trump properties. We also look at what other candidates
and groups spend money with Trump companies. It's an easy way to curry favor with the
administration.

And now the scary part...
Campaign finance data is messy and awkward. You'll have questions you simply can't answer only by looking
at the data. And there are places that can trip you up and cause you to make mistakes if you are not careful.
As always, if something just doesn't smell right, do your due diligence reporting to check it out. Beyond that
here are a few gotchas to watch out for:
•

Pay attention to Line Numbers: In all versions of Form 3 (which is what you'll want to look at most of
the time), all money is counted on specific line numbers within the report, but the line numbers are
not consistent. House and Senate candidates report their activity on Form F3. Presidential candidates
use Form 3P. All other PACs, including Super PACs, use Form F3X. If you want to look at bundled
contributions from lobbyists, they use Form 3L. So information recorded on Line 14 on one form
might not match what's reported on Line 14 on another form. You can find links to blank forms as
well as instructions for all forms here: https://www.fec.gov/help-candidates-and-committees/forms

•

Not all contributions are contributions: We had to run a correction once because I missed an $11
million contribution from a hedge fund manager named Robert Mercer that was recorded on Line
17. Derek Willis of ProPublica tells me Line 17 is used to record money contributed specifically for
independent expenditures.

•

Refunds: Watch out for refunds. Sometimes these are reported as negative amounts on Schedule A.
Often they're reported as disbursements on Schedule B.

•

Seeing double: If you see multiple contributions to the same PAC from the same person, look
carefully at them to make sure you don't double-count money. There are tons of ways this can
happen. Here are two of the main ones:
o

Someone gives more than $5,400 to a candidate's campaign. Some of the money is reattributed to a spouse rather than refunded.

o

A donor gives money through a third party, such as a joint fundraising committee, which
raises funds for multiple candidates and PACs. So the donor giving the money writes one big
check to the PAC that is raising the money and might (or might not) designate which
candidates get money and how much. (This is called an earmark.) The fundraising committee
turns around and writes one big check to each PAC receiving the money. In the end, the
receiving PAC will report the money twice: once from the big check and once to itemize the
contribution from each donor.

•

Watch out for memo codes: One of the last fields is the Memo Code field. If there is an X in this field,
it means the campaign ignored this row when adding up all the money for that line item. Most of the
time, you don't want to do this. For example, if a bunch of people gave money to a joint fundraiser,
the PAC that receives that money typically just counts the single big check and excludes the itemized
contributions. But you probably want to know where the money ultimately came from, so you'll
want to count those itemizations and exclude the big check.
When I work with this data, I typically add an "Include column." I put Y in the field if I want to use it
in my final analysis and an N if I want to ignore it. In the above example, I'd put an N in the row for
the big check and a Y in the Include column for all the itemized contributions.

•

Election Cycles: Most of the time, when you look at the top-line numbers of a report, numbers for
the election cycle, such as total receipts, cover the entire two-year election cycle. For Super PACs,
the cycle is only one year. So if you want to see how much money a Super PAC has raised during the
2017-18 election cycle, you need to pull total receipts for the cycle from the report that covers Dec.
31, 2017, and the total receipts for the cycle for the most recent report for 2018. Then add them
together.

