How journalists can detect (physical
and electronic) surveillance
Jorge Luis Sierra @latinointx ​– NICAR 2018. Chicago, Il. March 9, 2018.

Journalists who work in authoritarian environments tend to be under ​electronic
surveillance​. Surveillance is being frequently conducted at a mass scale and is intended
to track what journalists in general are doing and what stories they are investigating.
In some cases, surveillance has a specific target — electronic espionage intended to
track the actions of a specific reporter and sources.
The key question is as follows: if a journalist wants to combat electronic surveillance,
how are you supposed to recognize when it’s happening?
Here is how I would advise journalists who think that surveillance is a potential or actual
threat to their privacy, personal safety, data security, and the identities of their sources:

Physical prevention
Stay alert.​ Electronic surveillance isn’t just a way to gather information about a
journalist’s work and sources — it is the preparation phase of a serious physical attack,
if other forms of intimidation fail to stop the journalist’s investigation. It has been true
over decades and we can find evidences about this trend from the cases of ​Don Bolles
in Arizona, June 1976; ​Javier Valdez​, in Sinaloa, May 2017, and ​Daphne Caruaga​ in
Malta, November 2017.
Be aware of physical surveillance.​ If you suspect that you are under electronic
surveillance, monitor your physical surroundings as well.
These are recommendations from the ​Clandestine Reporters Working Project​:
●
●
●
●

Are there unusual or suspicious vehicles parked near your office or home?
Are people walking around your house?
Have you seen the same people more than once?
Are you being followed by a vehicle?

● Pay attention to groups of two or more males.
● If you are in a hotel, don’t answer phone calls and don’t allow visits in your room1.
● Blend in with others. Try to mirror their clothing, behaviour, speed, eye contact
and body language.
Journalists doing high-risk work should always check to make sure they’re not being
followed, especially if they’re about to contact a sensitive source. Our neighbor country,
Mexico, is a particular example of the combination of both physical and electronic
surveillance of journalists.2
Report the surveillance​. In any case, journalists should report the surveillance to
official authorities and seek support from other colleagues in their networks, their media
organization and advocacy groups such as the Committee to Protect Journalists,
Reporters Without Borders, Rory Peck Trust, Freedom House or Article 19.

Online prevention
Protect your devices.​ All your devices — computers, mobile phone, tablets — should
be protected with antivirus software, hard drive ​encryption​ and strong passwords or
passphrases. You should also make sure that every ​app​ and all the software used on
your devices is kept up-to-date. These two steps are going to be your first line of
defense. You can find a more detailed list of information security tools that you can
install on your devices ​here​.
Protect your accounts​: You may need to protect your accounts from penetration
attempts.
● It is very important to have a strong passphrase. You can use the ​Diceware​ to
create a strong passphrase of six words or more. Watch ​this video​ to see how.
● Use the 2-F authentication. It works with a password that you know and an
application that you have. Here is a ​Google tutorial​.
● If you are under severe risk, you may use the ​Google Advance Protection
Program, which is basically the use of a passphrase and two physical security
keys to access a Google account.

Monica Gonzalez, a prominent Chilean investigative reporter and her daughter were victim of a ​virtual
kidnapping​ in Chiapas, Mexico, in July 2016. Virtual kidnappings, involving criminal organizations and
corrupt police officers are common on the Mexican side of the U.S. -- Mexico border.
2
Out of recent 41 murder cases of journalists in Mexico, 11 took place while reporters were on a vehicle,
14 while reporters were entering or exiting their homes. The rest of cases happened after journalists were
previously kidnapped. You can find more information ​here​.
1

Follow good security practices.​ The most common way for private companies,
abusive governments, and criminal groups to conduct electronic surveillance is to infect
devices via spear-​phishing​. These are electronic messages that arrive via email, text or
instant messaging, inviting the target to open a link or file containing surveillance
software. Whatever you do, don’t click on suspicious links or files: analyze every
message you receive, even if you trust the sender. I’ve created a more detailed tutorial
on identifying and avoiding spear-​phishing​ ​here​.
Monitor your data.​ If you suspect that your device is infected, check to see if there was
a sudden increase in data use. When surveillance software is active, it drains your data
plan in order to extract photos, messages, contacts, videos and ​metadata​.
Monitor your battery.​ Poor battery performance is an indicator that there may be an
unwanted program running and draining your device’s energy. Check to see if your
device’s battery is using up more power than usual when connected to the internet.
Monitor your device’s temperature.​ If you are not using your device and it is warmer
than usual, this can be another indicator that a malicious program is running.
Reset your device.​ One preventative action you can take is a hard reset of your
device. If you think your mobile device is infected, back up your data and do a hard
reset to get your phone back to factory settings. If you think you device is infected, you
may contact the ​Citizen Lab​ in Toronto to request a forensic analysis.
Encrypt your communications.​ If you need to make a phone call or send a message
with sensitive information, try to use ​encryption​. ​OpenPGP​ and ​MeetJitsi​ are good
options, while ​Signal​ is the mobile app of preference for many investigative journalists.

Offline prevention
If you are under targeted surveillance, it is probable that somebody is following your
geolocation and listening your communications.
Be aware of metadata retention​. Telecommunications companies are allowed to keep
your metadata and geolocation for years. See the case of ​Malte Splitz​ in 2009 as an
example of the risks posed by metadata retention.
Be aware of surveillance devices​. Journalists under targeted surveillance should be
aware of tools used by nation states, private companies or criminal organizations.

● Stingrays tracking devices​: According to the American Civil Liberties Union, this
devices mimic cell towers to trick cell phones to transmit their locations and
personal identification data. See ​this ACLU map​ about who have those devices
in the US.
● Bugging devices​: They can be vehicle tracking devices, tiny hidden microphones
and covert cameras secretly installed in offices or homes.
Offline encryption​: Combine offline and online methods to encrypt and communicate
sensitive information.
● The Echo Encryption Standard has been developed by the Clandestine
Reporters Working Group to protect communications among reporters in the
cyber espionage era.
● The One Time Pad: this is an old method of encryption, but still is very effective if
you follow strict protocols and use it for operational purposes. Watch ​this video​.

Prevention at the newsroom
Secure collaboration​: if you are collaborating in a sensitive story, you may want to
work in a safe online environment. You can use some of these tools:
Managing sensitive documents.
● Global iHub​: a secure virtual space in which journalists can work together.
● Securereporter.org​: It is a collaborative platform for cross border investigations. It
is used by OCCRP in Eastern Europe and Connectas in Latin America.
● Martus​: It is a collaborative encrypted platform for Independent journalists and
human rights defenders to manage sensitive information.

Jorge Luis Sierra​ is an award-winning Mexican investigative reporter and editor and an
expert in digital security.

