Favorite Tools or Tips?
March 9, 2018
#NICAR18 30 Tools in 60 Minutes Session with @jeremycaplan | Original session handout at bit.ly/wonderto
Feel free to add to the collaborative tool list below
#NICAR18 Contributor Answers Below
JamSnap is an app that let you take a photo and then add points of sound onto
the image. Great little app
DocumentCloud (documentcloud.org): Great way to store, search, annotate and
embed documents.
Apester - for nice-looking quizzes, really easy to use.
Reporters Committee First Aid. The interface looks very early aughts, but don't
let that fool you -- it's a wonderful way to access information about different open
records act laws in different states, and to create project lists of FOIAs.
Otranscribe -- free transcription notepad that has quick keystroke shortcuts for
time stamps, fast forwarding, rewinding, stopping. It also automatically rewinds
three seconds every time you pause the tape.
Odyssey js, by Carto. Not new. But makes nice storymap type projects. The
vertical scroll with the map at the top option is nice. https://cartodb.github.
io/odyssey.js/
Marzipano. Upload multiple related 360-degree images to assemble them into a
virtual tour. Versatile infoboxes. www.marzipano.net. Free.
zapier similar to ifttt but includes Evernote as a "that"
infogram.com
Really easy way to make embeddable interactive charts, including maps.
Using Twitter and plugging in the latitude and longitude to pinpoint a certain area
and find sources. Great for breaking news.

4K Video Downloader - Standalone mac app for downloading YouTube videos gives size options and automatically applies clipboard URLs.
Audiogram is awesome!! I get a lot of good feedback from people on Instagram
how the vizualization of audio looks great! I also used a photo that I created on
photoshop.
https://audiogram.sparemin.com
I love using Audiograms for social media! It visualizes small audio clips and
works great on Instagram and Twitter.
pdfescape.com, smallpdf.com for easy pdf manipulation
500px - also free-ish high quality images
thenounproject.com - free icons in png or svg with transparent backgrounds
Onetab -- clear up tab clutter, save lists of urls, and share them.
f.lux -- dymanically changes the warmth of your screen to decrease eyestrain
and for better sleep
The Great Suspender -- Tabs slowing things down? This Chrome extension
auto-suspends them.
Asana -- it's awesome, similar to Trello but beautiful and such a great team
organizer
Auxy - Make synth-style music easy without much music knowledge.
Sprout Social Landscape: Social media photo resizer. Huge timesaver in sizing
images on the social desk. Free: https://sproutsocial.com/landscape
Hyperlapse app for iOS: Awesome for two reasons: It's made by Instagram, and
it has great stabilization software in it. Much better than timelapse app built into
your phone.
Slack / address email overload; single private channel (unlimited?) free outside
org

Transcriptions - Trint - https://trint.com/

COMMENT

session handout at bit.ly/wondertools

