Death Behind Bars: How to investigate your local jail
The Death Behind Bars series published by the Reno Gazette Journal started with an
anonymous tipster who reported that there had been three suicides in the jail in the last
month. This came as a surprise because usually the jail puts out press releases on jail
deaths. Three is also a big number for a jail that typically sees one or two deaths a year.
So we did a simple data request. Here's a framework for how we did this project:
Data: At first, we simply needed to know who had died at the jail. We requested 10
years' worth of data on jail deaths to include: date of death, name, age, race, gender,
cause of death and the booking sheets for each dead inmate. We requested from
the sheriff's office, but also could have gotten this information from the coroner. In a
spreadsheet, we categorized each death into four types: accident, suicide, homicide,
natural.
This is how I structured the spreadsheet.

We calculated totals and rates for each year and each category of death. We then
collected data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics to obtain a national death rate for
comparative purposes.
Other public records:
-Risk management investigation summaries from the sheriff's office
-Criminal investigations (to the extent there was one) from the sheriff's office and
outside investigating police agencies
-Contracts with the jail's medical provider
-Video of the three homicides
-Annual reports to the Bureau of Justice Statistics to look for discrepancies between
what the coroner had and what was reported to the feds
-Policies on use of force, excited delirium, notifying the public via press release, deescalation practices
-Training hours specific to suicide prevention, excited delirium, de-escalation techniques
-Audits of the jail by outside agencies such as the National Commission for Correctional
Health Care Resources Inc.
Telling the human story: Telling the human story behind each of these deaths was
critical to engaging our audience. Many of the families affected by these deaths
belong to vulnerable demographics who lack a voice or access to policy makers. Many
of the inmates who died in the jail were not altogether sympathetic characters. Many
had lengthy criminal records. Many suffered from drug addiction. We interviewed their
family members extensively to provide readers a portrait of the people behind the
numbers.

Presentation: Our investigation brought to light an array of systemic problems at the
jail. Rather than writing one long story, we broke the series up into an overview followed
by deep dives into police restraint homicides, suicides, and deaths in the infirmary. We
created a series of videos, including an overview of the investigation to use for
promotion purposes, important interview highlights with the sheriff and families of the
victims and explainers on excited delirium and the difference between a jail and prison.
We strongly recommend creating a landing page to house each element of the series,
including follow ups. We also created an interactive graphic with the four main stories,
which we embedded in every story on the topic.
Audience engagement: We developed a detailed promotion calendar, which ran over
two weeks. We pushed each element of the series on various social media channels.
We used videos to drive audience to the full investigation and conducted a Facebook
live chat about the series. A couple of police watchdog Facebook groups popped up
centered on our work, which drove additional conversation in the community about the
issues at the jail. We also worked with stakeholders, such as the National Alliance for
Mental Illness, to promote the work and engage those who could be helped by policy
changes. We've provided our work to law enforcement agencies who requested it for
training purposes.
Social media, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram primarily, was key in reaching the
vulnerable populations most harmed by the problems at the jail. For months after we
received phone calls from people with family members suffering in the jail or who had
lost loved ones and needed to know more about what happened to them.
Measuring impact: We aggressively reported this story for months after the initial
series came out, following up on deaths that had not yet been investigated and pushing
policymakers to address the problems. The Washoe County Commission started taking
a more active role in managing the jail. The state health department began significant
outreach and inspected health services there. The sheriff's office began holding
community workshops with NAMI and other vulnerable population advocacy groups.

