Inside the sausage factory: An inside look at
government data making
Tipsheet
●
●
●
●

Event: ​2018 CAR Conference
Speakers: Josh Kalov, Hunter Owens, Rebecca Williams
Date/Time: Friday, March 9 at 11:30 a.m.
Description: What lives behind the records request? This session will bring together three
experts in government data collection and use to discuss how governments collect, use and
distribute data. Each of the three panelists has extensive experience collecting and using data at
either the local, state or federal level. With that, they will discuss why data is collected, how to
track down data, what formats are used and other nuances of the governmental data making
process.

Introductions
●

●

●

Josh Kalov is the founder of Kalov Strategies, LLC where he focuses on data and web
development in the non-profit and government sectors. In previous roles inside county
government as a GIS Technician and as an Open Data Consultant, he has created and managed
internal data and developed data for public release. Outside of work Josh is a frequent user of
government open data with a passion for government transparency. @JoshKalov
Hunter Owens is a Data Scientist for the City of Los Angeles. Prior to joining the City, he oversaw
and built predictive models to inform better policy and operations across dozens of
Governments and NGOs through his work at the Center for Data Science and Public Policy. You
probably know him for strong opinions on ETLs and Tacos. @hunter_owens
Rebecca Williams is an information policy analyst with a background in law and city planning.
She currently works as a Digital Services Expert at the White House Office of Management and
Budget Office of the Chief Information Office focused on IT Modernization, Data Governance,
and Digital Identity Management. Rebecca has also worked on the Bloomberg What Works
Cities initiative, Data.gov, and the Sunlight Foundation on data access issues. @internetrebecca

Panel Discussion
Policy
City: ​CAO Homelessness Strategy / Prop HHH​, - Data Collection isn’t a priority during the Policy Making
Process.
Measure JJJ areas aren’t computed programmatically​, you have to prove it.

County: ​Cook County Open Government Plan Ordinance
Federal: There is increasing interest from Congress on codifying the requirement for data standards. The
Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) is a law that aims to make information
on federal expenditures more easily accessible and transparent​. The new ​USASpending.gov​ went
officially live last week. USASpending.gov displays standardized federal spending data, provides ​custom
open data downloads​, as well as ​an API​. AWS also hosts ​USAspending data snapshots​. Related legislation
on modernizing government services via data standardization currently introduced is the G​eospatial
Data Act, CASES Act, GREAT Act, GOOD Act, ​and ​the Evidence-based Policymaking Act​. In addition to
statutory based data policies, the Office of Management and Budget issues Circulars and Memorandum
related to information management including ​A-130 (​Managing Information as a Strategic Resource)​,
A-16 (Coordination of Geographic Information and Related Spatial Data Activities)​, ​A-119 (​Federal
Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary Consensus Standards and in Conformity
Assessment Activities)​, ​M-13-13 (​Open Data Policy—Managing Information as an Asset)​, M
​ -14-06
(​Guidance for Providing and Using Administrative Data for Statistical Purposes)​.

Enterprise Data Management / Governance
City: ​SB 272 Compliance​ / Application Portfolio (​Bill Text​)
County: ​Cook County Open Government Plan Ordinance​; ​Disparate data codes/policies​; ​Champaign
County GIS Consortium
Federal: The U.S. Federal Government’s central clearinghouse for government data is Data.gov. You can
observe agency participation (including local governments) and growth at ​Data.gov/Metrics​. All federal
datasets are required to have a contact person listed. In addition to increasing the number of easily
discoverable datasets, the Federal Government is working to improve the quality of Federal datasets
and automatically measures ​user analytics​, ​data format types​, and ​broken links​. To address substantive
data quality issues, agencies have also started to conduct data usability testing (​1​,​2​), ​provide tutorials​,
and provide data dictionaries with plain language definitions.

Procurement
City: ​LA BAVN​,
County: ​Cook County Procurement​ ​Bids​: ​Lifecycle of Procurement Open Data
Federal: Data management heavily relies on vendors and you can follow changes to data management
by: reviewing RFPs and protests on ​fpds.gov​ and ​fedbizopps.gov​, reviewing expenditures on
USASpending.gov​, and reviewing IT system performance on ​ITdashboard.gov​. ​M-13-13​ encourages
agencies to secure public domain data rights when procuring government data.

Oversight
City: ​Controller Audit on Street Sweeping
County: ​Cook County Auditor Reports​; ​Kankakee County Auditor
Federal: The Federal Government’s ​Government Accountability Office​ and ​agency Inspectors General
have conducted research around many different data issues, including standards (DATA Act), privacy

(SSN Reduction), and duplication (Geospatial data). These oversight reports can help you better
understand the current challenges and landscape of federal datasets.

Records Requests
City: Everybody has to attempt to route your CPRA/FOIA, but they don’t have a master list for different
types of requests. Try and send to many different departments/agencies/etc.
County: ​Cook County Records Requests​; F​ OIA Log
Federal: ​Yesterday, DOJ announced​ the launch of a new ​open source​ ​FOIA.gov request website​ that
consolidates all the contact information for federal agency FOIA offices, provides historic FOIA statistics
(including turnaround and wait times) as ​bulk open data​, and ​a read/write API​.

AMA

