Saturday March 10, 2018
4.45 pm
Mago Torres and Forest Gregg facilitated a conversation about the the opportunities and challenges
of collaborating between newsrooms. We had a rich mix of folks that included years of experience
organizing both small and massive collaborations; people who are getting new initiatives started;
and the curious few who wanted to see if “collaboration” was something they and their newsroom
wanted.
One participant synthesized the necessary supports for collaborations as a triangle:
1. A clearly defined purpose of the collaboration, that members believed was more valuable
than the hassle and risks of collaborating
2. A significant amount of emotional labor to build and maintain the relations of trust that
underpinned the collaboration
3. A good process, include tools, for the coordination and communication of the activities of
the collaborative
Since we had so many practitioners, there was a lot of questions and sharing about what processes
for coordination and communication.
Some repeated themes:
1. Have a written constitution. To the extent possible, formalize and agree upon how you will
work together before you work together. This is especially important with bylines and other
forms of attribution.
a. Making a website for every collaboration that lists all the contributors of all sorts
can be a good supplement to bylines or explicit mentions in articles
2. The right people need be able to talk to each directly.
3. Shared values. People need to come with some overlap, but also shared values can be built
4. People need to be open to the idea that collaboration may not be succeed or be worthwhile.
This can actually help people be open to trying something new, if people don’t have to
commit to a long-term initiative
5. If people are very defensive and proprietary, that may be overcome by rearticulating the
benefits that individuals people and orgs get from collaboration. If that can’t be articulated,
maybe the time is not right for collaboration. If organizations also have competing interests,
that should be made plain and explicit. “Co-opetition” is possible, but competition needs to
be acknowledged.
Participants
- Mago Torres, JSK Fellow 2018, ​https://twitter.com/magiccia
- Forest Gregg, DataMade, ​https://twitter.com/forestgregg
- Donny Bridges, ​Center for Technology and Civic Life​, ​donny@techandciviclife.org
(​@DonnyBridges​)

-

Please add yourself

