INVESTIGATING RACIAL
INEQUALITY

Investigating Inequities
NICAR 2018
Ron Nixon
The New York Times

Investigating Inequities
• Forget Intent (unless you can prove it)
• Focus on outcome
• Look beyond the obvious
• Challenge myths
• Go beyond the data

Four areas of focus
• Sub Prime Loans
• Payday lenders/check cashing outlets
• Community development block grant
• EB5 visa program

Data and documents
• Home mortgage disclosure act data
• Commerce Department/Secretaries of State
• U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service
• City planning and development offices
• HUD CDBG program
• Lawsuits
• Laws and regulations
• Community reinvestment act
• FOIA/State and Federal

Investigating Racial Inequality

Nikole Hannah-Jones, The New York Times Magazine
@nhannahjones

Higher education Health outcomes
Unemployment Incarceration rates K-12 education
Juvenile justice Housing Health disparities
Foreclosures

Death penalty Toxic waste sites Urban renewal
Public housing Wealth Homeownership
Lending Felon disenfranchisement Income
Life expectancy

Infant mortality

Report about racial inequality
the same way you would any
other story.
That is: Racial disparities come from real
people who make real decisions and take real
actions that harm real people

Know the law
★ Civil Rights Act of 1964
★ Fair Housing Act
★ Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
★ Equal Credit Opportunity Act
★ Housing and Community Development Act
★ Equal Opportunity Employment Act

Know the agencies with civil
rights divisions

Who enforces what? What are
the enforcement mechanisms?

Nikole’s data favs
1. Census
2. Censusscope.org
3.) Brown University US2010 project (John Logan)
4.) U.S. Dept. of Education Office of Civil Rights
5.) HUD
6.) Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
7.) National Institutes of Health
8.) Local school board, housing authorities

Sometimes the simplest
data is the most revealing

Separate but equal?
1) Teacher quality: tenure, experienced, degrees, National Board
certifications
2) Curriculum
3) Funding
4) Extracurricular offerings: sports, yearbook, newspapers clubs
5) Teacher turnover
6) Art, music, field trips, dance

Have you read Brown v
Board? Or the Green case, or
Milliken, or Keyes?

Data is just the beginning
1.) Find it.
2.) Analyze it.
3.) Interrogate.

Truth Squadding

and Latinos, race trumps
income
Typical low-income white family (earning less
than $40,000 a year) lives in neighborhood with
12.9 percent poverty rate.
Typical affluent black family (earning more than
$75,000 a year) lives in neighborhood with 13.9
percent poverty rate.
Typical affluent Latino family lives in a
neighborhood with 13 percent poverty rate.
John Logan, Brown University

It is one of the most common arguments used to
justify federal inaction in pushing communities
that get government housing dollars to become
more racially diverse:
Class, not race, determines where people live, the
argument goes. African Americans and Latinos are
poorer than white Americans, and therefore,
cannot afford to live in whiter, wealthier areas.
ProPublica evaluated race and income data for
Westchester County – the affluent New York City
suburb under a federal desegregation order – to
determine whether income alone accounts for the
high degree of racial segregation experienced by
African Americans there.

“Racism gets reduced to intent,
as if intent is all that matters.”
David J. Leonard, professor of critical culture, gender and race studies, Washington State University

Disparate impact theory

★ Civil rights doctrine that says practices may be illegally discriminatory if they
have an adverse impact on racial/ethnic minorities.
★ Often used to fight practices that appear race neutral but harm members of
protected classes AND the accused cannot justify the practice or show there
were no other less discriminatory actions or policies they could have taken/
adopted instead.
★ Doctrine deals with practices, policies, laws, not motivation, and often
provides the only means of legal recourse in the modern age.
★ Has been used heavily by the Obama Justice Department to pursue
discriminatory lenders.(Used most in employment and fair housing, but also
by the Department of Education)

Racial inequality is not
an accident or simply
a legacy of the past

CooperCenter.org

