After FactFinder
Navigating data.census.gov
Ronald Campbell
NBC Owned Television Stations
ron.campbell@nbcuni.com
NICAR Conference
Chicago
March 9, 2018
Short link: http://bit.ly/2F5avw6
During the 2010 Census, just as the suits in Suitland, Maryland,
began dumping the very first data on the world, they gave us a new
tool: American FactFinder. The immediate reaction was ugly:
FactFinder was not ready for prime time and didn’t work well for
months after its launch.
They learned. With hopes for the 2020 Census distinctly muted, the
Census Bureau is rolling out a new exploration tool two years early.
The new tool, data.census.gov, combines search, mapping and
visualization in one place. It’s in beta now and scheduled to replace
FactFinder in June. My early verdict: Not bad; quirky, but not bad. By
the time the first 2020 Census data arrives in early 2021, it might be
better than FactFinder.
The basic search screen performs simple requests well.

1

After I enter “population chicago”, the site displays a shortened
version of Table P3, Population by race for Chicago, Illinois. It also
offers to let me view the full table and see a menu of 56 tables, web
pages, maps (available in a rough version) and related searches.
Unfortunately, when I chose any of the related searches, the website
did not remember that I had asked for information on Chicago.
Instead it defaulted to the United States as a whole.
For serious work in the new site, use the Advanced Search tool. Just
click in the search bar, and the words “Advanced Search” will appear
underneath. Click on that link, and a detailed search menu will
appear.

2

Using the Advanced Search page, let’s find the latest data on
immigrants in Illinois counties. At this point we discover just how
finicky the new site is. Enter “immigrants” or “foreign-born” in the
search box for “this exact word or phrase” and you will get nothing. (I
tried.) Instead you must resort to fluent census-speak and type
“nativity” in the box labeled “at least one of these words”. Once we’ve
done that, we’ll start filtering results by specifying the geography,
year, survey and topic.
After selecting my search term, it’s time to filter. The order is arbitrary.
I typically start with Geographies; click on State and select “Illinois”;
then click on County, move to the County (State) column and select
“Illinois” again and click on “All Counties in Illinois”.

3

Years: Select a year between 2010 and 2016; for this exercise, pick
2016.
Surveys: You have your choice of the American Community Survey
(ACS) 1-, 3- and 5-year estimates as well as County Business
Patterns (CBP), the Decennial (2010 only, with 2020 coming
eventually) and a couple of other surveys. Since we’re looking at
every county in Illinois, some of which are too small to appear in the
1- or 3-year ACS, we’ll choose “ACS 5-Year Estimates Detailed
Tables”.
Topics: There are nine general topics available, and each of them
has several subtopics. Scroll down to “Populations and People”.
When you click on that, another list opens to the right. You’ll notice
that a few of the items in this list are grayed out; no data is available
on these items for the geography we’ve chosen (Counties). Click on
“Native and Foreign Born”. That opens still another list further to the
right with five topics. We’ll go with the top choice, “Native and Foreign
Born”. Here is what the Search page should look like:

4

Before we go further, let’s see what the search parameters look like.
Click on the blue View/Edit box to see. This is important because it’s
easy – way too easy, actually – to add so many terms that your
search becomes unwieldy.

The word “nativity” is in brackets because it was entered through the
word search. All the other terms are filters. You can remove an item
by clicking on it.
Click on the blue box at lower right, “View All Results”, and you might
– or might not – see what you expect. Here’s what I got on five of six
attempts while drafting this tutorial:

5

Remember, we asked for “Native and foreign born”. It gave us a table
listing sex by age and nativity.
“But wait --”, as the infomercial guy says, “There’s more!” There are
listings for two more tables and, below them, a link reading “View all
tables (39)”. And the table two below “Sex by age by nativity” is the
one we want, “Nativity in the United States”.

Just click on the link, “View Full Table”, and our search is (nearly) at
an end.

6

Now we have a display showing the state and several counties. More
important is this menu to the left side:

This little interface is my favorite part of the new site. While most of
these features are available in FactFinder, you have to know where to
look. In the new site they are obvious.
Table Notes and Methodology is exactly what it sounds like – a
description of the data. Always. Read. The. Footnotes.

7

The Switch Dataset bar should let you quickly compare the
information currently on display – the 2016 5-Year Estimates – with a
dataset from another year. Unfortunately, and unlike a similar feature
in FactFinder, this menu option doesn’t work. At least not yet.
But most of the other menu features work great:
Transpose columns and rows with a click. Download to CSV with
another click. Share a link to your table with another click. Map your
data with another click (available for states and, with some limits,
counties).
As a veteran census geek, I have spent untold hours in FactFinder
working with margins of error, analyzing them and then excising the
MOE columns before passing the results to another reporter or a
graphic artist. In the new site I can view the margin of error with a
click, see if the results hold up, and if I’m satisfied, turn off the MOE’s
with another click and pass along the results to reporters and artists.
This single change makes the new site invaluable for me.
The “Show Filters” button is useful if you decide to widen or narrow
the scope of your search. Suppose, for example, that in addition to
Illinois and all Illinois counties you want to throw in the United States
for comparison. Click on “Show Filters”, then on “Geographies” and
check “United States”. National totals will be added to your table.

8

9

