I went to so many events where heavy drinking was the norm and so were gallows humor jokes
about how we all drink too much. And it makes sense - we have stressful jobs and grabbing a
round or two or three after work is easy.
But I was finally like “what if we actually saw this as a problem instead of a quirky feature of the
journalism community?”
I don’t want to moralize because you are the boss of you and your body. Drinking too much is
not a moral failing. And in many ways, it’s a default.
I am the expert in finding coping mechanisms that are less about “is this good for you?” and
more about “is this less harmful than the thing you were doing before it?”
But here’s my vision and hope for the news nerd community. What if we were all cognizant of
how we’re using substances, how much and why?
What if heavy drinking wasn’t just a cultural default?
I don’t have a grand plan. But I do have a personal story about coming from a family of
alcoholics and realizing I was drinking more than I wanted to be.
For me, it started with a weird mix of stuff. I was working on emotional regulation in therapy,
which meant a lot of mindfulness training.
I’d always thought of myself as a one-drink-to-unwind-after-work kind of girl.
But when I was more mindful - which is a fancy word for “paying attention to what the hell you’re
doing on a daily basis” - I noticed that one drink would turn into 2 or 3 somewhat regularly, or I’d
go out with friends and have a pint of some 10% Belgian ale, which is basically 3 drinks.
A few times a month, I’d have mild hangovers on weekdays. I wasn’t sleeping well, which I
chalked up to my anxiety.
I wrote a story about Spokane’s new medical school and their cadaver lab, where first-year
students dissect bodies to learn anatomy. I saw as they looked at livers, pointing out signs of
cirrhosis and heavy drinking. I thought about the fact that I won’t be in my 20s for much longer.
I know this from being an addiction reporter and covering health. We used to think you’re either
an alcoholic or you’re not. If you are, you need to stop drinking and be sober, and if you’re not,
you’re fine.
Turns out, it’s more complicated than that. And cutting back is a legit goal - the CDC says so!

I asked my doc to refer me to an alcohol counselor. Mostly, I wanted her to tell me I was fine
and could maybe cut back a few drinks a week, but I didn’t have a capital-P problem. She did
not do that. She laid out federal heath recommendations, which say women should try to have
no more than 7 drinks a week, and men no more than 14, and said that might be a target. And I
got mad because that sounded impossible, and then I got scared.
So, I took this on as a reporting project. No judgment (in theory - in practice, there was a lot).
I made a spreadsheet. (PAUSE FOR DRAMATIC EFFECT) I made a formula to calculate
standard drinks so I wasn’t lying to myself. You can totally data geek out on this if you want.
My therapist also encouraged me to notice when I wanted a drink and the thoughts behind it.
When I gave myself permission and when I didn’t.
I wanted drinking less to get easier. It didn’t.
Counting things was a nightmare. I agonized over every beer I wanted. I hated it. I felt so
restricted. And I broke my own rules all the time.
But, I started sleeping better. I spent less money. I could rationally see the benefits, even
though emotionally I missed not having to care.
Eventually, I realized I needed a reset. I took two weeks off totally in early January - no alcohol,
period. I wanted to have the experience of going to a bar with friends who were having beers
and getting water or kombucha and being okay.
I’m still working on it. Prepping for this talk has helped keep me honest. I don’t track things any
more.
Here are a few things that I didn’t know when I started that would be helpful.
Approach this with curiosity, not judgment. Have someone who’s going to keep you honest
without being harsh. Be kind to yourself.
Some things I didn’t know until I started:
-You can get a therapist just to talk about drinking.
-If you have a therapist for other stuff already, it’s okay to bring up your drinking,
-Your doctor can refer you to someone & they will probably be stoked you asked.
-Insurance should cover it.

it’s okay if you want to drink, but maybe know some stuff?
it’s okay if you don’t want to quit
it’s okay if you’re like “this is my one unhealthy habit and I’m good with it” but like, make sure
you’re actually good with it?

