The congressional data you don't use
NICAR 2018

https://tinyurl.com/yd44l3ph
Carrie Levine (slides:
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ESDNQ-EkPur3VOvU3shmehvEWm19JCJlBnAobRPPfOc/mo
bilepresent?slide=id.p)

Lobbying
The Senate (​http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfields​) and the House of
Representatives (​http://disclosures.house.gov/ld/ldsearch.aspx​) both have web sites that track
quarterly lobbying disclosure filings. Each search works slightly differently, but both have more
or less the same information.
The Center for Responsive Politics has the data in an easily accessible, searchable format here:
https://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/
Why? ​Use it find out who is trying to shape policy, how much they’re spending to do it and clues
to how they’re going about it.
Lobbying Contribution Reports
Lobbyists and organizations that lobby have to file disclosure reports twice a year showing
contributions given to honor lawmakers. Those can be found here:
http://disclosures.house.gov/lc/lcsearch.aspx​ and here:
http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=lobbyistselectfields​.
Why? ​Uncover events where members of Congress mingled with lobbyists, find out about ties
between lawmakers and charities and track “soft influence” efforts.
Campaign Finance
Start with the Federal Election Commission’s website at​ ​www.fec.gov
The Center for Responsive Politics website at​ ​www.opensecrets.org​ offers several different
kinds of political data for free.
o
​Summary pages for campaign committees and outside organizations gives an overview of
money raised and how it was spent. CRP also analyzes it to tell you which industries,
companies, zip codes and metro areas gave the most, among other things.

o
​Their pages for nonprofit groups that are active in politics include donor information when
it’s known.
o
​CRP has other sections for lobbying data, personal financial disclosures, spending by
outside groups, and a database to track public officials going through the revolving door.
Why? ​Find the biggest donors and track how members of Congress spend their campaign
money.
Wildcard​ Filings under the Foreign Agents Registration Act are available at ​www.fara.gov​, but
much of the information in the filings isn’t currently searchable or sortable.
From Michael Beckel, Issue One:
Congressional databases regarding privately sponsored travel​:
Members of Congress and congressional staff must file reports with the House and Senate
Ethics Committees that detail travel-related expenses reimbursed by non-government sources.
The Honest Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007 requires that Congress make travel
disclosure reports received during the past six years available to the public on the internet. The
House’s database is here​. And the S
​ enate’s database is here​. It is also helpful to be familiar
with the ethics rules governing the ​House​ and ​Senate​, and to know some of the ​key ethics
cases​ regarding privately sponsored travel.
Why?​ With this data you can see which members of Congress are taking the most privately
sponsored trips, as well as which special interest groups are paying for travel — and potentially
using those trips to curry favor with lawmakers. Moreover, sometimes these documents include
the full agendas of secretive conferences for well-heeled donors, as well as lists of attendees, or
other rich details for investigative reporters.
How FEC filings help illuminate the NRCC and DCCC’s secretive “party dues” system:
While the phrase “party dues” seems innocuous, the current system of how the National
Republican Congressional Committee and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
each assess “dues” from lawmakers is anything but. If you want to serve on an influential
committee in the U.S. House of Representatives, your party expects you to raise significant
sums of money for its coffers. Want to chair an influential committee? Your party expects you to
raise even more. House Republicans and House Democrats in these coveted spots are each
generally expected to raise six- or seven-figure sums for the NRCC or DCCC, respectively.
While it’s impossible to know how much money a member of Congress is raising directly for the
parties based on public filings alone, campaign finance filings submitted to the Federal Election
Commission do show how much "excess" campaign funds a lawmaker is transferring back to
the party. These expenditures can be searched ​on the FEC’s website here​ or via ​ProPublica’s
Itemizer here​. For more background, check out ​Issue One’s “The Price of Power” report​.

Why? ​One way that members of Congress show party leaders they are a good "team players" is
by how much money they raise for the party. If a lawmaker is transferring large sums of
campaign cash back to the party, they may be signaling leadership aspirations. The portion of
campaign cash a lawmaker transfers to the NRCC or DCCC may also raise questions about
how much time a politician is spending fundraising.
Wildcard​: ​Information that should be accessible as data but currently isn’t:
● Senate e-filing: Current paper filing system wastes $900,000 a year and delays disclosure to
the public. ​Issue One fact sheet​ about the bipartisan bill — sponsored by more than half of
all senators — that would fix this.
● Unique IDs for federal lobbyists could and should exist for federal filings
● Unique IDs for campaign donors could and should exist for federal campaign finance filings
● Federal Communications Commission (FCC) public files for political ads are not easily
searchable, sortable or downloadable data; ​and they should be
● Members' Representational Allowance (MRA) data are not easily accessible,
searchable, sortable or downloadable; and they should be
Daniel Schuman
Congressional Research Service Reports
The Library of Congress’s Congressional Research Service authors and updates thousands of
reports each year that explain important issues before Congress. But until recently, all the
current reports were not available on one central website — they’re now all at
EveryCRSReport.com.
Not only are all the reports published there, but you can (1) see the changes made to update
each report through version tracking and information about the percent of the report changed;
(2) read new reports as they become available on an almost daily basis; (3) access the
underlying metadata, which gives you the the subject matter, issue, title, and more, also broken
out by topics; (4) download all or a subset of the reports; (5) hotlink to the relevant subsection of
a report; (6) read it on any mobile device you may wish (including as an ePub).
Format​? Structured metadata (json); predictable URLs, unstructured text
Why? ​CRS reports are one of the primary documents relied on by Congress to understand
topics before Congress, and providing information about the report (or understanding how it has
changed) can greatly inform reporting on Congress.
Roll Call Votes comparison
Legislink allow you to compare every Roll Call vote from 1990 (Senate) and 2003 (House) to
present and sort the data— visit ​http://legislink.org/us#CompareRollCalls​.

Format​? CSV and XML
Why? ​It’s often important to be able to see who changed their votes, sortable by state, party,
and outcome of the vote.
Every Law from 1789 to present
Legislink publishes a permanent URL to every public law from 1789 to present, using all the
major citation methods — visit ​http://legislink.org/us​.
Format​? Metadata is structured; underlying content varies, but largely unstructured data
Why? ​Sometimes you need to read the original law. Not all of the US Code is the law.
Congressional Data Census
The Congressional Data Coalition has built a crowd-sourced census of structured
Congressional data, available at ​http://congressionaldata.org/​ > Build Stuff > Legislative data
sources.
Why​? Sometimes you don’t know what you’re looking for.
Wildcard
●
●

●
●
●

House of Representatives online (downloadable) phone directory:
https://directory.house.gov/#/​ (structured data, downloadable as CSV)
House of Representatives Statement of disbursements:
https://www.house.gov/the-house-explained/open-government/statement-of-disburseme
nts​ (downloadable from the House as CSV, Senate as PDF)
GovTrack meetings calendar: ​https://www.govtrack.us/congress/committees/calendar
(structured data: XML)
Jobs in the House: WhipWatch app:
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/whip-watch/id995281189?mt=8
List of IG reports in one central location: ​https://oversight.gov/​ (unclear about underlying
structure)

