Finding the story: Election
administration
NICAR 2018

https://tinyurl.com/ybmkbnxw
Derek Willis, ProPublica
@derekwillis

Getting Started
Let’s visit the ​Election Assistance Commission​, then to its section on ​Datasets, Codebooks &
Survey Instruments​. This will be our jumping-off point.

The Rules of the Road
Let’s take a look first at the ​Statutory Overview Survey Instrument​. How does your state define
electoral terms like “active voter” or “under votes” and have those definitions changed since
2014? Each state’s responses are a PDF file and have the name and contact information of the
individual who filled it out. Here’s ​Illinois​.

EAVS
Let’s take a look at the Election Administration & Voting Survey ​instrument​. This is a voluntary
survey, and not every jurisdiction that conducts elections fills it out or completes every section. It
has sections on the methods and outcomes of the voter registration process, voting equipment
used, volunteers who work the polls and modes of voting. Almost any question about how
elections are conducted is addressed by this survey. The ​codebook​ provides the text of the
questions, the possible answers and some descriptive statistics about the results. EAVS has
been around since 2004, but the more recent versions have data from more jurisdictions.

The Data
The data is available as Excel, CSV, Stata or SPSS files, and they are zipped. CSV version is
flattened out into a single file, while Excel has worksheets for each section (and headers). Let’s
grab the Excel version and look at Section A, which is on voter registration, using the codebook
as our guide. The first thing you’ll notice is that “jurisdiction” can mean different things

depending on the state. In most cases it means county, but Alaska reports statewide, while New
England towns and those in Wisconsin are broken out. Let’s filter on Illinois (WTF, Jasper
County?).

Finding Stories
There are a ton of stories to be found in EAVS. Some of them are definitely process stories
about the registration and voting process, but you can find stories about the kinds of people who
volunteer to work the polls (and how hard they are to recruit), about whether your county sees a
lot of military and/or overseas ballots and how many of those get rejected, or even the kinds of
buildings used as voting locations. EAVS data can point to areas in the election process where
your jurisdiction​ seems to do well and areas where it might need to focus some attention. Most
of all, EAVS helps you understand how elections work (or don’t). And it also can lead you to ask
for more detailed data from local and state officials.

Caveats
EAVS data is most useful for looking at individual jurisdictions. You can also do intra-state
analyses (assuming all jurisdictions report what you’re looking at), although if you do them
across years you need to be aware of changes in voting laws and practices in that state. Zero
could mean 0, or sometimes it could mean no data (but it shouldn’t). If you want county-level
data for states where elections are run by local jurisdictions, you’ll need to roll those up. When
in doubt, ask ​Charles Stewart​, a political science professor at MIT, about this data. He knows it
cold.

Prior Art
●
●
●
●

https://www.twincities.com/2017/06/29/what-minnesota-is-not-number-one-in-voting-colo
rado-takes-the-top-spot/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/08/09/the-united-states-is
-getting-better-at-running-elections/
https://cronkitenews.azpbs.org/2016/08/24/reports-to-the-federal-government-about-milit
ary-voting-often-are-flawed/
https://projects.propublica.org/voting/

