NICAR18
Panel: Uncovering environmental hazards faced by urban children
Dylan Purcell, The Philadelphia Inquirer & Daily News
dpurcell@phillynews.com | @dylancpurcell

TOXIC CITY
Among the many health hazards faced by children, especially in urban areas, we focused on
lead paint in old rental homes, lead in the soil in former industrial areas and lead paint,
asbestos, lead tainted water and mold in school buildings.
Lead paint
Our Toxic City project on lead paint published in October 2016.
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/Philadelphia_ignores_thousands_of_kids_poisoned_by_lead_
paint.html
Begin by learning about the harms of lead and where can be found in the home.
https://www.epa.gov/lead/learn-about-lead
http://www.phila.gov/health/pdfs/PatientHandout7_31_13.pdf
Any home built before 1978 is a candidate for lead paint both inside and outside. Flaking paint
on a porch can be just as dangerous to a child. Test areas where children have access and
spend their time. Testing kits can be bought at a hardware store but aren’t as reliable as
sending the paint chips to a certified lab. Some children eat paint chips because lead paint
tastes sweet. Look for flaking and paint dust and test areas low to the ground.
The worst neighborhoods in Philadelphia for lead poisoning were also among the poorest.
Ask your city if they routinely test rental homes for lead. What are the regulations for
homeowners and renters to make sure the house is lead safe or lead free?
What does your state or city do when a child’s "blood lead level" reaches five micrograms per
deciliter? What about at 10 BLL? Increasingly, blood lead scores at 5 are considered an action
level but Philadelphia sets their standard for action at 10.
Housing inspection data may point to homes with lead. That didn’t work in Philadelphia because
the city agency overseeing inspections doesn’t focus on lead paint routinely.
Are there court records? Philadelphia established a special Lead Court to force landlords and
homeowners to clean up their homes when a child tests at 10+ BLL and the home isn’t being
made lead safe.

The local health department most likely knows the names of each poisoned child. We were able
to get blood results released to us when parents signed a waiver that was approved by the
health department. It was a difficult negotiation but worth it.
Lead in the soil
Our investigation into lead contaminated soil ran in June of last year.
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/special_packages/toxic-city/major-parts/philadelphia-lead-soilfishtown-construction-dust.html
Philadelphia was once home to more lead smelter factories than any other city. We found that a
cluster of these smelters once existed in a string of blue collar neighborhoods called the river
wards.
Lead in the soil is measured in parts-per-million (ppm). Parents are advised to keep children
from playing in soil above 400 ppm. We found scores 25 times as high.
Finding potential sites for contaminated soil can be difficult. The EPA has several lists including
one called Eckel, which uncovered more than 400 previously unrecognized smelter sites. But
some sites on that list were later found not to be smelting lead.
The EPA publishes data on known sites under two programs CERCLIS and SEMS. While
SEMS replaced CERCLIS, the two databases should be compared to help fill in the blanks on a
site’s history.
https://www.epa.gov/superfund/superfund-data-and-reports
In some cases the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) has
information on former smelter sites. And don’t forget your state’s environmental agency. They
likely maintain a different list of toxic sites. In Pennsylvania the department of environmental
protection had sites that didn’t meet the criteria of a federal superfund but were still potentially
unsafe. The DEP also followed up our investigation with their own testing.
http://files.dep.state.pa.us/RegionalResources/SERO/SEROPortalFiles/Community%20Info/Anz
on/Rls-Map-Former%20Anzon%20Site%20Sampling%2010-25-17.pdf
News clips were another way to find information on plant spills and accidents that left behind
toxic dust.
We were fortunate in Philadelphia to have a great map resource. HIstorical maps help identify
the footprint of former factories and homes.
https://www.philageohistory.org/tiles/viewer/

We did our own soil testing. For a small number of samples you may want to pay a licensed
environmental firm to take the tests. We quickly learned that it was cheaper and faster to collect
our own samples and send them to the lab.
Dirt samples were taken from bare patches of soil in places where kids play. Multiple collections
from a single location were not blended together as a composite sample, as you’ll sometimes
see. No soil was collected near drip lines around homes because lead paint can skew the
results. The samples were taken from the top two inches of soil.
We also took dust samples, which required additional training. We measured samples in a 10 by
10 area and sent the results to the lab. The level of unsafe dust is different than soil.
Lead in the schools and other hazards
Our next Toxic City project will publish this year. We are focused on flaking lead paint, lead
water, asbestos and mold in Philadelphia’s public schools.School districts likely keep data that
you can request for these issues.
If a school was built before 1978 it might contain lead paint and asbestos. Under federal AHERA
rules, schools must maintain asbestos management plans and make them available to the
public. It’s also likely that school districts will keep records on flaking paint and other Indoor
Environmental Quality (IEQ) building conditions.
You may also want to request databases of work orders, overall building condition studies,
crawlspace inventories, water testing data, and any asthma numbers. For asthma we also
found city food inspection reports listed rodents and cockroaches, two known asthma triggers.

