I’m entitled to a
spreadsheet, d@$&#t!
Making public records requests for data

Sarah Ryley, The Trace
sarahryley@gmail.com

Make sure your data is not already online.
Treat everything you write as a legal document.
All communications should be clear, concise, professional and
well-formatted. You are writing for: public records officers,
attorneys, appeals officers and judges who may have no data
literacy, as well as the data/ tech folks who will generate your
request.
Immediately follow up all phone calls with an email
summarizing the discussion so you have a record of the
conversation.

A few tips:
Request: Should preempt any common objections because it can be difficult/
impossible to get the agency to acknowledge an amendment or clarification.
Negotiation: Even if you know the agency will never give you data, your good faith
effort to work with the agency strengthens your appeal. Ask for a data dictionary
and record layout so you can make an informed effort to narrow your request.
Agencies often use invalid exemptions and/ or complete falsehoods to deny data
requests. Check the validity of each. In your response, cite statute, case law,
evidence and the text of your original request.
Written determination: Insist on a determination in writing, preferably before the
request is generated, so you don’t have to wrangle over the fields they’ve
wrongfully withheld after you get the data.

Sample Intro:
Under Public Records Law, I am requesting raw data — in a machine-readable database or spreadsheet format
such as Excel, CSV, Access, SQL or XML — pertaining to arrests that have been handled by the Springfield
Police Department (“SPD”) from the earliest date available through the date my data export is generated.
The data should include all fields in SPD’s Arrest Tracking Database that contain non-exempt information,
including but not limited to the following types of information:
-

Arrest Number and any other unique identifiers and/ or primary keys that distinguish between unique
records and link the database tables together
First and Last Name of arrestee
Race and Ethnicity of arrestee
Location information, including but not limited to address, cross street, latitude and longitude, and x/ y
coordinates

I would like to reiterate that I am seeking all fields containing non-exempt information in SPD’s Arrest Tracking
Database. That means fields containing the above information, and fields containing any additional information
not listed, but that would still be disclosable under the law.
If SPD only began tracking certain information in its database in more recent years — as a result of system
upgrades or policy changes, for example — include that information for the years it became available.

Acknowledge online data:
Some of the information I’ve requested is available on the Chicago Data Portal.
However, the attached data dictionary for the Employee Salary Database shows
additional fields that contain non-exempt information are available. My data export
should include those fields as well.

Preempt these common objections:
“We don’t keep that information as data.”
“Our database is only capable of exporting these five fields into a
spreadsheet and nothing more.”
“We would need to write a program to extract the data and that
would cost you $40,000.”
“Your request is overly burdensome. We would need to manually
review 1 million records for redactions and that would take us 30
years.”

Cite evidence data exist and can be exported:
Google the agency’s name + terms like “database” “records management” “data”
“system” “ RMS ” “data dictionary” “record layout”
Agencies are often required to post a list of their databases. Ex: DOJ’s Systems of
Records (link)
RFQs, RFPs, Statements of Work, Contracts
-

Details the “current data environment,” including the server.
Often says the database must support custom queries and “ad hoc” reports.
Often includes “data migration” phase to convert old data to new structure.
Often mentions existing and required documentation.
Some RFQs and RFPs say all responses are subject to FOIA.

Audits, academic research and other reports. If they’ve given data to a researcher
or a consultant, they generally must also give it to you.

Provide examples of documentation:
Record Layout: Describes the structure of the database. Ex: U.S. Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (link)
Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD): Describes the relationships between a
database’s tables and columns. Ex: U.S. Department of Justice (link)
Data Dictionary: Describes the meaning of the fields in each database. Ex:
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics: (link)
User Manuals: Instructions on proper use of the database. Ex: U.S. Attorneys
Office Legal Information Office Network System User’s Manual: (link)
Report Writing Guides: Instructions on the proper entry of information into the
database. Ex: Fredericksburg Police Department (link)

Agency Website:
Shows how the
information is
segregated into fields,
and indicates how the
database might be
organized into tables.
(link)

You: “This CAD report
shows the information
that the Department has
deemed exempt, and
that this information is
already segregated into
its own fields so it can
be easily redacted by
simply deleting the
columns.
You must provide all
remaining fields. The
fact that the information
is requested as data vs.
a document does not
limit its disclosability.”

Overly burdensome:
We are not asking the Department to manually input, alter or review
individual records. Such fields can be redacted in their entirety, so long
as we are notified of each field and the specific justification for the
redaction.
For example, we agree to the redaction of free-text fields that contain a
mix of exempt and non-exempt information, such as the narrative and
comment fields. However, if exempt information can be redacted from a
field en masse — such as the names of juveniles — we ask that you
provide the remaining non-exempt information.
If SPD feels specific fields would make our request unduly burdensome,
we are happy to discuss alternatives that would better facilitate
disclosure.

Data format does not limit disclosability:
The California Public Records Act (“CPRA”) contains no provision that allows
for withholding certain information simply because it is contained in a database
rather than a document. In fact, the California Supreme Court wrote in its
recent ACLU v. Superior Court (2017) decision that information disclosed “en
masse” via a database would be “far less likely to prompt [confidentiality]
concerns” than if disclosed for a single case.
The Court determined in the ACLU case that a public entity “should go beyond
whether a method of removing exempt information is ‘a native function’” to
facilitate CPRA disclosure if “randomizing [exempt information] or deleting
columns from a spreadsheet, for example, would seem to impose little
burden.”

Request a determination prior to exporting
the data:
The “Documentation” portion of this request seeks a complete list of
tables and fields in the database(s). In your determination, please notate,
from that list, each field that has been redacted and the legal justification
for the redaction.
Please send us your determination prior to exporting the data so we can
discuss redactions before the work has been completed.

Records officer:
“We only have
aggregate
statistics.”

You: “Those
aggregate
statistics must
have been
calculated using
raw data.”

Other legal hurdles:
“I’m entitled to this information as data.”
“My request does not constitute the ‘creation of a new record.’”
“You can’t charge me $40,000 to export the data, because the law requires
you to store information in a database capable of exporting that information
without the need for programming.”
“You can’t deny my request in full simply because a few fields I asked for
contain exempt information.”
“I’m entitled to documentation that describe, in plain English, the codes,
fields and tables in the database, and how the tables link together. This
information is not a trade secret, nor would it allow me to hack into your
system.”

Entitled to data:
We are entitled to receive these records in one of the above formats under §
6253.9(a): “If the information requested is in an electronic format the agency shall
make that information available in any electronic format in which it holds the
information or, if requested, in a format used by the agency to create copies for its
own use or for provision to other agencies.”

Not the creation of a new record:
We realize the information is contained in multiple tables. We are not asking SPD
to join tables together for us, or to conduct any type of analysis on the data. We
are merely asking for raw data, as it exists in SPD’s Arrest Tracking System.
We can do the joining on our own, so long as each table contains the unique
identifiers and primary keys necessary to join the tables together, and so long as
we are provided the documentation necessary for an accurate understanding of
the data.

You can’t charge me $40,000 for
programming:
The Florida Sunshine Law explicitly requires public access to records maintained in
databases. Under Section 119.01(2):
b) When designing or acquiring an electronic recordkeeping system, an agency must
consider whether such system is capable of providing data in some common format
such as, but not limited to, the American Standard Code for Information Interchange.
c) An agency may not enter into a contract for the creation or maintenance of a public
records database if that contract impairs the ability of the public to inspect or copy the
public records of the agency, including public records that are online or stored in an
electronic recordkeeping system used by the agency.
d) Subject to the restrictions of copyright and trade secret laws and public records
exemptions, agency use of proprietary software must not diminish the right of the public
to inspect and copy a public record.
The Florida Attorney General clarified in AGO 97-39 that this applies to all systems
implemented after the subsection was enacted on July 1, 1995.

You need to tell me what these codes
mean:
The documentation would also fall under the definition of metadata. The California
Secretary of State defines metadata as “data about data,” or “the additional
descriptive information about digital content that makes records useful,
meaningful, and findable.”
Since the Legislature has not expressly addressed the specific types of
documentation at issue in this request — or more broadly metadata — it must be
produced in any format in which it is kept.
Thus, the League of California Cities, of which Springfield City Attorney Mary Joe
is a committee member, recommends: “Agencies that receive requests for
metadata or requests for records that include metadata should treat the requests
the same way they treat all other requests for electronic information and disclose
nonexempt metadata.”

You’ve got data: Make sure they’ve given you everything. This means all
fields, codes and records. Check the number of unique records (not the
number of rows) against aggregate statistics and online data. It helps to do a
little preliminary analysis to spot other deficiencies and inconsistencies.
If you’re missing anything: Frame your follow-ups as missing records, not
questions. You can’t appeal unanswered questions.
Yes: “The spreadsheet only includes 500 homicides, but you reported 650 to the FBI.”
No: “Why do I have records on 150 fewer homicides than what you reported to the FBI?”
--Yes: “I am missing the definitions for the codes and abbreviations used in the following
columns … I requested ‘all relevant documentation for the databases that describe the layout
of the data tables and fields, and the definitions of the codes and abbreviations.’”
No: “What do the following codes and abbreviations mean?”

The appeal: The appeals process differs by state and the federal government.
You must first “exhaust” any administrative appeals process. Some states
have a binding non-judicial appeal option, such as the Attorney General’s
Office or an ombudsman. But non-binding mediation has also been helpful.
Data requests are complicated. Summarize your request and the timeline of
the communications in plain English, as if writing a story for print. Cite statute,
case law and evidence, then include the relevant communications as an
attachment. Try to keep your cover sheet as brief as possible while still being
thorough and persuasive.
Stick to the agency’s basis for denial. If they haven’t given you all the records,
and have cited no other exemptions (such as “confidentiality” or “creation of a
new record”), you can argue they’ve relinquished their right to do so now. You
are only appealing the outstanding records of the 150 homicides that were
inexplicably withheld.

A few resources for legal references:
-

Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press Guides (link)
Local media organizations
The Attorney General’s Office Guide
Guides for a specific type of agency. Ex: DOJ FOIA Guidelines (link)
American Oversight has FOIAs to various agencies (link)
The FOIA Project (link)
Judicial Watch FOIA archives (link)
Google the name of your state’s open records law + terms like
“metadata” “database” “data dictionary”
NICAR-L

I’M ENTITLED
TO A SPREADSHEET,
DANG IT!
LET’S GO DEEP - HOW TO GET HEALTH CARE AND ED DATA
Annie Waldman, Reporter at ProPublica | @AnnieWaldman | annie.waldman@propublica.org

LINKS
Slides: http://bit.ly/2p35dd4
Tipsheet: http://bit.ly/2FHxlwM

THE FIGHT FOR DATA IS
LONG AND HARD

MAIN REASONS FOR DENIAL/DELAYS
(i.e. exemptions)
●

●
●
●
●

Federal FOIA exemptions:
○ national security
○ internal agency rules
○ data/info exempt under other laws → (b)(3)
○ trade secrets
○ internal agency memos
○ personal privacy → (b)(6)
○ law enforcement
○ banks
○ oil/gas wells
State FOI exemptions: frequently echo federal exemptions, with additions.
Delay tactics, absurd cost estimates, sending incorrect data, “unclear”
request
HIPAA: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
FERPA: Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act

BALANCING DATA NEEDS & PRIVACY

(b)(6)
HIPAA
FERPA

DATA REQUEST SUCCESS

BEFORE YOU REQUEST YOUR DATA
(i.e. do your homework)

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Research before you request.
Be friendly before you file.
Find the internal data wizard.
Ask before you request.
Always request an itemized cost estimate.
Negotiations are crucial.
KNOW THE PRIVACY RESTRICTIONS.
Research AG decisions.

HEALTH DATA

EXEMPTION (b)(6) of FOIA
When HHS created HIPAA, it claimed that most
“medical records” covered by HIPAA were
already covered by Exemption 6 of FOIA, and so
ultimately, HIPAA led to no big changes as to
what is available.
Is this true? Not really.

EXEMPTION (b)(6) of FOIA
The court’s “balancing test”:
● The plaintiffs’ interest in disclosure.
● The public interest in disclosure.
● The degree of invasion of personal privacy.
● The availability of any alternate means of
obtaining the requested information.
HIPAA does not require information officers to consider
any kind of test when deciding whether they will release a
record.

WHAT IS HIPAA?
● HIPAA has major privacy protections for health care
data.
● HIPAA applies to:
○ Health care organizations (providers, health
plans, public health agencies, life insurers,
billing agencies, ambulance services, and
universities).
○ Any organization that electronically
bills/transmits health care data.
○ Hybrid entities (for example: schools, prisons,
detention facilities).
● HIPAA is forever, well almost.

PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFO
When personal information combines with health information, it becomes protected:
● Name
● Address (subdivisions smaller than a state)
● Birth, death, admission and discharge dates.
● Telephone and fax numbers, email addresses
● Social Security numbers
● Medical record numbers
● Health plan numbers
● Account number
● License number
● Vehicle serial number
● Web URL
● IP addresses
● Finger/voice print
● Photographic images
● Any other characteristic that could uniquely identify a person.
HIPAA leaves it up to the health care professional to redact the records to make them releasable.

EVEN WITH HIPAA, YOU CAN GET DATA
● Hospital Directory data.
● Statistical data on hospital billing.
● Medical Examiner data.
● Ambulance or emergency medical services.

● People are entitled to their OWN records.

HIPAA ALLOWS FOR DE-IDENTIFIED DATA
If data has been “de-identified,” HIPAA doesn’t apply, as long as there is “no
reasonable basis to believe that the information can be used to identify an
individual.”
●
●

“Safe Harbor” method
“Expert determination” method

HIPAA ALLOWS FOR DE-IDENTIFIED DATA

● Ask for data without the personally
identifiable data (remove the variables or
redact).
● Ask for dummy IDs.
● Ask for aggregate data.

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH

Source: University of Michigan Health System, http://www.ehcca.com/presentations/HIPAA7/4_04H2.pdf

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH:
LIMITED- or RESTRICTED-USE DATASETS
● Make sure the data exists.
● Ask if the data might be available if you sign a data use
agreement.
● Review any data use agreement with an attorney (or your
newsroom’s counsel).
● Keep track of dates of use and publishing restrictions.
● Keep track of data and agreement updates.

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH:
LIMITED- or RESTRICTED-USE DATASETS

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH:
LIMITED- or RESTRICTED-USE DATASETS

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH:
LIMITED- or RESTRICTED-USE DATASETS
Frequent elements of a data use agreement:
● Statement of intent.
● Justification of access.
● Description of data.
● Payment.
● Uses and disclosures.
● Disposition of data.
● List of all reporters.

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH:
LIMITED- or RESTRICTED-USE DATASETS
LINKING OR RE-IDENTIFYING DATA: Just don’t do it.

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH:
LIMITED- or RESTRICTED-USE DATASETS

WHEN LIMITED DATA SETS ARE NOT ENOUGH:
IDENTIFIABLE DATA

It is EXTREMELY
difficult to get any data
that a government
entity considers
“identifiable.”

WHEN LIMITED DATA SETS ARE NOT ENOUGH

THE IRB

EDUCATION DATA

WHAT IS FERPA?
● This law protects privacy of student educational
records, limiting their disclosure.
● Because nearly every public school, college and
university receives public funds, FERPA applies to
almost every educational institution in the country.
● Protects personally identifiable information.
● FERPA, like HIPAA, may be misused by institutions to
protect institutions from scrutiny.

EVEN WITH FERPA, YOU CAN GET DATA
DIRECTORY DATA:
●

Any information in an education record of a student that would not
“generally be considered harmful or an invasion of privacy if
disclosed.”

●

Typically, it includes: name, address, telephone listing, email, photo,
date/place of birth, participation in activities/sports, dates of
attendance, major field of study, grade level, enrollment status
(part- or full-time), weight and height of athletes, degrees, honors or
awards, most recent ed institution attended.

●

Schools can disclose this information to third parties (us).

EVEN WITH FERPA, YOU CAN GET DATA
● Instructional data.
● Law enforcement/campus security data.
● Health/emergency records.
● School employment data.
● Scholarship and award data.
● Spending/contracting data.

FERPA ALLOWS FOR DE-IDENTIFIED DATA
If the data is aggregated or the personally-identifiable characteristics have been removed, you
may be able get data.

Source: https://fpf.org/wp-content/uploads/FPF-DeID-FINAL-7242015jp.pdf

WHEN DE-IDENTIFIED DATA IS NOT ENOUGH
Similar to health data sets, you may be able to request restricted-use data from a federal, state or local
educational agency. For example, the education department has these data sets available:

Source: https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/licenses.asp

CONTACT
Annie Waldman, Reporter, ProPublica
@AnnieWaldman | annie.waldman@propublica.org
Presentation link:

I’m entitled to a spreadsheet,
dang it!
Steven Rich
@dataeditor
#NICAR18

Mass FOIA projects
- Two main ways:
- Same request to a bunch of the same kinds of
agencies
- Same request to different types of agencies

Law enforcement data
- Not a ton of standardization
- Kept in all kinds of formats
- Stored in databases no one ever uses
- Subject to certain records exemptions
- Is pretty much like every other variety of
government agency

The approach
- Check the internets
- Call the agency and see if they’ll just turn it over
- Familiarize yourself with the state’s laws
- File the request
- Pester like crazy
- ????
- Profit

Understanding what you can get
- Every state has different records exemptions
- Every state has different legal precedent
- That’s cool
- But generally speaking there’s discretion
- Ask for things that are exempt

The part where you request all of the things
- Ask for the same thing from everyone
- Two ways to send
- Mass email (mail merge)
- Tailored requests with specific legalese
- Automate if you can
- Know your deadlines

The part where you fight for the things
- The request is a first step
- Create an alerts system for deadlines
- Pick up the dang phone
- USE A SPREADSHEET (or tracker)
- Be nice and then get mean
- Push for correct format

The part where you don’t get things
- Some battles are worth fighting
- Others are not
- Always. Be. Appealing.
- Prioritize based on your time
- Name and Shame
- Apply pressure

All the data is here; now what?
- Standardize
- Pick up the dang phone
- Get the collection methodology
- Understand that things can change
- Do your best
- Don’t force it

Stuff you should look out for
- 65,536 rows in Excel
- Changing definitions in the data
- Changing fields in the data
- Definitional issues in general
- PDF data
- Missing fields

Aftermath
- Pick your targets
- Don’t focus on outliers
- Put everything in context
- Check legal issues
- Talk to experts
- Make what data you can public

