Demographics: Beyond Census
NICAR 2018 Chicago

D’Vera Cohn
Senior writer/editor, Pew Research Center ​dcohn@pewresearch.org
@allthingscensus

This tipsheet has six sections, one for each source of data. They are:
● The Department of Homeland Security (green card data for states, metros
and counties; international adoptions by state; foreign students by state)
● State Department (refugee arrivals by state, nationality, locality
● Office of Refugee Resettlement (unaccompanied children by state, county)
● Pew Research Center (unauthorized immigrants by state and some large
metros; religious demographics for states and large metros)
● Mexican data census/immigration statistics (general overview)
● National Center for Health Statistics ( births by state)

Department of Homeland Security
The DHS immigration yearbook has annual fiscal-year totals and some other
details for people who obtain ​green cards or status as a Lawful Permanent
Resident (LPR, formerly “legal permanent resident”) for the nation, states and
metros. ​You can find it and other DHS immigration statistics here:
https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics
The latest yearbook is for fiscal 2016, which ended Sept. 30, 2016. (Some
national-level data is available for fiscal 2017, which has not been released in the
past before the entire yearbook is published.)

Recently, DHS has begun publishing more detailed data for states and the top 200
counties in the Immigration Statistics Reading Room on its website:
https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/readingroom
For 2007-2016 you can obtain birth country and major class of admission. This is
more data than we’ve had in the past, and I show an example of it in my slide
(and below). It comes up as a Google doc, and I’m showing the top rows. Los
Angeles is the county with the largest number of green cards, so it pops up first.
The first row tells you that in 2016, a dozen people from Afghanistan who were
living in Los Angeles got green cards based on their status as refugees or people
with asylum.

You can download the entire yearbook, or just pull the tables about LPRs. The
tables are in Excel, and identified only by table number, but the numbers have
been consistent from year to year. Some tables include Puerto Rico in the totals.
There are many cells that don’t have data because the number is small (3 seems
to be the minimum shown), but the tables do tell you when the number is zero.
So you can find out that zero people from Aruba got green cards in the
Washington DC-VA-MD-WVA Core-Based Statistical Area in fiscal 2016, but there
were three from Oman who did.
Here is a list of the 2016 tables (I boldfaced the ones with data below the national
level):
1. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS: FISCAL
YEARS 1820 TO 2016
2. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY REGION
AND SELECTED COUNTRY OF LAST RESIDENCE: FISCAL YEARS 1820 TO 2016
3. 3d PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY
REGION AND COUNTRY OF BIRTH: FISCAL YEARS 2007 TO 2016

4. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY STATE
OR TERRITORY OF RESIDENCE: FISCAL YEARS 2007 TO 2016
5. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY CORE
BASED STATISTICAL AREA (CBSA) OF RESIDENCE: FISCAL YEARS 2007 TO
2016
6. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY TYPE
AND MAJOR CLASS OF ADMISSION: FISCAL YEARS 2007 TO 2016
7. 7dPERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY TYPE
AND DETAILED CLASS OF ADMISSION: FISCAL YEAR 2016
8. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY SEX, AGE,
MARITAL STATUS, AND OCCUPATION: FISCAL YEAR 2016
9. 9dPERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY BROAD
CLASS OF ADMISSION AND SELECTED DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS:
FISCAL YEAR 2016
10.10dPERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY
BROAD CLASS OF ADMISSION AND REGION AND COUNTRY OF BIRTH:
FISCAL YEAR 2016
11. 11dPERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY
BROAD CLASS OF ADMISSION AND REGION AND COUNTRY OF LAST
RESIDENCE: FISCAL YEAR 2016
12.12dIMMIGRANT ORPHANS ADOPTED BY U.S. CITIZENS BY SEX, AGE, AND
REGION AND COUNTRY OF BIRTH: FISCAL YEAR 2016
There also are supplemental tables with even more state or local data:
1. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY STATE
OR TERRITORY OF RESIDENCE AND REGION AND COUNTRY OF BIRTH:
FISCAL YEAR 2016
2. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY
LEADING CORE BASED STATISTICAL AREAS (CBSA) OF RESIDENCE AND
REGION AND COUNTRY OF BIRTH: FISCAL YEAR 2016 [50 CBSA’s, including
one in Puerto Rico]

3. PERSONS OBTAINING LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS BY REGION
OF BIRTH AND CORE BASED STATISTICAL AREA (CBSA) OF RESIDENCE:
FISCAL YEAR 2016 [More than 900 CBSAs]
4. IMMIGRANT ORPHANS ADOPTED BY U.S. CITIZENS BY SEX, AGE, AND
STATE OR TERRITORY OF RESIDENCE: FISCAL YEAR 2016
There are a lot of ins and outs of green card admission categories – family-related,
employment-related etc. There’s a pretty good explanation of the process and
different in the government’s own “annual flow report” of Lawful Permanent
Residents
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Lawful_Permanent_Residen
ts_2016.pdf​)
Late-breaking news: On March 19, 2018, the Migration Policy Institute and
Population Reference Bureau are releasing a much-needed update to their ​2008
“Immigration Data Matters” guide,​ and if the new version is as helpful as the old
one, that’s great news.
Keep in mind that about half of people who receive green cards each year already
are in the U.S. (“adjustments of status”) on temporary visas; you can read more
about that in this blog post
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Lawful_Permanent_Residen
ts_2016.pdf​.
Also, if you look at numbers for past years, they tell you where people with green
cards were living at the time they received a green card (“new LPRs”) but they
may have moved since then, so census figures are still your best bet for profiles of
the total immigrant population.
There are some state-level numbers on ​international adoptions​ in a
supplemental table to the Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, though they are
pretty basic. They don’t include birth country numbers; you can get those for the
entire U.S. from another yearbook table. The big story in international adoptions
is that numbers are down quite a bit, and that there are now more boys than girls
being adopted (mainly because of changes in adoptions from China:

http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/10/17/amid-decline-in-internationa
l-adoptions-to-u-s-boys-outnumber-girls-for-the-first-time/

Foreign student numbers​ have doubled since the recession, according to 2016
data, although there are more recent reports that the growth may have ended or
reversed. You can get localized data, but first you might want to look at Pew
Research Center’s work to get a good overview of trends, terminology and so
forth: Here are links to a fact sheet
http://www.pewglobal.org/fact-sheet/foreign-students-in-the-u-s/​ and blog post:
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/11/20/new-us-foreign-student-enr
ollment-doubled-since-great-recession/
The Department of Homeland Security runs the Student and Exchange Visitor
Program, including the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (F
nonimmigrant visas for foreign students in a fulltime academic program, as well
as their spouses and children; M nonimmigrant visas for students in vocational or
other nonacademic programs, as well as spouses and children). The main website
is: ​https://www.ice.gov/sevis
DHS regularly publishes a report called SEVIS By the Numbers
(​https://www.ice.gov/doclib/sevis/pdf/byTheNumbersJun2017.pdf​), which
includes national trends and some specifics about states and top schools. For
more specific state data, go to the SEVIS interactive map:
https://studyinthestates.dhs.gov/sevis-by-the-numbers
There you can find the total number of students in each state, and some
demographics about them – gender, the type of program they are in, more data
about students in STEM fields (science and math). So (based on a search in early
March 2018) we learn there are 13,062 active international students in Colorado,
about six-in-10 are male, and the largest single type of program is a bachelor’s
degree (about 40% of the total). They are mainly from Asia (10,228), as is true
nationally. You can drill down to the sub-regional level, and find that there are
148 students from Eastern Europe. And you can get demographics of foreign

students by region in Colorado – gender, field of study for all and for STEM
students.
There is additional information to be had, if you file a FOIA request. I cannot say
how long that will take. Pew Research Center did, and we were able to get details
about F-1 students in 2016 – those enrolled in academic programs - that included
counts by specific institution, major field of study, country counts, and more.
Here is what you can ask for (those with asterisk are less reliable or complete)
GENDER
COUNTRY OF CITIZENSHIP
LEVEL OF EDUCATION (vocational schools, language training, etc)
TITLE_OF_MAJOR_1
MAJOR_1_CODE
TITLE_OF_MAJOR_2
MAJOR_2_CODE
SCHOOL_NAME
SCHOOL_CITY
SCHOOL_STATE
SCHOOL_CODE
*STUDENT_FOREIGN_CITY
*STUDENT_FOREIGN_STATE_PROVINCE
STUDENT_FOREIGN_COUNTRY
*ESTIMATED_TOTAL_COST
*SOURCE_OF_SUPPORT_STUDENT
*SOURCE_OF_SUPPORT_SCHOOL
*SOURCE_OF_SUPPORT_ONCAMPEMPLOY

*SOURCE_OF_SUPPORT_OTHER

State Department
The State Department processes ​refugee visas​ and keeps track of where they
settle. So you can get statistics for the country or for each state, by nationality
and specific city destination. You can only get demographics of refugees at the
national level, but there is quite a bit of good information to get.
The formal definition of a refugee is someone who is unable or unwilling to return
to their country of origin because of persecution or a well-founded fear of
persecution. This can be based on race, religion, nationality, membership in a
particular social group or political views. Refugees usually are screened outside
the U.S., then admitted. People who are seeking asylum – who have to meet the
same standards – file their applications after they already are in the U.S.
The main State Department site for refugee information is called WRAPSNet
(Worldwide Refugee Admissions Processing System):
http://www.wrapsnet.org/admissions-and-arrivals/
The site is pretty straightforward and up-to-date so far. It mainly has data going
back to 2002, though there is a good graphic of arrivals by region going back to
1975 and you can download the data behind it. For some data, you will get totals
for cases (which means families) and individuals (everyone). (Most earlier data is
from an archive and is not as detailed:
https://2009-2017.state.gov/j/prm/releases/statistics/index.htm​)
You can get plenty of information by clicking on the charts and reports in the
middle of the page, but if you want more, click on Reports in the upper right
corner of the site and go to Interactive Reporting. One option is to display arrivals
for any destination city and state and any nationality for a calendar year, a fiscal
year or another time period. You also can select all nationalities or all states to
look at or download into formats including XML, CSV, Excel, MHTML, TIFF and
Word.

I picked Illinois, since that’s the site of this conference, then asked to look at all
arrivals by country since the start of the fiscal year on Oct. 1 (click on “view
report” after making your selections; response time can vary). As of early March
2018, there were 299 total refugees who came to Illinois since Oct 1.
Here is a screenshot of some of the data:

At the national level, you can product a profile for any given refugee nationality
by age gender, ethnicity, religion, language and education. You also can look at
just nationality and religion. Here is some analysis we at Pew Research Center
produced on religion and refugees:
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/07/12/in-first-months-of-trump-pre
sidency-christians-account-for-growing-share-of-u-s-refugee-arrivals/
There is one group of refugees not included in the overall totals, those who
worked for U.S. military forces during conflicts in their home countries – mainly in
Afghanistan and Iraq - and received Special Immigrant Visas. There is some
information available on this SIV group on the State Department’s refugee page; it
only includes those refugees who applied for government assistance, which is
most but not all of them. The best place to get statistics on total numbers of SIV
visas is through the State Department’s visa statistics page:

https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/legal/visa-law0/visa-statistics/immigra
nt-visa-statistics.html
The visa page has a lot of other interesting statistics as well!
And here is a recent Pew Research Center analysis of that data:
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/12/11/afghans-who-worked-for-u-s
-government-make-up-growing-share-of-special-immigrant-visa-recipients/

Office of Refugee Resettlement
Children who are apprehended at the border without a parent or legal guardian
are placed into the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement, which is part of
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. They are placed with
sponsors (which the office says usually means a family member) while their cases
are pending in immigration court. So far, ORR has been keeping the data pretty
current for where children are placed by ​state​ and ​county​.

Pew Research Center
Pew Research Center has made estimates of ​unauthorized immigrant
populations for states and some metro areas and a few cities​. The latest national
estimate (11 million) is for 2015 and our latest state estimates are for 2014, but
we also have ​trend data going back to 1990​. (And we also have public opinion
data on attitudes about illegal immigration.) The best way to see what we have is
to search our website (www.pewresearch.org) by ​topic​ under “unauthorized
immigration,” or look at our regularly updated ​“5 facts” blog post​, which has links
to other reports and data.
Unauthorized immigrants include people who arrived illegally as well as those
who overstayed lawful temporary visas.
At the ​national and state level,​ we have estimates of the total number of
unauthorized immigrants, but also how big a share they are of ALL immigrants
and of the total U.S. population, top birth countries of unauthorized immigrants,
unauthorized immigrants in the labor force​, share of the overall total from

Mexico, and the share of students in grades kindergarten through 12 who have an
unauthorized immigrant parent or parents. We also have estimates and trends for
birth countries and birth regions of unauthorized immigrants. And we have
detailed national-level estimates of the occupations and industries that
unauthorized immigrants work in, with some state-level estimates on that as well.
We’ve also done estimates of ​births to unauthorized immigrants.
Pew Research Center also has estimates for 155 metropolitan areas: 20
metropolitan areas where most unauthorized immigrants live, and for 11 of the
big cities within those metro areas (such as Los Angeles, Chicago, Denver and so
forth). We can’t provide estimates for all big cities in part because it is not always
possible to separate cities from the large metro areas that contain them using
census data, which are the basis for our numbers.
Because our estimates are from a sample, they have margins of error, so we
cannot always be precise, even though we know that journalists want us to be
more definitive.
Religion is not a topic that is even asked about on the census, but there are
non-government surveys that do have it. Among them are the ​Pew Research
Center’s Religious Landscape Surveys, conducted in 2007 and 2014.​ The surveys
– which only include adults - have easily available demographics by religious
group for the country as a whole, so you can compare religious groups on age,
race and ethnicity, immigrant generation, education, income, marital status and
more. The survey also has estimates of the size of different religious groups for
each state and for 22 metro areas. You also can do some comparisons of the
demographics of religious groups in your state, and trends over time. There are
more complicated margin-of-error issues for metro areas (special weights needed,
not the standard published weights), but it can be done.
Some tables are easily available with a click. Let’s say you want to find out about
Catholics in Illinois, who are about 28% of the state population:
http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/state/illinois/religious-tradi
tion/catholic/​ You can get their age, generation and gender makeup, their
immigrant generation, household income, education levels, marital status, and

what share have children at home. There also are lots of questions about religious
beliefs and practices, party affiliation and political ideology and views on topics
such as same-sex marriage and aid to the poor.
For other tables, you’ll need to download the entire dataset and use statistical
software to extract your results.
Link to the 2014 report:
http://www.pewforum.org/2015/05/12/americas-changing-religious-landscape/
2014 appendix with totals for each religious group for the U.S., each state, and 22
metro areas:
http://assets.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/11/2015/05/AppendixD-Detailed-Tables.pdf
Interactive with more state-level (and metro) demographics and trends:
http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/#geography​ [scroll down to
the map and click on a region, state or metro to find out more]
2014 dataset (you need to have a free account to download data, and statistical
software to extract it):
http://www.pewforum.org/dataset/pew-research-center-2014-u-s-religious-lands
cape-study/
2007 report:
http://www.pewforum.org/2008/02/01/u-s-religious-landscape-survey-religiousaffiliation/
2007 dataset (as with 2014, free account and statistical software needed):
http://www.pewforum.org/dataset/u-s-religious-landscape-survey/
There are some cautions to keep in mind because the data come from a survey
with a margin of error, and so you may not be able to say with certainty that
there are differences between relatively small groups, such as Hindus or
Buddhists in certain places.

Mexican data

This is a very general overview because I’ve not used the data myself, though
others have done so at the Pew Research Center.
● IPUMS​ International now has Mexican census data, including data on
people who were living in the U.S. five years earlier and now are in Mexico,
children younger than five who were born in the U.S., and people who
were living in Mexico five years earlier but now are in the U.S. You can look
at the date of migration, and return to Mexico. Census numbers with these
variables are available for 1990, 2000 and 2010.
● Mexico also does a survey in between censuses – so in 1995, 2005 and
2015 – that has data on return migrants from the U.S. (and children born in
the U.S.)
● Another Mexican survey, called the National Survey of Demographic
Dynamics (ENADID is the Spanish acronym), was taken in 2006, 2009 and
2014. It also has information on people who returned to Mexico as well as
those who migrated to the U.S.
● The National Survey of Occupation and Employment (ENOE is the Spanish
acronym), taken from 2005 to 2016, measures changes in who lives in a
household over time, including migration into and out, as well as reasons
for migration.
● There also is a Survey of Migration in the Northern Border of Mexico
(EMIF-Norte), taken from 1993 through 2016 so far. This survey measures
flows into the U.S., flows from the U.S., and people who had been in the
U.S. and were handed over to Mexican authorities by U.S. authorities
(including so-called “voluntary returns” as well as deportations, or
removals). The EMIF includes a survey of deportees as to why they
migrated, where they went, and whether they intend to try again.
The IPUMS data are available in English. An English language beta site is available
for INEGI, the Mexican national statistics site that includes some but not all of the
surveys listed above (to get there, go to ​http://en.www.inegi.org.mx/​ or go to the
INEGI site, inegi.org.mx, click on “Ir a sitio Beta” at the top right, then click on

English at the top. If you go to Data/statistical project, that gets you to the census.
EMIF, the survey of deportees, is only available in Spanish the last time I checked.

National Center for Health Statistics
Birth data are collected by states about women who reside in that state (even if
they give birth somewhere else). If you are looking for information about one
state, start with that state’s vital statistics agency (often a health department)
because the numbers may be timelier and more complete. But if you want to
compare states – or see where your state fits with the national picture- look at
data from the National Center for Health Statistics. ​The latest complete data on
their site is for 2016.
You can easily find out the age of mothers who gave birth, whether they were
married or unmarried, their race and Hispanic origin, and birth rates. You also can
get ​additional state tables​ about births at home, cesarean delivery, preterm
births, low birthweight births and multiple births (some have race and Hispanic
origin data too).
My slide showed some data that we obtained at Pew Research Center about the
mothers’ birth countries. It came from a restricted dataset intended for research
purposes, so it’s not easily available. We did an analysis of the impact of
immigrant moms on births overall, and by state. This slide shows the percent of
all 2015 births in any given state where the mother was an immigrant. The share
was about a third or more in California, Florida, Massachusetts, New Jersey and
New York.
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/08/29/over-the-past-25-years-immi
grant-moms-bolstered-births-in-48-states/
Why use data from the NCHS when you can get even more demographic
information from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey question
about women who gave birth within the past year? The census data give you a
fuller picture of the mothers, but the NCHS numbers give you more about the
characteristics of the baby and birth conditions.

There are other differences between the datasets: The census data about women
who gave birth in the last year relate to the date the survey was taken, not the
date of birth. So, for example, a woman may not have been married when she
gave birth, but may have married by the time she responded to the ACS. She may
have given birth in Alabama but later moved to Kentucky, and responded to the
ACS there. Also, the NCHS numbers are for a calendar year, but the ACS survey is
taken throughout the year and includes all births within the previous 12 months.
So births reported in the 2016 ACS could have taken place as early as January
2015 and as late as December 2016.

