Intro to Machine Learning Tipsheet
Saturday, March 10th • NICAR 2018
Forest Gregg​, DataMade (​@forestgregg​) | ​Jean Cochrane​, DataMade (​@jean_cochrane​)

Probabilistic parsers
What’s a probabilistic parser? ​Given a string, probabilistic parsers can extract labelled
components. If you give it an address, a probabilistic parser can return the address
number, street name, street type, etc.
When should I use a probabilistic parser?​ Probabilistic parsers can be a great alternative
to regular expressions when the list of rules is hard to define explicitly.
Some probabilistic parsing libraries:
●
●
●

usaddress​: Parse address components in the united states
probablepeople​: Parse names of people and companies
parserator​: Train your own custom parser!

What other types of information can I parse?​ Any type of string that has common
patterns, but that deviates from those patterns in ways that are difficult to anticipate. Some
examples might include product descriptions, agents, or titles of media like songs and
movies.

Named entity recognition
What’s named entity recognition? ​Named entity recognition describes a class of
techniques that allow you to extract relevant entities like people, places, and things from
unstructured text.
Repository​: h
​ ttps://github.com/fgregg/nicar_ner/
Named entity recognition libraries​:
●

Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK)

●

spaCy

NER in action: ​Local News Engine​ combs through data feeds to look for newsworthy
people

Fuzzy matching
What’s this? ​Sometimes your data contains matches that aren’t exact: for example, you might
have a list of names and addresses that contain duplicates, but the dupes have typos or use
different address formats, so it’s difficult to identify them programmatically. Fuzzy matching is a
principled way of identifying these duplicates.
When should I use it? ​Fuzzy matching is useful when you want to identify rows in a database
or spreadsheet that refer to the same “thing” in the world (or “entity”), but the resemblance isn’t
exact. This can be helpful when you have a messy dataset with lots of unusual duplicates, or if
you have multiple datasets from different sources that are recording the same entities but don’t
share the same unique identifiers.
Fuzzy matching libraries:
●
●
●

dedupe​: ​Python library
csvdedupe​: ​Command-line bindings for the Python library
Dedupe.io​:​ Web service with a graphical interface built on top of the Python library

