Using data and records to investigate voting
Jessica Huseman
jessica.huseman@propublica.org​ or @JessicaHuseman
Some big thoughts:
● Elections are local. You can’t cover elections unless you know your local electoral history
and data. Start ​here​ — ProPublica’s got an app for that.
● MEET YOUR LOCAL ELECTIONS ADMINISTRATOR. ​They are dedicated professionals
(most of the time) and want to help you cover the election correctly.
○ NASED​ for contact information for state elections directors
○ NASS​ for contact information for secretaries of state
○ Each county has their own and, really, these are most important.
● Ask your local elections officials good questions:
○ What are the rules for media observing at elections? Tabulation? Accuracy
testing of machines? Go to these things!
○ Voter registration rules and deadlines - including absentee ballot and vote by mail
rules and deadlines.
Information Resources:
Electionline ​— Compiled by the Democracy Fund. Best election stories by state.
National Conference of State Legislatures​ — Offers a newsletter on post election audits and
legislative actions regarding elections. Nerd out!
William & Mary Law School eBenchbook ​covers the laws and court cases in 3 states (VA,
FL, & CO ) and is in the process of adding in NV & NC.
Numbers:
Pew’s Election Performance Index​ — A look at how states are doing on 17 different indices and
allows user to compare like-situated states as well as look at performance across time.
Much of this data comes from the ​Election Assistance Administration Voting Survey​. It has its
problems, but it’s the most comprehensive survey of election administration.
The F Word ​(Fraud, guys)
● Hearing f word rumors? ​Read this first.
● Voter rolls ​are​ messy​ - but that ​doesn’t mean​ fraud is ​rampant​.
● Publicly available voter rolls​ can’t be used for all that much​.
● Is your area one of the ​248 counties​ that recently received letters from PILF? ​Check their
work.
● Fraud does happen - it’s just not the fraud people talk about or pass laws to prevent.
○ Mail in ballot fraud​ - especially in ​nursing homes​.
○ Absentee ballot fraud​.

