The Beat Investigation
The beat is just an extended investigation, so set long-term story goals and begin building long-term
projects. Don’t get mired in minutiae or become a player in the game. Rise above. Own this turf and
set your own agenda. Don’t accept story ideas from publicists or media handlers. Don’t accept praise
from the same. Question the narrative and the rhetoric.
Toughen your skin and remember you need to be respected to be well-sourced, and not liked.
Schmoozing can be a hindrance. Regard the press conference as the scoop you did not get, but the
opportunity to corner the high-ranking authority avoiding you.
Good sources that come to you are rare. It is up to you to go and find them – a case of making your
own luck. Either way, your success in cultivating them depends largely on earned respect and
reputation.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
Seek out beat guides: good places to look include The Reynolds Center at ASU’s collection of beat tips
(https://businessjournalism.org/category/ebooks/), SPJ’s Journalist’s Toolbox
(https://www.journaliststoolbox.org/), the IRE collection of conference sessions, and for a great
overview, Poynter’s “What does it take to be the best?” (https://www.poynter.org/news/beatreporting-what-does-it-take-be-best)
Read the best. Search out past prize winning stories. Follow the top reporters on your beat, including in
other markets. STEAL THEIR SOURCES. Make it a habit when reading any good piece to know how the
reporter built it, and who their unidentified sources were.
BECOME THE MASTER
Understand how the system is supposed to work and who it is supposed to serve. Who is accountable?
Who is vulnerable?
Think. Seek explanations. Be forward looking –where are events and trends headed?
Learn the language (but don’t use it in your stories). Many institutions cloak themselves in jargon and
you have to pierce that shield, then translate it for readers in human terms. In doing so, you’ll find the
stories take on deeper dimensions and can reveal powerful forces at work – human greed, power,
corruption, sorrow, tragedy, victory.
Cast your beat broadly – cultivate sources and look for stories beyond the accepted sources of power
and authority.
Remember that beats, and the institutions they cover, historically have been powerful silencers of
minority voices. It takes work to proactively change that. Go beyond the “usual suspects” and ensure
that your source lists are diverse, inclusive and wide-reaching. Challenge yourself to find those voices.
Sources will lead you astray. It is a good thing.
Trespass on others’ beats, or partner up: A hunt for jail databases turned into a team project on
immigration detainers. As an environmental reporter I covered animal rights terrorism, absentee
landlords and lead paint. As a city business reporter I investigated hospital malpractice, and a deadly
medical device.
Don’t be afraid of people. Hold the consumer/user in as high regard as those in power, and treat those
in power with scant deference.
CONFESSIONS ARE BETTER THAN DENIALS

Make it a practice to know what you’re talking about before you contact the subjects of investigation,
and set your expectations high. Look for opportunities of personal access to these individuals – and
when you talk to them, make it clear you want the “why,” not the “gotcha.” At the same time, be
challenging, and don’t let them control the interview. Understand and be practiced at the art of the
interview.
EAT RAW
Quotes in press releases are not quotes.
Charts and summaries are not data. Read the footnotes and find the raw sources of data.
Look for what has been left out – the time frame of the trend line, or the context of the quote.
Look for other sources of data (academic circles and research papers are great places to cast about for
references to raw information). Then draw your own conclusions. Test your conclusions.
Make it a practice to report first-hand information, and question your own decisions to accept secondhand material.
GET SOURCED FROM HEAVEN TO HELL
Sourcing is the key to finding truths. But those who have the information act in their own self-interest.
In the never-ending tug of war over power and control, reporters often get tired, beat down, or lazy.
They accept shocking conduct as “the way things are.” One of the best tips I ever overheard in a
newsroom: great reporters master sustained outrage.
 Look beyond the elite. Don’t fall into the trap of turning to non-elites only to express fear,
tragedy, or victimization.
 Move outside your comfort zone and demographic niche. Seek out sources from diverse
communities and backgrounds. Marginalized communities can require greater effort and trust
building but can provide fresh perspectives that rejuvenate and challenge your understanding.
 Make friends outside of the newsroom. It helps to talk to non-journalists to keep a perspective,
a sense of what matters, and ideas for new sources.
 Avoid using the same sources again and again. Quoting the same experts again and again
produces tired, brain-dead reporting. Ask your sources who they listen to, or check out who
they follow on social media. But beware of building silos – networks of sources who think alike
and affirm their own points of views.
 Test everyone’s credibility and check their facts. Identify the motives of sources. Background
your sources. Be wary of entrapment, and if need be, walk away from any source you can’t
independently verify.
 Seek out first-hand information. Ask sources where they got their facts and go to those original
sources. Ask your trusted sources for introductions to other trusted sources – a way to work
your way in when dealing with closed-rank groups, such as police departments.
 Look for other sources of information – private vendors, litigators, trade press, academics,
associations, social media groups, unions…
 Be creative about where to look and adaptive to trends. Nina Martin of ProPublica’s “Lost
Mothers” project mined GoFundMe accounts for maternal death incidents. A decade earlier Don
Barlett and James Steele chronicled the sorry shape of national medical coverage by the coin
jars at checkout counters. Paul Pringle found ties between a medical school dean and a drug
pusher on the Venmo app.
 Data is a source. Learn what data exists, where it is kept, how it is used, and get it. Data also is a
source for finding people: Mine campaign finance reports for donors to call. Payroll records for
names of public staff.

BUILD A RUSSIAN PHONEBOOK
Like Cold War reporters who had to find their own way about Russia, it is necessary to create a directory
of the numbers that are not public, and add to it continually.
Develop a system – I jot down numbers on the inside cover of my reporter’s notebook, and transcribe
them later into contact lists that can be retrieved, as well as Outlook contacts. I export my Outlook
contacts before changing phones, or jobs.
 File a record request for internal agency phone lists.
 Mine emails and other records you’ve collected for names, numbers and email addresses, and
an understanding of how a system works and who the key players are. Make special note of who
the chief complainers are.
 Run large document productions through OCR software (I use AABBY) to make such searches
easier and to find what the agency redaction drones have missed.
 Grab private cell phone numbers from returned calls.
 Courtesy can build rapport – when asking for private numbers I assure sources I will send a text
before calling out of the blue.
 Be facile about where you look for information – voter rolls, tax assessor records, deeds, civil
and criminal court files, federal bankruptcy records, criminal records searches should be starting
points. The more often you use them, the quicker your searching will be.
 Remember that Nexis is highly unreliable, and no one source is consistently good. Look in less
obvious places – I found the confidential home address of a police officer on the return mailing
label of a divorce document.
FIND HUMAN GUIDES
 Try to identify the rare guru – the person on the outside who is a mentor to those inside, and
who can provide knowledge of the network but also an important historical long view. The old
beat reporters who spent a decade covering an arena had this long view in their own minds.
You’ll need to find sources to fill that void. These people are also mentors and can connect you
to those who trust them – conveying that trust to you.
 Identify who the thought leaders are, and who are the “fixers” and the “advocates.” Who speaks
at public meetings (get the sign-in sheet at the door)? Which lobbyist hangs out at the legislative
staff committee office?
 In large networks, or campaign issues, consider social networking software like NodeXL to map
connections and identify the key links. This works when there are 100 or more “connections” to
track.
 AVOID being steered. Regard tip services like HARO (Help A Reporter Out) as marketing and a
shameful shortcut to beat reporting.

STEP OUTSIDE
Go to the places where people talk.
 Conferences and conventions are great places to corner officials and authorities who otherwise
avoid the media. Get the speaker list, sit in on the session, and walk up to the dias at the end for
a shot at a one-on-one. And remember to work the back of the room – pay attention to who
else is there in the crowd.
 Listen in: YouTube or Facebook videos of conference sessions, recordings of quarterly earnings
calls, webcasts of public meetings and hearings, and emergency dispatch archives. If you can’t
be all places at all times, make it a practice to download and listen to these. Seek out similar
recordings of key past events for an historical perspective of how things began, or were







intended. For help in downloading video some software may be needed. I currently use 4K
Video Downloader (the free version), and used to use KeepVid when it was free.
Look for eye witnesses. People at events may post video on YouTube or posts on Facebook or
Twitter. They are obvious sources in breaking news events, but just as helpful for semi-private
meetings and during those crucial periods when campaigns and movements are being
organized.
Reach past the gatekeepers. Seek out high-level sources directly. If you don’t know the email
address, guess it. Most institutions follow a single naming convention. Try Google searches of
some of your educated guesses, or just send a bcc to them all. Don’t hesitate to reach out to
CEOs and top officers directly… I’ve found them at host hotels of key events, and interviewed
them in the lobby and the swimming pool.
Send a postcard. If phone and email don’t work, and you can’t knock on a door, drop a postcard
in the mail.

CARE AND FEEDING – BUILDING TRUST
 Face to face is always best. Then the phone. Email should be left as a warm-up to the call, or a
follow-up to the interview. Social media exchanges are not interviews. Sourcing is about trust
building and reporters need to build trust quickly. Meet in person. Follow up frequently. Keep
the source informed and operate under a “no surprises” rule. Assure victims and give them
control of their information – get them to invest in the story. Talk on background and discuss
what is needed on the record.
 Be kind to unsophisticated sources and clear with the sophisticated ones. Explain the
difference between off the record and on background. Off the record doesn’t really exist. Don’t
assume even sophisticated sources understand the rules. Confidentiality is a contract – make
the rules clear. Also keep clear professional boundaries with sources – you are not there to join
their cause or be a friend or advocate.
 Educate sources on how not to blab or blow their cover. Warn them that you’ll never release
their identity but others may try to trick or trap them into admitting they are a source. Insist on
trust and fairness and warn that giving false information violates the contract of confidentiality.

BE CREATIVE

BE PERSISTENT

BE PASSIONATE

