“22 Harvest Street”
Writing the Multiplatform Story
Tisha Thompson
@Tisha ESPN tisha.thompson@espn.com

https://vimeo.com/224364171

Niko Quotes
I sat down on this leather couch and just the next thing I know is like five to ten
masked men all in black just come out with bats and pipes and knives and guns.
I got up and ran as quickly as I could, being two months out of ACL surgery, and made
it halfway across the room and just the next thing I know is that my left leg was, like,
completely over there and I just knew that my femur was broken in half.
They took our shoes off. And started cutting the webbings in between our toes.
I was honestly confused because I had no idea who these people were.
They were wearing masks.

Niko Quotes
When I was hit over the head with a fluorescent light bulb, like, I went black for, like,
two seconds, came back, and just, like, the amount of blood there was dripping down
my face and, like, covering my body, I was just so overwhelmed.
I got shot in my right leg in my right calf. And it wasn't until like Saturday or Sunday
morning when I really knew that I actually had been shot.
They put me in the shower. And I just sat in there for like half an hour just rinsing all
this blood off of me. I mean I lost, like, three to four pints of blood and I was just, like,
the entire tub was just, like, drenched in red.

Niko Kollias watched his blood swirl down the bathtub drain.

There was so much. And it was coming from so many places.
His head. Both of his legs. And the gaping cuts where they
had sliced the webbing between his toes.

Even more blood was coating the clothing iron sitting on the
sink.

He didn't know where they'd put the hedge clippers; he was
just glad they were gone.

He could still see the roll of duct tape nearby, covered with
the bloody fingerprints they'd left behind when they taped his
hands and feet together

before slamming the rebar and heavy metal pipes down onto
him, over and over again.

over which they had smashed a long, fluorescent lightbulb. It
was only then, when the blood just wouldn't stop from that
last blow, that they halted their attack and threw him in the
shower.

Visual/Audio Materials Included…
Surveillance videos of the original drug robbery (10+ cameras avg 1-2 hours)
ATM videos (3 machines)
Audio Recordings of Niko calling his banks
Evidence Photos (50+ photos)
Evidence Cell Phone Video (30 seconds)

Cell phone video shot by neighbors of SWAT Team raid
Pictures of text messages
Facebook Photos & Mug Shots
Court Transcripts & Documents

Lines containing details only found in the audio & visuals...
Rivera is holding a sawed-off .22-caliber rifle and standing over Kollias' teammate lying face down in a pool of blood on the
bathroom floor.

Blood from the gunshot wounds to his legs completely saturates his khaki pants.
Kollias says the men then gave him a crutch so he could hobble into a small, dirty bedroom with a blue inflatable mattress.
At 2:45, multiple cameras showed Smith standing outside the building's door, talking animatedly on his phone. Smith then
waved at the three men on the steps, drawing their attention to a black sedan rolling into the parking lot.
The surveillance cameras show some of the hammer victims walking out of the building using their shirts to stanch the
bleeding from their heads.

Strickland withdrew thousands of dollars before he went on a shopping spree that weekend, which included a $799 leather
jacket, Timberland boots and a $27.99 pair of jeans from Marshalls.
The customer service agent, unable to see the gun next to Kollias' head, tells him, "Have a great weekend."
Stepping over glass shattered in the explosion, SWAT members combed 22 Harvest, finding the plastic masks, the
impromptu household items used during the bathroom attack and the bleach used to clean Kollias' blood.

https://vimeo.com/224364171

Character/Byte Driven

Chronological

Simplified Narrative

Very detailed narrative

Foreshadowing/Surprises & Reveals

Not a lot of visuals

Lots of Audio/Visuals

Still a very “visual” story

Neither starts at the beginning
Both focus heavily on Niko
Both create a mystery - why is this happening?

Both reveal LOTS of new facts & information
Both combine to tell a single story of survival

The nitty-gritty details in the digital story liberated the television story
The visuals in the television story elevated the digital story

By releasing the written story first, but holding back the video, viewers tuned in to the tv story
But the tv story also drove people to digital to learn more about the other characters & events

