Joint Fundraising
Committees and Nonprofits
This sounds boring, but just wait.

Joint Fundraising Committee Basics
● Joint fundraising is fundraising conducted jointly by multiple political
committees.
● The political committees involved form a new vehicle that becomes the joint
fundraising committee.
● These vehicles have been around for a long time, but the Supreme Court’s
2014 decision in McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission, which
eliminated some obscure but important campaign contribution limits,
effectively supercharged them.
● There must be a written agreement that lays out how proceeds and expenses
will be divided between the committees involved, and when the committees
solicit money, they must tell donors how it will be divvied up.

So what?
● JFC donors can write checks equal to the total of the collective contribution
limits of the participating committees. That can reach high six figure
amounts. That means politicians raising money for JFCs are mingling with
big-dollar donors.
● Political parties, weakened by a ban on soft money, are using JFCs and
special party accounts created a few years ago to level the playing field with
super PACs and other big-money vehicles.
● The money passes through multiple political committees, which makes it
harder to track, even though it’s disclosed in Federal Election Commission
filings.

Both parties are using JFCs

A small number of donors can give a lot of money

Nonprofits and Dark Money

Credit: Center for Responsive Politics

How nonprofits play in politics
● Nonprofits spend hundreds of millions of dollars on ads promoting candidates,
but aren’t legally required to reveal their donors.
● When nonprofits don’t spend on a race directly, they can still serve as
conduits for donors who don’t want their contributions publicly disclosed.
● Some are closely associated with a single candidate or officeholder. They
raise money to support the politician or initiatives closely associated with the
politician, but it’s impossible for the public to find out who is paying the bill.
● Examples of nonprofits that have spent a lot on politics in past cycles:
American Crossroads/One Nation, Majority Forward

America First Policies
● Lots of overlap with the Trump campaign: Trump’s former campaign
manager, Corey Lewandowski, is a senior advisor. His current campaign
manager, Brad Parscale, is a founder.
● Hired Trump campaign pollsters to produce polls, strategy memos and other
documents more typical of a campaign operation.
○

Made them publicly available, but hard to find. Great reporting by CNBC’s Christina Wilkie
uncovered the docs.

● Doesn’t disclose donors, so no way to know who is currying favor.

What can I find out about nonprofits?
●

Nonprofit tax filings (990s) have information about board members, officers, salaries
and highest-paid contractors.
○

○

●
●
●

Donors’ identities are redacted, but requesting a 990 Schedule B will give you information
about the amount of money given by individual contributors. You’ll be able to tell someone
wrote a seven-figure check - just not who.
Nonprofits must disclose grants to other nonprofits, so you can see money moving from one
nonprofit to another.

State charity regulators sometimes require additional information, such as audited
financial statements. I like NY, NC, CO.
Articles of incorporation and other state corporate filings sometimes have gold.
Keep an eye out for lawsuits against nonprofits. You never know.

Helpful websites for reporting on nonprofits
●
●
●
●
●
●

Guidestar
Citizen Audit
Requesting nonprofit tax filings from the IRS
The Nonprofit Network from the Center for Public Integrity
Nonprofit Explorer from ProPublica
The Center for Responsive Politics

