Constructing the Narrative
Ken Armstrong — ProPublica
ken.armstrong@propublica.org; @bykenarmstrong
Suspend the reader
One way to do this? The unanswered question. The question can be big or small, direct or
implied, answered in a little while or a long while. If you end a section with, “She heard
the phone ring,” the reader will wonder: Who’s calling? And to say what? To find out,
the reader must keep reading. Unanswered questions are hooks. Dangle them to pull
readers along.
Enable the reader
With most things we write about, there is a set of rules: How should a police officer do
this? How should a schoolteacher do that? Instead of applying the rules to each separate
act (e.g., “The police officer violated department policy by …”), embed the rules early on
– and let the reader apply them as the action unfolds. The writer gets out of the way while
the reader, with each rule violated, senses the approach of doom. This creates tension and
dread – akin to a horror movie sending a character into the basement.
Surprise the reader
The most obvious means is some big reveal. But there are other ways. Consider shifting
the story’s perspective. This can be especially effective if done late in the story – and if
the perspective comes from an unexpected source.
Spare the nut graph
If you’re writing a narrative, don’t write a nut graph. Write a story – and let the reader
write the nut graph. This takes some courage. But you can always test before publishing.
Enlist cold readers and ask: What did you take away from the story? What was the lesson
here?
Simple language = speed
Big fancy words are a drag. They distract. They pull readers out of the story.
Think cinematically
A narrative isn’t about findings. It’s about scenes. Figure out the most important scenes
and report them into the ground. (And whenever you can: Get dialogue.)
Mind the packaging
Don’t let the headline – or a cutline, or a graphic, or a pull quote – give away what the
story holds back.
Simple people = fable
How many people do you know personally who are pure and simple, representing all that
is good or all that is bad? Pretty few, I’d guess. So why do so many people like that show
up in stories? Write about people in full.

Writing the Investigative Story: General Tips
Ken Armstrong — ProPublica
ken.armstrong@propublica.org; @bykenarmstrong
If circumstances allow, write a story, not an exposé
Create suspense. Use dialogue. Shift perspective. Circle and loop. Experiment with Chekhov’s
gun. Heed Elmore Leonard’s 10 Rules of Writing, particularly No. 10: “Try to leave out the part
that readers tend to skip.” If you’re bored writing it, others will be bored reading it.
Beware of bullets
They’re more like tranquilizer darts, likely to put readers to sleep. Also beware of the
investigative-series formula: overview; case study; the fix. Elmore Leonard, No. 10, applies here
as well: Leave out any parts that readers will want to skip. If you lose readers on Monday, they’re
unlikely to return on Tuesday.
Pronouns can be good for you
Lose your fear of first- and second-person pronouns (I’m talking to you). Sometimes you become
part of the story – or your newspaper does. If that happens, shoot straight. Say “we.” Pronouns
are direct; to newspaper readers weary of institutional voice, they can be engaging and honest.
Choose wisely
As a reporter, you have a choice. You can describe a debate, or you can inform it. Inform it.
If you reach a bold conclusion, state it boldly
Don’t tiptoe. At the same time, remember: You must earn the right, through your reporting, to
speak with such authority.
Long live the nerd box
Some readers want to know how you did what you did – what databases you merged, which
documents you consulted, how many queries you ran. Most don’t. Put your sourcing and howwe-did-it elements in a nerd box, displayed prominently. A nerd box provides authority and
transparency without getting in the story’s way.
Behind every dot on the map (or row on the Excel sheet), there’s a person
Don’t let readers forget that.
Report for story
Gather transcripts. (Remember: Dialogue). Gather video and audio. (Everyone’s recording
everything these days, or so it seems.) Think in scenes – and what you’ll need to make those
scenes pop.
Too few dimensions can make you a cartoon
If you’re serious about writing, don’t limit yourself to investigative stories. Experiment. Write
profiles, essays, hard-edged features, long-form narratives. This can help you avoid the trap of
casting people in simplistic roles: victim, villain, whatever.
Twitterati (fun feeds for writers to follow):
@pamelacolloff / @susanorlean / @roypeterclark / @lanedegregory / @grammargirl /
@puertabooks / @davidgrann / @stephenking / @profjoekimble / @laphamsquart

