NAILING THE BIG
INTERVIEW
I. Approaching the Source: Know Your Strategy
II. Time Management: Control The Clock.
III. On and Off the Record
IV. Technique
V. Expect the Unexpected

I. Approaching the Source: Know Your Strategy
You don’t want to tip your hand too early and give the subject time to get
his story straight. But, by the same token, you don’t want to get accused of
sandbagging someone, either. Ideally, you want to be as open as possible
without giving away the store.
To successfully execute your game plan:
(a) Build the story from the ground up with preliminary interviews.
(b) Make the subject feel like he or she must sit down with you.
(c) Narrow your take-away to a single yes or no question.
(d) Get the answer to that question that delivers on the promise of the
story.
(e) Don’t allow your methods to overshadow the take-away.

II. Time Management: Control The Clock.
Think of the interview in terms of a sporting event. The side that wins is the
one that controls the tempo and controls the clock. Your opponent’s job is
to run out the clock and put you in desperate situation.
a) Make sure you always know where you are in the interview, and

where you want to be.

b) Do that by preparing. You can’t be over-prepared enough for an

interview.
c) Write as many questions as you can think of. Then divided them

into a story arc with sub-sets of questions that change depending
on how you think the answers might go. You can pare that down as
needed.
d) Have time stamps on your questions so you can tell if I’ve you’ve

too much time in one area, and not enough in another. That way,
no matter how much your subject tries to distract or deflect, you
know where you are and what you have.

e) If, for any reason, you get lost, that’s okay. Just give yourself the

time to get back on track. (One trick is to ask a question you don’t
care about —like what’s the story behind that clock on the wall, or
what time does the sun set around here? — just to give yourself
time to regroup.)
III. On and Off the Record
No matter how obvious you may think these terms are, they’re not
obvious to the sources.
 Off the record: Make clear that means you won’t use the
information.
 Background: You can use it, but only if you check it elsewhere
first.
 Not for attribution. You can use a quote, but not the name. This
involves a negotiation on how to quote the source.

The bottom line: Stay away from all of the above. You want to keep
things clear and simple, because there will be plenty of opportunity for
things to get ugly later.
IV. Technique
Everybody brings something different to the table. But especially on
television, the way you ask the question is as important as the answers you
get. Remember these tips:
1. Don’t interrupt a source when he’s in the middle of an answer.
2. By the same token, don’t rush to fill in silences. Most people feel

awkward when there’s silence, and rush to fill it in. In that rush,
they’ll often say something unintentionally revealing.
3. Don’t come off as hot. That will make the subject seem sympathetic

by comparison. But a little incredulity isn’t a bad thing. You want to
be a proxy for your audience by reacting the way they would.

4. Circle back to a question that seems innocuous, just to see if you get

the same answer twice. If not, you have a sense of whether the source
is being truthful.
5. Avoid double-negatives and multi-part questions.

IV. Expect the Unexpected
It’s not just the interview you have to prepare for. It’s all the stuff
around it, because you can be sure your subject is going to try and throw
you off your game.

