Prying Loose Public
Records
Sept. 15, 2018

bit.ly/IRE-publicrecords

Civics 101
No government employee is obligated to answer your
questions. But they do have to respond to public-records
requests. Even if you’re a critic, a political opponent, a gadfly,
or just annoying.
Governments must interpret the public-records law liberally,
not narrowly.
But in our experience, many government employees don’t
know much about the public-records law.

How public records hold officials accountable
Local government:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Are they bringing in as much money as they planned? Is their spending on
track?
Are they implementing the policies they pledged to?
Are agency employees enforcing recently passed laws?
Are they going to fix that pothole on your street?
Who’s installing the playground equipment at the park? How much will it cost?
How much do top administrators make?

How public records hold officials accountable
Schools
●
●
●
●

What’s their policy on discipline, attendance or uniforms?
How much do teachers make?
Is your child’s teacher certified?
How does your school compare to others in suspensions, expulsions, specialeducation outcomes and graduation rates?

How public records hold officials accountable
Criminal justice:
●
●
●
●
●
●

How many times have officers used force against people? Which officers
have done it the most?
How does the police department respond to complaints against officers
What types of crimes are occurring and where?
Do police follow up on criminal reports?
How quickly do police make it to crime scenes?
How many cops are on duty in your part of the city compared to others?

What entities are covered by the law?
The law applies to “public bodies.”
●
●
●
●

Any department, agency, commission or board of state, parish or municipal
government
Any committee, subcommittee or task force of those entities
Public or “quasi-public” nonprofit corporations that perform a public function
(like the SPCA in New Orleans)
Housing authorities

Who’s responsible for public records?

The law defines the “records custodian” as the head of the government body who
has custody or control of public records, or someone authorized to respond to
requests.

What’s a public record?
Basically, anything written down or stored electronically that relates to
government work.
State law says it’s “All books, records, writings, accounts, letters and letter books,
maps, drawings, photographs, cards, tapes, recordings, memoranda, and papers,
and all copies, duplicates, photographs, including microfilm, or other reproductions
thereof, or any other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, including information contained in electronic data processing
equipment” ...
… that were created, used or kept for use in any way related to a government
function.

These are public records
●
●
●
●

Records held by private entities on behalf of a public entity (such as if a
company holds photos and videos of traffic-camera tickets)
Records held by private entities when they relate to government funds (such
as a foundation’s records related to how they spend a government grant)
Emails sent or received by a nongovernmental account that pertain to
government business.
Text messages sent to a personal phone sent or received to conduct
government business.

These are not
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

Investigative records (DA and police, including arrest record beyond initial
incident report) related to pending or anticipated criminal charges (including
appeals and sentencing)
Security procedures and records related to terrorism activity (can be
misconstrued)
Trade secrets; economic development records and negotiations (can be
misconstrued)
Commercially sensitive records of power utility
State ethics board proceedings unless introduced as evidence or after case
is over, with some limits
Various records of immunizations, medical insurance and state aid
And many more (starting in 44:4.1)

Your rights
●
●
●
●
●

You have the right to view and copy records. (If you’re an adult and you’re not
in prison for a felony.)
You are not obligated to prove that a record is public; the custodian must
prove it’s not.
You do not have to pay to view a record.
Government employees can’t ask you why you want to see the records.
Government employees can’t look at any papers or photos you’re carrying.
They can ask to see your ID to confirm you’re over 18.

How to ask
Find out what records exist first. Call or visit the government office and ask
what relevant records or forms they have. The more they have to interpret your
request, the less likely you are to get what you’re looking for.
They don’t have to create records to respond to your request. So you need to
ask for things that exist. (Not “a list of teachers who chaperoned a field trip” but
“any record reflecting the names of teachers who chaperoned a field trip.”)
Send the request to the records custodian. (Government entities are required
to post the contact info for the custodian.)
They can ask you to file requests in a certain way like an online system or
email. But they can’t require it; requests can be made verbally, by mail and email.

Things to include
It’s wise to state that this is a “public records request” under Louisiana law. (In federal
law, it’s called a “Freedom of Information” or FOIA request.)
Strike a balance. Narrower requests are easier for them to respond to; broader requests
give you a better shot at getting something you didn’t know about.
Avoid asking for copies; ask to review the documents instead. That way you don’t pay for
something you don’t want. (And you can usually copy it yourself.)
Ask them to cite an exemption under state law if they deny any part of your request or
redact anything.
If you’re asking for several records or types of records and the clock is ticking, ask to review
them in batches. (Though they may ignore this.)

What happens next?
Timeline for response: Records must be provided immediately if not in use. If
they are, they must be provided within three business days. If the agency needs
time to collect, redact or review documents, they must provide an estimate of how
long that will take.
Many government employees don’t know the law. They think they have three
days to respond in any way.
Don’t assume they’ll respond within the legal timeframe. You must follow up.

Viewing records
You cannot be charged a fee to review records.
They have to provide “reasonable comfort and facility” for you to view or copy (like
a place to work) as long as they can make sure the records aren’t altered.
You have to do it during working hours. If the custodian allows you to do it outside
of working hours, you may have to pay for an employee to be there.

Getting copies
Except for court files, you’re allowed to make your own copies with a portable
scanner, your phone or whatever they invent in the future.
They can charge a “reasonable” fee for copies. We’ve seen charges of 25 cents to
$1 a page.
For electronic files, the city of New Orleans will put them on a DVD and charge
you $25.
There is nothing in the law that allows the agency to charge for staff time to make
copies if they can do during regular business hours.

Dealing with denials
Your request may be denied because the records contain private information. But
in those cases, the government body is required to “segregate” the private
information and provide the rest.
They may try to charge you for reviewing records for private information or
segregating them. The law does not provide for that. (See 44:32 C 3)
They could tell you that segregating is “overly burdensome.” Appeals courts have
ruled that segregating can’t interfere with their legal duties. If you don’t agree with
this, you’ll probably have to go court.
There is no appeals process other than going to court. There is a special type of
lawsuit to compel an agency to do its job, such as provide public records.

Workarounds
Use Google to search a government website for documents:
●
●
●

Go here: https://www.google.com/advanced_search
Narrow search to site or domain
Select PowerPoint, PDF, Excel or Word files

Try another government agency. Records do not have to be requested from the
agency that created them. Charter schools send documents to the RSD, OPSB
and the state education department. The city must provide documents to state
agencies for certain things like grants.

Getting records from the city of New Orleans
If you don’t know where to get the records, contact your council rep.
Budget data: The City Council authorizes budget expenditures, and throughout
the year the council gets a lot of information on the budget from the executive
branch (the mayor’s office and city departments). Try calling your district’s Council
member or a member of the central staff and asking. Often, the Council is more
responsive than the City Attorney’s Office.
Safety and Permits: Start with the city’s OneStop app.
Contracts: The Lens downloads all city contracts and makes them searchable.
The city’s public-records request system is called NextRequest.

Police reports and records
The incident report is public. It includes:

You can get body camera footage, with exceptions. See 44:3 (I)

Dealing with the NOPD
The city has an online records request platform, called NextRequest. Enter the
record you need, with the “item number” if you have it.
Sometimes it’s faster to go into NOPD headquarters and request your records
directly from the records clerk, located on the first floor. It’s open Monday,
Wednesday and Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Don’t be surprised if they automatically try to give you copies and charge you for
them. Don’t be surprised if they say you’re not allowed to view them, which isn’t
true. (This applies to accident reports, too.) Ask to speak to a supervisor and be
prepared to cite the law.

Dealing with the NOPD
You’ll get a faster response if you have the item number, the unique ID for police
incidents.
The format is A-00001-17, where the letter represents the month (January in this
case), the five numbers in the middle represent its place in incidents during the
month (this is the first item number for January) and the last two numbers
represent the year.
If you do not know your item number, you can find it by accessing the city’s
electronic police reports and searching by location and/or approximate date and
time.

Personnel files of public employees
Personnel files are complicated. Courts have found that an individual’s right to
privacy outweighs the public interest of seeing them.
School employees’ personnel records are not public.
Names, qualifications and employment history of applicants for public employment
are public.
Some parts of personnel files are private under state law (home phone, address,
bank info for direct deposit).
Evaluations and other measures of job performance are generally not public.
Salaries are unquestionably public record.

Getting public employees’ salary info
For New Orleans salary records, you can get around NextRequest and its lag time
by requesting it from the Civil Service Department. Call (504) 658-3500 to ask how
it should be routed.
For state salary records, you can make the same request to the state Department
of Civil Service. Call La. Civil Service General Counsel Adrienne Bordelon at (225)
342-4442.

Resources
PDF of public records law (download to Dropbox and put on your phone)
Shortlink: bit.ly/louisianapublicrecordslaw
Attorney General’s opinions: Official guidance to government agencies (not legally
binding, but influential)

Support The Lens
Donate: support.thelensnola.org
Story tips: editor@thelensnola.org

