Tips for covering the State
Capitol
Elizabeth Crisp
The Advocate

State Capitol = Info Overload

Get in a routine
• Set aside time on Mondays, or whenever is
convenient, and call at least one person just to
see what’s up. Not the same person/department
every time, but have a general rotation. That
gets you into people's heads and then they will
be more likely to contact you if they haven't
heard from you.
• Not the usual suspects. Some suggestions:
Budget directors (who are just great to know
anyway), lobbyists, people in advocacy groups,
lower-level legislators in-the-know but not often
the forefront of the news.

Daily vs. Long-term
• Stay organized: Keep a file of comments,
bills, anything that may be of use later.
• You never know when it may become a
trend or a bigger story.
• Don't worry about always turning it around
immediately.
• EX: ProPublica conflicts

Manage Data
• Government isn't always great about providing
"usable" information -- we get a lot of PDFs or
(unfortunately) printed sheets of paper. Make a
habit of entering numbers into Excel, even after
an immediate turnaround.
• It's always just good to keep it because you
never know what might happen down the road.
You might notice a trend you didn't before.

Show up
• Even if you aren't writing a daily or covering the
event at all, be there when possible. With
technology you can often multitask and work on
other things from wherever you are.
• It means a lot to be a recognizable face and let
lawmakers, and more importantly lobbyists and
staffers, know that you are interested and
engaged.
• The Capitol press corps ranks are dwindling
around the country. It's important to show that
someone is watching (even when you may be
multitasking in disguise).

“Is this weird?”
• Fresh eyes are a great way to explore
state government, where people become
entrenched in how things have "always
been." If you have an instinct that
something is unusual, don't be afraid to
pursue it just because no one else is
thinks it’s a big deal.
• EX: Mississippi felon voting rights bills

Money in Politics
• Don't just focus on campaign finance
reports.
• Look into lobbying (spending by
groups/companies, who's being lobbied
the hardest, what issues are being
lobbied).
• Personal financial disclosures.
• Trips and other perks, including gifts if you
can get that in your state.

Request records
• Public employee salary data should be
readily available -- you can request yearly
or so to keep yourself updated. You never
know when you might need it. If you have
it at your fingertips then you will be
prepared. You don't want to end up at 5
pm on a Friday, and someone gets
suspended or fired and you don’t know
what his or her salary is.

Request records
• A lot of data is available in a more usable format,
you just have to know how to get it.
• Find out who has access to get you full Excel
sheets for lobbying data, etc., and get to know
them. Let them know that you would like to
receive it regularly.
• Regularly request public schedules, travel logs,
travel receipts for governor and other state
officials.
• FoiaMachine.org and similar services can help
you quickly fill out and track requests.

Numbers
• Find a way to make it real for people. When the
Louisiana Legislature was fighting over
extending 1/3 of an expiring 1-cent sales tax
hike and extending 1/2 of the penny, I decided to
explain that in layman's terms as a battle over a
difference of about 17 cents on a $100
purchase, to put in perspective.
• People don't understand fractions of pennies,
but they can see the scope when you put it into
scale.

Social media & online tools
• Newsletters are a great trend. I’ve started
The Rundown here with top political news
from The Advocate, along with social
media highlights and daily schedules. It
goes as an email blast, but also is featured
on our website each morning.
• You should be tweeting! Every state has
its own political hashtag, ours is #lalege.
Find yours and get in the habit of using it.

Social media for ideas and
sourcing
• Don't be afraid to put yourself out there to
solicit ideas. I've used Facebook, Twitter
and Google forms to get story information
and/or sources. All can be good resources.
• Obviously, you have to vet people that you
find online. Some might not work out, but it
never hurts to put yourself out there.

Other tools
• Who Posted What? Search Facebook by
keyword and date or search a date range,
also search specific users:
http://whopostedwhat.com/
• CrowdTangle: Can set up channels with
specific Facebook and Twitter accounts to
follow and receive alerts for.
http://crowdtangle.com *Subscription
required.

There is always another day
• News is a daily (if not hourly) business. If
you are on a tight deadline, you can
always push an analysis or bonus content
(i.e. things you didn’t have time to get to
before deadline) to the next morning for
online.

Contact me
Elizabeth Crisp
Twitter: @elizabethcrisp
ecrisp@theadvocate.com

