FOI Laws for Texas Journalists:
Texas Public Information Act
Texas Open Meetings Act
Federal Freedom of Information Act

______________
2018

Paul C. Watler
Eric D. Wong
Jackson Walker L.L.P.
2323 Ross Avenue, Suite 600
Dallas, TX 75204
(214) 953-6000
pwatler@jw.com
ewong@jw.com

10125569v.4

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION LAWS – STATE AND FEDERAL
By Paul C. Watler1
Jackson Walker L.L.P.
2323 Ross Avenue, Suite 600
Dallas, TX 75204
(214) 953-6000
pwatler@jw.com
A.

Texas Public Information Act2
1.

Overview

Enacted in 1973 as the Texas Open Records Act, the Texas Public Information Act (as it
was renamed) has been known as one of the strongest state freedom-of-information laws. 3 The
first section of the Public Information Act emphasizes this point:
Under the fundamental philosophy of the American constitutional
form of representative government that adheres to the principle
that government is the servant and not the master of the people, it
is the policy of this state that each person is entitled, unless
otherwise expressly provided by law, at all times to complete
information about the affairs of government and the official acts of
public officials and employees. The people, in delegating
authority, do not give their public servants the right to decide what
is good for the people to know and what is not good for them to
know. The people insist on remaining informed so that they may
retain control over the instruments they have created. The
provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to implement
this policy.
TEX. GOV’T CODE ANN. § 552.001(a).4
Anyone, including a non-citizen, may request public information from a governmental
body for any reason, purpose, or use. In fact, the Public Information Act prohibits the
government from questioning the motives or interests of a person making a request under the
Act. A public information officer may only ask a requestor to establish the requestor’s proper
identification, to attempt to narrow a request that seeks a large amount of information, and to
1

Mr. Watler, a partner in the Dallas office of Jackson Walker L.L.P., is a board certified, civil trial lawyer and
former president of the Freedom of Information Foundation of Texas, 1996 - 1999. He is listed in the Best Lawyers
in America in the categories of First Amendment law, bet-the-company litigation and commercial litigation.
2
Includes legislative developments through 2015 and case law developments through March, 2016.
3
One may question whether the Act in 2016 is still worthy of such a description in light of developments
during the past decade or so.
4
The Public Information Act may be found in Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code.
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

1

clarify a request if the governmental body is unclear as to what information is requested. If the
request is for a motor vehicle record, a public information officer may seek additional
information from the requestor to prove that he or she is entitled to information under the Texas
Transportation Code.5
All requests must be treated “uniformly without regard to the position or occupation of
the requestor, the person on whose behalf the request is made, or the status of the individual as a
member of the media.” TEX. GOV’T CODE ANN. § 552.223. Texas courts have specifically held
that the media has the same right of access to records under the law as do members of the general
public.
2.

Entities, Information Subject to the Act
a) “Governmental body” defined

The executive and legislative branches of state and local government, many quasigovernmental bodies, and certain property owners’ associations are “governmental bodies”
subject to the Act. § 552.003(1)(A). A nominally private entity may be deemed a governmental
body subject to the Act to the extent that it is supported in whole or in part by public funds such
that it is sustained by such funds or acts as the functional equivalent of a governmental body. 6
Only the judiciary7 is exempt from the Public Information Act, but records of the judiciary may
be available to the public under other state laws, such as Rule 12 of the Texas Rules of Judicial
Administration
b) “Public information” defined
The Public Information Act defines public information as that “collected, assembled, or
maintained under a law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official business”
by a governmental body or an individual officer or employee of a governmental body. TEX.
GOV’T CODE ANN. § 552.002(a), (a-1).
By amendment in 2013, the Legislature expressly extended the scope of the Act to reach
electronic communications by governmental officials or employees concerning official business,
even if not made or transmitted on a governmental computer, hardware or server. “The
definition of ‘public information’… applies to and includes any electronic communication
created, transmitted, received, or maintained on any device if the communication is in connection
with the transaction of official business.” Section 552.002(a-2). Pursuant to this provision, a

5

Transportation Code § 550.065 prohibits release of accident reports and certain information relating to accidents
unless the requestor can provide name of any person involved in the accident and either the date or specific location
of accident.
6
See Greater Houston Partnership v. Paxton, 468 S.W.3d 51 (Tex. 2015).
7
District attorneys are not considered part of the judiciary for purposes of the Public Information Act. Holmes v.
Morales, 924 S.W.2d 920 (Tex. 1996). Therefore, district attorneys are subject to the TPIA although the law
enforcement exception (Section 552.108) will frequently come into play in connection with public information
requests to prosecutors.
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

2

county commissioner was required to produce email correspondence from his personal email
account in which he was transacting official government business.8
c) “Super” public information
Section 552.022(a) of the Government Code provides a nonexclusive list of categories of
information that must be made available for examination upon request without exception “unless
… made confidential under this chapter or other law.”9 Items deemed public information not
subject to exception from disclosure that often may be useful for journalists to request include:


§ 552.022(a)(1) – “a completed report, audit, evaluation, or investigation made of,
for, or by a governmental body, except as provided by Section 552.108” (the law
enforcement exception);



§ 552.022(a)(3) – “information in an account, voucher, or contract relating to the
receipt or expenditure of public or other funds by a governmental body, if the
information is not otherwise made confidential by law”;



§ 552.022(a)(16) – “information that is in a bill for attorney’s fees and that is not
privileged under the attorney/client privilege”; and



§ 552.022(a)(18) – “a settlement agreement to which a governmental body is a
party unless the agreement is confidential under other law”.
3.

Exceptions to Disclosure

A record may not be withheld unless it falls within one of the more than 50 exceptions
listed in TPIA § 552.101 – 552.151. The following exceptions to disclosure are commonly relied
on by governmental bodies in response to record requests from journalists:
(a)

Section 552.101 – “information considered to be confidential by law, either
constitutional, statutory, or by judicial decision.” This exception includes
information, the disclosure of which would constitute the common law tort of
invasion of privacy through the public disclosure of private facts. Information is
protected by common law privacy if (1) it contains highly intimate or
embarrassing facts about a person’s private affairs the publication of which would
be highly objectionable to a reasonable person and (2) the information is not of
legitimate concern to the public. This exception also includes information
protected by constitutional privacy, which encompasses two types of privacy: (1)

8

Adkisson v. Paxton, 459 S.W.3d 761 (Tex. App. 2015, no pet.)
The 2011 Texas Legislature modified section 552.022(a) of the Government Code, which originally read
that “the following categories of information are public information and not excepted from required disclosure under
this chapter unless they are expressly confidential under other law.” The 2011 amendments also inserted the term
“Confidentiality of” in the heading of several exceptions, thus making the excepted information “confidential” for
purposes of § 552.022(a) and thereby considerably diluting the scope of information deemed public without
exception.
See, e.g., § 552.109, “EXCEPTION:
CONFIDENTIALITY OF CERTAIN PRIVATE
COMMUNICATIONS OF AN ELECTED OFFICE HOLDER” (emphasis added).
9

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

3

the right to make certain kinds of decisions independently and (2) a person’s
interest in avoiding disclosure of personal matters relating to “the most intimate
aspects of human affairs.”
Governmental entities may also rely upon a common law right of physical safety.
Tex. Dep’t of Pub. Safety v. Cox Tex. Newspapers, L.P. & Hearst Newspapers,
L.P., 343 S.W.3d 112 (Tex. 2011). The standard for determining whether such
right protects information is that which applies to Section 552.152, which allows a
governmental entity to withhold information if there is a “substantial threat of
physical harm.” Vague assertions of substantial harm will not suffice.
(b)

Section 552.102 – “information in a personnel file, the disclosure of which would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.” The Texas
Supreme Court ruled that Section 552.102 requires a balancing of interests
between privacy and disclosure as found in federal FOIA Exemption 6.
Application of the FOIA Exemption 6 balancing test in the context of a request
for disclosure of dates-of-birth of public employees resulted in the holding that
DOBs of state employees are excepted from public disclosure.
Texas
Comptroller of Public Accounts v. Attorney General of Texas, 354 S.W.3d 336
(Tex. 2010).10

(c)

Section 552.103 – information relating to records related to anticipated or pending
litigation involving the state or a political subdivision. This exception includes
legal proceedings to which an officer or employee of the state or political
subdivision is or may be a party. However, such information is not excepted if
other parties to the litigation have had access to it, such as in civil discovery.

(d)

Section 552.104 – information relating to competition or bidding. This excepts
from disclosure information that, if released, “would give advantage to a
competitor or bidder.” In Boeing Co. v. Paxton, the Texas Supreme Court recently
greatly expanded the application of the exception. 11 The court held the “test under
section 552.104 is whether knowing another bidder’s [or competitor’s
information] would be an advantage, not whether it would be a decisive
advantage.” The supreme court further held section 552.104 protection is not
limited to governmental bodies, and therefore a private third party may also
invoke this exception. The supreme court’s decision overrules a long line of
attorney general decisions limiting the application of section 552.104 to
governmental bodies and discussing the burden a governmental body must meet
in order to withhold information under section 552.104.

10

The Austin court of appeals relied on and notably extended the Comptroller ruling to hold that the dates-ofbirth of members of the general public contained in records of a governmental body are excepted from TPIA
disclosure under common law privacy. See Paxton v. City of Dallas, 2015 WL 3394061 (Tex. App.—Austin 2015,
pet. denied)
11
466 S.W.3d 831 (Tex. 2015).

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

4

(e)

Section 552.107 – “information that the Attorney General or an attorney of a
political subdivision is prohibited from disclosing because of a duty to the client
under the Texas Rules of Evidence, or the Texas Disciplinary Rules of
Professional Conduct, or of which a court by order has prohibited disclosure.”
For example, a distinct factual summary included with legal analysis in a report of
an attorney hired to conduct independent investigation of sexual assault
allegations was excepted from disclosure under this section as a communication
subject to the attorney-client privilege.12

(f)

Section 552.108 – law enforcement and prosecutorial records, the disclosure of
which “would interfere with the detection, investigation, or prosecution of a
crime.” Information may be withheld under this section even in cases where a
criminal investigation does not result in conviction or deferred adjudication.
However, “basic information about an arrested person, an arrest, or a crime is” not
excepted from disclosure (§ 552.108(c)). Although the law enforcement exception
is interpreted broadly, in 2013 the Act was amended to allow news media access
to “sensitive crime scene” photos held by law enforcement. TEX. GOVT. CODE
ANN. § 552.1085 (d) (West 2013).

(g)

Section 552.111 – inter-agency or intra-agency memoranda. This exception
protects advice, opinions or recommendations communicated to or from a
governmental agency, but not factual information. For example, a Texas court
has held that compiled results of an annual teacher effectiveness survey were
purely factual and not excepted by this exception. The agency memoranda
exception applies to only those agency communications that relate to the agency’s
policy making function.

(h)

Section 552.114 – student records. This exception applies to student records at
institutions funded by state revenues. In addition, Section 552.026 incorporates
the federal Family Educational Rights Privacy Act, which excepts student records
at institutions receiving federal funds.

(A complete list of exceptions can be found in the Public Information Handbook posted
on the Attorney General’s website.)
A governmental body relying on an exception to withhold information has the burden of
establishing that the record falls within the stated exception. In determining whether a record is
exempt from disclosure, courts are required to construe the Act liberally in favor of openness.
However, in 2011, the Legislature modified this burden for certain information under the
following categories by requiring the requestor to seek an Attorney General’s opinion for
12

The 13th court of appeals addressed the issue of attorney-client privilege in City of Dallas v. Paxton, 2015
WL 601974 (Tex. App. — Corpus Christi 2015, pet. granted). The court interpreted the privilege to apply not only
under Section 552.107 but also to fall within the scope of Section 552.101 which excepts information made
“confidential by law” from disclosure. The court also found that the City has demonstrated a compelling reason to
withhold the information by establishing that it is protected by the attorney-client privilege.
.
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

5

information withheld by the governmental entity. Motor vehicle records (Section 552.130) and
credit card, charge card, debit card, and access device number (Section 552.136).
4.

Procedure for Requesting Records

Under the Public Information Act, requests for records must be submitted in writing to
the officer for public information. The governmental body is not required to respond to oral
requests. A request for records should be as specific as possible to avoid unnecessary delay or
unforeseen expense. This is particularly important in light of the Texas Supreme Court’s
determination in 2010 that the time limitation for a governmental entity to seek an Attorney
General’s opinion starts from the date a requestor responds to a governmental entity’s “goodfaith request for clarification or narrowing of an unclear or overbroad information request.” City
of Dallas v. Abbott, 304 S.W.3d 380 (Tex. 2010). The 2011 legislative changes also makes clear
that the re-setting of the governmental body’s time deadline to request an opinion is likewise reset where a modification is made to a request by a requestor in response to a deposit or cost bond
estimate (Section 552.263 (e-1)). The written request does not have to be in any particular form
– e-mail and facsimile requests are fine – nor does the request have to contain any “magic
words.”
The written request should be addressed to the officer for public information, defined in
the Act as the “chief administrative officer of a governmental body.” TEX. GOV’T CODE ANN.
§ 552.201 (Vernon 2004). The best practice is to send a duplicate copy of the request to the
clerk who normally processes requests for the agency. Once a governmental body has received
the written request, the agency must “promptly” make the requested records available for
copying or inspecting. The Act requires governmental bodies to provide a “suitable copy of (the)
public information within a reasonable time” after receipt of the request. What is “reasonable”
depends on the facts surrounding each request. Although the agency must respond to the request
no later than 10 business days after its receipt, nothing in the Act prevents a requestor from
specifying a shorter deadline. Where the requested records are readily available, a “reasonable”
time for production may be fewer than 10 business days. If an agency cannot produce the
requested records within 10 business days, it must inform the requestor and set a reasonable date
and time when the records will be available.
The person requesting the information has 10 days in which to examine the records once
they are made available by the agency, but the requestor may seek two 10-day extensions upon
written request. The agency is not required to provide information in a specific format. The
agency has the right to charge a reasonable fee for duplicating the records, or if the records are
stored in a computer, to be reimbursed for the computer time required to retrieve the records. If
the anticipated costs of duplication or computer time are extensive, the agency may require a
deposit. Failure to make the requested deposit is deemed a withdrawal of the request. Charges
for inspection and/or copying of public information may not be excessive. A person who pays
more than actual reproduction costs as a result of the governmental body’s bad faith is entitled to
recover three times the amount of the overcharge.
If the governmental body receives a request that it believes falls within one of the Act’s
exceptions, it has two options: (1) the agency may still choose to release the information, unless
the information is deemed confidential by law; or (2) the agency may inform the person making
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

6

the request that it is withholding the requested information and must, not later than 10 business
days after receiving the request, specify the provision of the Act that permits the agency to keep
the information secret and seek a decision from the Texas Attorney General as to whether the
information falls within a stated exception. If the agency fails to make a timely request for an
Attorney General’s opinion, it is presumed that the requested information should be made public.
In the event the request for an opinion is not timely, the agency must release the information
unless the agency can show a compelling reason to withhold the information. Nonetheless, the
governmental entity should not use the request for an Attorney General’s opinion to
unreasonably withhold all information requested in its entirety. Rather, a governmental body is
required to immediately release as much of the public information as it can. See e.g., City of
Houston v. Houston Chronicle Pub. Co., 673 S.W.2d 316, 323-24 (Tex. App. –Houston [1st
Dist.] 1984, no writ) (“[t]hat part of the request which contains public information must be
disclosed immediately…The fact that the request may conceivably reach non-disclosable
information does not relieve the City of its duty to offer prompt access to as much of the
requested information as is public”).
Once the Attorney General’s office receives a request for an opinion, the Attorney
General must render a decision within 45 business days, although the Attorney General may seek
a 10-day extension. If the Attorney General determines that the requested records must be
released under the Act, the agency is bound to produce the records unless it chooses to challenge
the Attorney General’s opinion in state district court. The agency must file suit against the
Attorney General no later than 30 calendar days after the Attorney General issues the opinion.
The requestor may intervene in the suit. Decisions by the attorney general are not binding on the
court, but courts traditionally have given great weight to the opinions when ruling on cases under
the Public Information Act.
The Act makes it a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or jail time of up to six months
if the officer for public information, with criminal negligence, refuses to give access to or
provide copying of records made public under the statute.
The sole remedy for a requestor for the failure of a government body to produce
information under the Act is a writ of mandamus. TEX. GOV’T CODE ANN. § 552.321 (Vernon
2004). In order to be entitled to a mandamus, the petitioner must prove that the governmental
entity “refuses” to produce the requested information. City of El Paso v. Abbott, 444 S.W.3d
315, 322-27 (Tex. App. — Austin 2014, pet. filed). A requestor need not exhaust administrative
remedies before suit but may sue for statutory mandamus regardless of whether an AG decision
has been requested or issued. Kallinen v. City of Houston, 462 S.W.3d 25 (Tex. 2015).
5.

Resources

The Freedom of Information Foundation of Texas (www.foift.org) provides a free legal
hotline for informal attorney advice on TPIA, TOMA and FOIA issues, among other things,
which may be reached at (800) 580-6651. The Texas Attorney General’s website provides
access to Attorney General rulings and the Texas Attorney General Public Information
handbook. See http://www.oag.state.tx.us/open/index. shtml. For a guide to other state FOI
laws, see http://www.rcfp.org/open-governments-guide.
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

7

6.

Sample TPIA Request Letter

<Date>
<Your name>
<Return address>
<Telephone number>
<Name of government agency>
<Address of government agency>
Dear Officer for Public Information:
This request is made under the Texas Public Information Act, Chapter 552, Texas
Government Code, which guarantees the public’s access to information in the custody of
governmental bodies. I respectfully request <copies of, access to> the following
information:
<List here as specifically as possible the information you are seeking: documents, letters,
memoranda, reports, etc. If you know the dates, report numbers, titles, or even the
specific governmental subdivision that produced the information, list it.>
<Optional, when time is a factor> In the interest of expediency, and to minimize the
research and/or duplication burden on your staff, I would be pleased to personally
examine the relevant records if you would grant me immediate access to the requested
material. Additionally, and since time is a factor, please communicate with me by
telephone rather than by mail. My telephone number is: <insert telephone number.>
<If applicable add> Disclosure of this information is in the public interest because
providing a copy of the information primarily benefits the general public. I therefore
request a waiver of all fees and charges pursuant to Section 552.267 of the act.
I look forward to hearing from you promptly, as specified in the law. Thank you for your
cooperation.
Sincerely,
<signature>

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

8

B.

Texas Open Meetings Act
1.

Overview

The purpose of the Texas Open Meetings Act is to “safeguard the public’s interest in
knowing the workings of its governmental bodies.” Cox Enter., Inc. v. Board of Trustees of
Austin Indep. Sch. Dist., 706 S.W.2d 956, 960 (Tex. 1986). Enacted in Chapter 551 of the Texas
Government Code, the statute prohibits members of state and local governmental bodies from
holding closed meetings, except under certain circumstances. A member who knowingly
participates in a closed meeting where a closed meeting is not permitted by the Act, or who
knowingly conspires to circumvent the Act by meeting in a number less than a quorum, may be
charged with a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $100 to $500, imprisonment for one to six
months, or both.
TOMA has withstood constitutional challenge that it infringed the free speech rights of
Texas office holders. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held that TOMA is
content-neutral and is not unconstitutionally overbroad or vague. Asgeirsson v. Abbott, 696 F.3d
454, 467 (5th Cir. 2012) cert. denied, 133 S. Ct. 1634 (U.S. 2013)
Any gathering of a quorum of members of a governmental body, or a quorum of
members and any other person, to “deliberate” on public business or public policy must be open
to the public after proper notice, as set forth in the Act. “Quorum” means a majority of the
governmental body, unless defined differently by applicable law or rule or by the governmental
body’s charter. Members of a governmental body can gather in numbers of a quorum or more
for social functions unrelated to public business or to attend regional, state, or national
workshops, as long as no formal action is taken and any discussion of public business is
incidental to the social function or workshop. Members may not meet in numbers less than a
quorum to deliberate about public business.
The Act applies to all members of a “governmental body,” which is defined in relevant
part as: (A) a board, commission, department, committee, or agency within the executive or
legislative branch of state government that is directed by one or more elected or appointed
members; (B) a county commissioners court in the state; (C) a municipal governing body in the
state; (D) a deliberative body that has rulemaking or quasi-judicial power and that is classified as
a department, agency, or political subdivision of a county or municipality; (E) a school district
board of trustees; (F) a county board of school trustees; (G) a county board of education; (H) the
governing board of a special district created by law. TEX. GOV’T CODE ANN. § 551.001(3)
(Vernon 2004). In addition, committees formed from members of governmental bodies covered
by the statute must meet in public when considering matters pending before the parent body.
However, advisory sub-units that do not have rulemaking or quasi-judicial power are not
considered governmental bodies and are not required to hold open meetings. The judiciary
branch is exempt from the law.
The Texas Attorney General has ruled that the collective bargaining sessions between a
municipality and a police officers association are open to the public. The Attorney General also
has found that internal deliberations of the police officers association’s collective bargaining
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

9

team are open to the public if a quorum of members is present, but such deliberations may be
closed if counsel is participating.
2.

Public Notice Requirement

The Open Meetings Act requires that most governmental bodies provide the public notice
of a meeting at least 72 hours before the scheduled time of the meeting. State boards and
commissions, however, must post notice at least seven days before a scheduled meeting. Public
notices must specify the time, place, and subject of the meeting. Governmental actions taken
without proper notice can be voided by the courts.
Public notices must be made “in a place readily accessible to the general public at all
times.” The Act specifies where certain governmental bodies must post their notices: (1) state
governmental bodies must post a notice at the secretary of state’s office, which should post the
notice on the Internet; (2) county governmental bodies must post notice at the county courthouse;
(3) city governmental bodies must post notice at city hall; and (4) a school district must post
notice at the school district’s central administrative offices and provide notice by telephone or
telegraph to any news media requesting such notice and agreeing to pay all expenses incurred in
such special notice. The Texas Supreme Court has held that a notice posted on Friday in a
courthouse that was locked over the weekend was not readily accessible to the general public;
therefore, action taken at a Monday meeting was void.
A governmental body may call an emergency session on two hours’ notice to discuss an
urgent public necessity, such as imminent threats to public health and safety, or unforeseeable
events requiring immediate action. In addition, an item may be added to the agenda of a meeting
whose notice already has been posted if two hours’ notice is given and the posted notice specifies
the emergency requiring consideration of such additional items. Special notice of an emergency
item must be given to all news media that have filed a request for special notice and agreed to be
reimbursed for the cost of providing the special notice.
All public notices must specifically disclose every subject to be considered at the
scheduled meeting, even those subjects the Act permits to be discussed in a closed executive
session. The statute does not require governmental bodies to post the text of resolutions or detail
the consequences of a particular agenda item, only that the public must be notified of the topic to
be discussed. For example, a Texas court has held that a notice listing only “personnel” and
“litigation” failed to provide sufficient notice that a school board would consider selection of a
new school superintendent and discuss a pending desegregation lawsuit. Moreover, as public
interest increases in a subject to be discussed, the Act requires more detailed descriptions of the
subject to be included in the public notice.
The Act further requires that a governmental body prepare and keep minutes or make a
tape recording of each open meeting. These minutes and tape recordings are public records.
Recent amendments to the Open Meetings Act address two technology issues associated
with open meetings: video conferencing and message boards. Section 551.127 now allows
governmental bodies to participate remotely in public meetings via videoconference. TEX. GOV’T
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

10

CODE ANN. § 551.127 (West 2013). Meeting notices must specify this physical location as well
as the internet web address for the meeting’s broadcast.
Section 551.006 addresses the use of text messaging and e-mail communication by public
officials, and allows public access to communications regarding public business and policy. TEX.
GOV’T CODE ANN. § 551.006 (West 2013). Section 551.006 requires governmental bodies to post
public official discussions to an online message board, available to the public. The messages
must be displayed in real time for at least 30 days after first posted and must be searchable.
3.

Exceptions to Open Meetings Requirement

Under certain circumstances, the Open Meetings Act permits a governmental body to
meet in a closed executive session. However, prior to convening an executive session, a quorum
of the governmental body must meet in a properly noticed open meeting. The presiding member
must announce that a closed session will be held, and he or she must specify which provision of
the Act authorizes the closed session. Members may not take votes or any final action in the
closed session. As discussed above, the public notice must identify the subjects that will be
discussed in any closed session. The governmental body must make and keep a certified agenda
or tape recording of the entirety of a closed session. The certified agenda or tape recording is
confidential, but a state district court may order their release in litigation involving a violation of
the Act.
The most common exceptions to the Act that permit a governmental body to meet in a
closed executive session are:
(1)

Consultation with an attorney on contemplated or pending litigation, on
settlement offers, and on similar matters. The communication must be
related to an opinion on law or legal services or assistance in some
contemplated or pending legal proceeding. The exception also applies to
communications with an attorney regarding legal issues raised by an
existing or proposed contract, but the Act does not authorize discussions
of other, non-legal matters related to the contract. Topics outside this
exception may not be discussed in executive session, even if an attorney is
present;

(2)

Discussion of the purchase, exchange, lease, or value of real property or
any prospective donations if public discussion would have a detrimental
effect on the government’s negotiating position;

(3)

Discussion of personnel matters regarding specific individual employees
of the governmental body. However, the exception does not apply to
discussion of the selection of an independent contractor or consulting firm;

(4)

Closed meetings to deliberate business and financial issues relating to
contract negotiations are permitted (1) by a commissioners court of a
county with a population of 400,000 or more; or (2) by the Texas Facilities
Commission;

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

11

(5)

Discussion with one or more employees of the Texas Growth Fund or with
a third party if the only purpose of the discussion is to receive information
or to question employees or third parties relating to investment in a
business entity the disclosure of which would give advantage to a
competitor. Only meetings related to either investments in private
business entities or investments in publicly traded business entities that
need not be registered under the Securities Exchange Act may be closed
under this section;

(6)

Communication regarding the placement of security devices or security
personnel; and

(7)

School boards may meet in private to discuss individual cases of student
discipline. Such meetings may be open, however, upon the request of the
parent or guardian of the student. In addition, a school board operating
under a provision of the Texas Education Code may privately discuss “the
standards, guidelines, terms, or conditions” it will follow when consulting
with representatives of employee groups.

4.

Guidelines for Asserting Right of Access to Meetings

If a governmental body denies access to a meeting or otherwise fails to comply with the
Open Meetings Act, the person requesting access should cite the Act and demand that public
officials specify the specific provision of the Act that permits the body to meet in private. If the
public official continues to deny access in violation of the Act, the person requesting access
should consider retaining an attorney who is familiar with the Act. The statute permits
immediate access to the court for the institution of a suit for mandamus or injunction to stop,
prevent, or reverse a violation or threatened violation of the Act. In addition, public officials can
be criminally charged for violating the Act, and if found guilty, they can be punished by a fine of
$100 to $500, imprisonment for one to six months, or both.
The news media should report on violations or threatened violations of the Act because
compliance with the statute depends as much upon public awareness and pressure as the threat of
civil or criminal sanctions.
C.

Federal Freedom of Information Act
1.

Overview

Congress passed the Freedom of Information Act (“FOIA”) in 1966 and substantially
amended it in 1974 and in 1996. Today, FOIA grants the public and news media presumptive
access to a staggering amount of information. The U.S. Supreme Court has said that the purpose
of FOIA is to “ensure an informed citizenry, vital to the functioning of a democratic society,
needed to check against corruption and to hold the governors accountable to the governed.”
NLRB v. Robbins Tire & Rubber Co., 437 U.S. 214, 242 (1978).

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

12

Under FOIA, the public has the right to inspect government records unless the
information sought is within one of nine statutory exceptions. FOIA applies to virtually every
unit of the federal executive branch except for the president and the president’s immediate staff.
In addition to independent regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission, FOIA
grants access to executive-branch departments, such as the Defense Department and the Justice
Department, and government-controlled corporations, such as the Postal Service. However, the
Act does not cover the federal legislative or judicial branches.
In general, agency records subject to FOIA are records written, commissioned, or ordered
by the agency. However, not all records in an agency’s possession are “agency records” subject
to FOIA. If the record is used for some official agency purpose, then it is likely subject to FOIA.
The Act requires agencies to publish in the Federal Register the following general information:
(1) descriptions of agency organization and office addresses; (2) statements of the general course
and method of agency operation; (3) rules of procedure and descriptions of forms; and (4)
substantive rules of general applicability and general policy statements. The Act also requires
agencies to make available for public inspection and copying: (1) final opinions made in the
adjudication of cases; (2) statements of policy and interpretations adopted by an agency, but not
published in the Federal Register; (3) administrative staff manuals that affect the public; (4)
copies of records released in response to FOIA requests that an agency determines have been or
will likely be the subject of additional requests; and (5) a general index of released records
determined to have been or likely to be the subject of additional requests. All other “records,”
regardless of the form in which they are stored, are presumed to be subject to disclosure under
FOIA.
Any person may make a FOIA request. The Act broadly defines “person” as an
individual (including foreign citizens), partnership, corporation, association, or foreign or
domestic government. The purpose or intent of the person requesting records is irrelevant under
FOIA.
2.

Procedure for Requesting Records

A person seeking records from a federal agency should first try to obtain the documents
through informal means. Contact the FOIA officer at the agency and specify the records sought
by name, number, date, and description, if possible. If the informal request is denied, the next
step is to send the FOIA officer a written request for the records via certified mail (a form is
provided below). Once the agency receives the written request, it has 10 business days to
respond with its decision to grant or deny access to the records. The agency is not required to
release the requested records in that time, although it must do so within a reasonable time. An
agency may request extensions of time to respond if the request requires: (1) a search from
several offices; (2) the review of a voluminous amount of records; or (3) consultation with
another agency.
FOIA does not authorize an agency to withhold an entire document when only isolated
portions of it contain information that is exempt from disclosure. In such cases, the agency may
redact the exempted portions, but it must release the remainder of the document.

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

13

The fees an agency may charge in responding to a FOIA request vary with the status of
the requestor. The Act permits different fees to be charged to commercial requestors,
representatives of the news media, educational or noncommercial scientific institutions, and
individuals. Accordingly, a requestor may be asked to provide additional information to permit
the agency to determine the appropriate fees.
If the agency denies a FOIA request, it must specify the provision of the Act that permits
the agency to withhold the information. A requestor may appeal the denial to the head of the
government agency by sending an appeal letter. An appeal can also be made if the agency failed
to conduct an adequate search for the requested documents. The agency must render a decision
on the appeal within 20 business days, but it may extend this deadline by an additional 10 days.
After exhausting all administrative remedies, a requestor may file suit against the agency in
federal district court.
3.

Exceptions to FOIA

FOIA sets forth nine disclosure exemptions that agencies may rely on to keep records
secret. The FOIA exceptions are not mandatory, so an agency has discretion to release records
even if they fall within one of the exceptions. The agency has the burden to show how a
particular record fits within one of the exceptions. The FOIA exceptions are:
(1)

National security. Documents may be classified as top secret, secret or
confidential under this exception if their disclosure “reasonably could be
expected to cause damage to the national security.” Courts are
increasingly reluctant to second-guess an agency’s decision to withhold
documents under this exception;

(2)

Internal agency personnel rules and practices. This category includes
records related to internal matters that do not “shed significant light on a
rule or practice” of an agency;

(3)

Information specifically exempted from disclosure by a separate federal
statute. This catch-all provision incorporates other federal statutes that
specifically prohibit the release of certain information, such as individuals’
tax returns and Census Bureau records;

(4)

Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from
businesses in confidence;

(5)

Internal agency memos and policy discussions. This exemption is
intended to shield the same kinds of documents that would normally be
privileged in the discovery phase of a civil lawsuit, including records
protected by the attorney-client privilege and the executive privilege,
which covers working papers, draft reports, or preliminary opinion memos
that are used in the advisory and deliberative processes of government;

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

14

(6)

Personal information, such as medical reports, that if disclosed would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s personal
privacy. This exception generally applies to intimate personal or family
details that are not considered to be of important public interest.
Application of this exception requires a balancing of the individual’s
privacy rights and the public’s interest in disclosure;

(7)

Law enforcement investigative information. This exception allows law
enforcement records to be kept confidential if their release could (1)
interfere with enforcement proceedings; (2) deprive a person of a right to a
fair trial; (3) constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy; (4) disclose
the identity of a confidential source; (5) disclose law enforcement
techniques or procedures that could lead to circumvention of the law; or;
(6) endanger the life or physical safety of any individual. Law
enforcement agencies need only show that disclosure “could reasonably be
expected” to produce one of the six enumerated ends listed above;

(8)

Federally regulated financial institutions. This exception is intended to
protect the security of financial institutions by withholding evaluations of
a bank’s stability from the public and to encourage cooperation between
bank examiners and employees; and

(9)

Oil- and gas-well data of private companies.

A record that partially falls under one of these exemptions may still be released in
redacted form, unless the exempt and non-exempt material are so intertwined that segregation
would render the non-exempt portion meaningless.
4.

FOIA Resources


www.foia.gov



U.S. Dept. of Justice – http://www.justice.gov/oip/foiaresources.html



The FOIA Project – http://foiaproject.org/



Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press –
http://www.rcfp.org/federal-open-government-guide

FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

15

5.

Sample FOIA Request Letter

<Date>
<Your name>
<Return address>
<Telephone number>
<Name of government agency>
<Address of government agency>
Dear Freedom of Information Act Officer:
This is a request under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552 et seq.
I respectfully request <copies of, access to> the following information:
<List here as specifically as possible the information you are seeking: documents, letters,
memoranda, reports, etc. If you know the dates, report numbers, titles, or even the
specific governmental subdivision that produced the information, list it.>
In order to help to determine my status to assess fees, you should know that I am <insert
a suitable description of the requester and the purpose of the request. Sample requester
description: a representative of the news media affiliated with ___________ (list
newspaper, etc.), and this request is made as part of news gathering and not for a
commercial use.>
<Optional, when time is a factor> In the interest of expediency, and to minimize the
research and/or duplication burden on your staff, I would be pleased to personally
examine the relevant records if you would grant me immediate access to the requested
material. Additionally, and since time is a factor, please communicate with me by
telephone rather than by mail. My telephone number is: <insert telephone number.>
<Optional> I am willing to pay fees for this request up to a maximum of $_____. If you
estimate that the fees will exceed this limit, please inform me first.
<Optional> I request a waiver of all fees for this request. Disclosure of the requested
information to me is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to
public understanding of the operations or activities of the government and is not
primarily in my commercial interest. [Include a specific explanation.]
I look forward to hearing from you promptly, as specified in the law. Thank you for your
cooperation.
Sincerely,
<signature>
FOI LAWS: State and Federal
10125569v.4

16

