ALMOST EVERYTHING IRE KNOWS ABOUT

INVESTIGATING SPORTS
FROM LITTLE LEAGUES TO BIG LEAGUES
Tipsheet credits
Ken Armstrong (The Marshall Project), Dan Bauman (The Chronicle of Higher Education), Steve
Berkowitz (USA Today), Walt Bogdanich (The New York Times) David Donald (Center for Public Integrity)
Steve Doig (Arizona State University) Paula Lavigne (ESPN), Noah Pransky (WTPS Tampa), Jill
Riepenhoff (The Columbus Dispatch), Samantha Sunne (independent journalist), Jodi Upton (Syracuse
University), Brad Wolverton (NerdWallet)

Youth Sports: a $5 billion industry













News archive searches. A treasure trove of little league coaches who have done bad things.
(The Dispatch found more than 50 in an eight-year period in Ohio. There were coaches who
assaulted fans and umpires, coaches who sexually assaulted kids, a coach who called African
American kids a racial slur.)
National Alliance of Youth Sports. Can provide a list of youth-sports groups that receive their
seal of approval. In Ohio, we had only 90 on the NAYS list out of nearly 600 organizations here.
State teacher/coach discipline data. Bad apples often turn to youth sports after they lose their
license to teach or coach in a K-12 school. Ohio has more than 650 coaches who were
disciplined by the state education department.
Consumer Product Safety Commission’s National Electronic Injury Surveillance System. A
sample of U.S. hospitals on emergency room visits associated with a consumer product – can
isolate sports and injuries by age.
Tax returns from nonprofits. Referred to as the IRS form 990, these documents provide a
wealth of financial information about nonprofits and most youth sports organizations are not-forprofit groups. With a Guidestar account, you can download the leagues in your area. You can
isolate them by the IRS’s NTEE Codes – they typically begin with “N”. For example, N64 is soccer
clubs/leagues.
Survey. We sent a survey to all high school athletes in central Ohio about their youth-sport
experiences and received more than 1,000 responses. Among the interesting findings, the ages
at which they began to specialize.
NCAA Equity in Athletics Disclosure form. This can be obtained from any public university and
has a wealth of information. For youth sports, you can find scholarship information there –
specifically, how few there really are by sport.

High Schools



Nationwide Children’s Hospital in Columbus. Epidemiologist R. Dawn Comstock tracks
injuries among high-school athletes across the country and can provide robust aggregate data.
Your state’s high school athletic association governing body. Just like the NCAA, the state
version wields massive power over teenagers. In Ohio, it’s a nonprofit, exempt from public
records laws. But its board minutes provide a wealth of story tips. One rich example: rules against



transferring schools to prevent recruiting of star athletes often ends up harming the junior varsity
volleyball player who had to transfer because she was the victim of bullying. The organization
itself also could be ripe for investigation about how it operates and spends its money.
Participation rates. The National Federation of State High School Associations tracks historical
data on participation by sport and sex. Has been used to show declines in football since the
concussion alarms started sounding.

Public universities



















Complimentary cars. Every major college athletic department has special relationships with car
dealers. Give a car to a coach, get a bundle of tickets to the games. At Ohio State, the football
coach’s wife gets a shiny new Lexis every six months. The marching band director drives a
donated a 1997 Buick LeSabre with 94,000 miles.
Flight manifests. Travel to the biggest games typically attracts a couple plane loads of people.
One will carry the team, athletic department staff and important boosters. Another will carry the
president, dignitaries, politicians and other muckety mucks.
Occasional meal forms. NCAA allows boosters to take a team to dinner as long as they get
approval from the athletics department.
Will-call tickets. Most athletes and coaches are allowed to invite people to games. Former Ohio
State running back Maurice Clarett had a bookie on one of his lists. Current football players had
car dealers and drug-dealing tattoo artists.
Car registration forms. Most major universities require athletes to fill out forms detailing what
kind of car they are driving, how much they paid for it, who co-signed for the loan, etc. They often
are works of fiction.
Summer job forms. The NCAA requires every athlete to fill out a form telling the athletics
department what they’re doing for the summer. The most prestigious athletes get jobs arranged
by coaches. Five months after winning the national championship, Ohio State football players got
jobs for $18 an hour for what records describe as "public relations," visiting nursing-home
residents. This arrangement led to an NCAA violation.
President’s box. Who has been invited to the best seats in the house and what do they do up
there during the game? They eat a lot of expensive food.
Ticket database. Then learn of landmines like this: the largest single ticket holder at Ohio
Stadium is the publisher of The Dispatch.
NCAA violations. Schools are required to report when rules both big (boosters gave quarterback
money) and small (coach accidentally sent a text message to a recruit). There are tons of stories
there. NCAA publishes the major infractions database on its website (ncaa.org) by school with full
report of what went wrong. Be warned, all names have been removed. Most schools also keep a
summary sheet of all violations – quick way to see what’s going on. Very limited information,
though.
NCAA financials. To get a complete picture of a school without pouring through a budget,
request the financial document sent to the NCAA every January. Avoid Equity in Athletics
Disclosure Act data from the U.S. Department of Education – it’s often wrong. USA Today
collects and analyzes the NCAA financial documents every year.
Athletically-related outside-income forms. An NCAA rule requires all athletics department
personnel to annually disclose sources – and amounts – of income from things like sports camps;
endorsement deals and TV and radio appearances (if not already covered under a contract);
instructional books and videos. This document is not filed with the NCAA’s central office, but it is
supposed to be submitted to, and approved, by the school’s CEO or their designee. Sometimes a















coach or staffer has no such income. Sometimes, these amounts can be in the hundreds of
thousands.
The NCAA’s Student Assistance Fund, whose goal is to provide direct financial support to
players, draws from the association's multibillion-dollar media-rights deals. In recent years it has
distributed about $75 million annually to Division I athletes. The money has helped colleges
reimburse players for such things as clothing, health insurance, summer school, and many other
costs that their scholarships don't cover. But not all of the dollars directly help students. Story
idea: Athletics compliance officers often keep a record of how this money flows from the
conferences to their member schools. Request a copy of the form, which sometimes shows
distributions across every university in the league. Be sure to follow up with the compliance staff
at the conference and university levels to make sure you understand what the numbers mean.
Example: This Chronicle of Higher Education piece showed how some Big Ten institutions were
misusing Student Assistance Fund dollars.
Records pertaining to the use of university-owned aircraft by athletics department
personnel for recruiting and other business. Not all schools have these planes, but in March
2015, the Lawrence (Kan.) Journal-World published the results of an investigation that found that
over a five-year span, the University of Kansas spent $3.5 million flying coaches, administrators
and others on some 641 trips, mostly on university-owned aircraft but occasionally on stateowned or charter planes. About two-thirds of the money paid for flights by KU coaches and
athletic administrators.
Contracts pertaining to corporate sponsorship deals, shoe and apparel deals, namingrights deals, marketing and multi-media rights arrangements and non-conference games.
The terms for all of these transactions are committed to writing. Corporate sponsorship deals can
be difficult to get in some states, but in April 2015, after months of fencing with university officials
and the state attorney general, the San Antonio Express-News published a look at the University
of Texas’ 19 corporate sponsorship deals. The Portland (Ore.) Business Journal pretty
comprehensively tracks shoe and apparel deals. Games that match theoretically lesser teams
player against big-time teams – so-called “guarantee” games – have become big-money deals,
as have neutral-site games between big-time teams.
Compliance-department audits. Each D-I school is required by the NCAA to have an audit
every four years. Some schools, such as OSU, do them annually. Most recent audit at Ohio State
showed problems with athletes’ car registrations – they were driving cars that didn’t belong to
them – and missing equipment and apparel. Federal agents recovered lots of OSU equipment
during a drug raid.
Emails and phone records. Who is talking to whom. Former Ohio State football coach Jim
Tressel made lots of phone calls – including two to an FBI agent – when he learned of NCAA
violations. He called lots of interesting people – just not the ones he should have called.
Academic Progress Rate and graduation rates. This is how the NCAA now measures the
academic success of college athletics. Teams that don’t make the grade risk punishment. For
Division I, there are two sets of graduation rates – one compiled by the NCAA and one compiled
by the U.S. Department of Education. Both have their pros and cons. The NCAA rate measures
everyone, regardless of where they graduate. For example, if an athlete transferred from Ohio
State to Ohio University and then graduated, Ohio State is not penalized for a drop out. The
federal rate penalizes schools for drop outs even if they graduate elsewhere.
Coaches’ contracts. Find gems like this: At 175 pounds, Ohio State football coach Jim Tressel
already is worth more than his weight in gold. The new $2.6 million contract trumped a 2003
agreement that had guaranteed Tressel $1.6 million this season, roughly the value of his weight
























in gold. Now, he's platinum. These days, many assistants at top-tier programs also have
contracts.
State ethics board records. The Seattle Times’ Ken Armstrong says records from the
Washington State Executive Ethics Board document their investigations of all kinds of things
involving the UW athletic department. These included investigations of the coach's contract (in
particular, payments from Nike), as well as the coach's use of a booster's private jet and the
expenses racked up by the university during a Rose Bowl trip.
Media guides. Examine, for example, the majors of football and basketball players to search for
clusters of majors.
Personnel files. They are public records in many states. It’s a good way to find out if a coach has
been admonished for breaking NCAA rules.
FOIA the FOIAs to see who is asking for what because there may be other types of documents
reporters want that you aren’t familiar with.
eBay. Who is selling what?
Plagiarism Checker. At most universities, staffers get the nice perk of subsidized or free college.
Some coaches and staff will take advantage of this, going on to get their master’s or doctorate.
Check their papers for plagiarism. It can happen, again to a senator (See: http://goo.gl/TKnt0U). I
like http://www.plagtracker.com/, but there are plenty of sites out there that check work for you.
Search your coach’s name at Google Scholar.
Resume Checker. Did your coach/director graduate with the degree they claim? Call the
registrar at the university listed on the resume to verify. In Missouri, a candidate for governor said
he earned a degree in economics from Mizzou. One quick call to the registrar office and a St.
Louis Post-Dispatch reporter learned that the candidate had actually graduated with a home
economics degree (goo.gl/HLKPbL)
FCC Complaints for College Sports Networks, TV and Radio Broadcasts Associated with
College Games, Etc. Worst-case scenario, you have a blog post and a laugh.
Negotiation documents and personnel files for new hires. This only applies to public
universities. Also, try to find out where else your person of interest interviewed. If they interviewed
at a public university, those documents can shed light on the deal they reached at your private
institution.
Intellectual Property (Trademark and Copyright). What trademarks or copyrights does the
university or athletic department/foundation own? (The Chronicle of Higher Education has a rundown of 88 bizarre ones.) Find who has the license agreements to produce those materials at the
U.S. Copyright Office.
UCC Liens. Consider a non-profit that wants lease a product rather than by it -- for our purposes,
a car or copier. In my experience, leasing these items requires paperwork to be filed with the
secretary of state. Check these UCC liens out. The documents may show you what items are
being leased for your university’s athletic department. Personal Property Taxes In St. Louis,
Webster University was paying personal property tax on a number of vehicles used by athletic
department. May be worth a look at other universities.
Federal lawsuits against athletics/coaches involving civil rights issues. This can involve
sexual and racial discrimination.
Student discipline data. In some states such as Ohio and Florida, public universities can
release the names of students who have been found responsible for committing an act of
violence and their punishments. It’s an exemption to the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act. Some states have expressly banned this information from becoming public, but not all. The
answer to why a star athlete suddenly left the team for an undisclosed rules violation is often
found in discipline records.

Private colleges and nonprofits athletic conferences (and the publics, too)











Social Media. Let’s face it: At private universities, there aren’t a lot of open-information channels.
What we do have, though, is vanity. Peruse the Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, (etc., etc.) posts of
coaches and players, and see what they are up to. Are coaches taking lavish trips to far off
locales? Are they spending more time off campus than on it? Perhaps they are endorsing
products on the platform without disclosure or compensation to the university?
Dept. of Education - Equity in Athletics Disclosure Act data. For participating sports,
coaching staff and salaries, revenues and expenses, and supplemental info. It can be fraught with
errors. But for private universities, it’s the best option. http://ope.ed.gov/athletics/index.aspx
IRS form 990. Check out how the Big 10, Pac 10 and others spend and divvy up gazillions of
dollars. Check out how much the conference commissioner is paid each year. Also check out
booster clubs finances. Also, at private schools, look at the highest paid employees – it’s often
the football coach. Even the football coach at perennial Division III football powerhouse Mount
Union in Ohio is among the highest paid at that school. Check with your local campus library to
see if they have an account. www.Guidestar.org.
IRS form 990 2.0. Check out the bowls.
NCAA.org. Wealth of information/data on injuries, doping, academics. Some information is
broken down by school; some is aggregated. But it provides a benchmark.
USASpending.gov. Federal grants and contracts to the athletic department or sports programs
from.
Athletic department foundations. There are a number of athletic foundations affiliated with
public and private universities. The documents for these foundations are rich with information. For
instance, the University of Alabama athletic foundation owns the house Nick Saban lives in. Take
a look. Check out Dan Bauman’s primer on what to look for. And this primer.

Colleges and Pros











Liquor Licenses and Liquor Revocations for Stadiums. No explanation necessary!
Bonding. How are stadiums and other sports amenities being paid for? Sometimes it’s with
bonds. Pay attention to credit rating reports (Fitch, Moody’s, Standard & Poor's) for your
university. Stadium financials may be mentioned in connection to the bond rating. For private
universities, information on bonds can also be found in 990s and financial audits. At public
universities, financial audits are an option, but you can probably get more information via an open
records request.
Extra! Extra! IRE’s story database always has a wealth of ideas. Look under the sports category,
see what’s been done and tailor it to your own school. Imitation is the best form of flattery.
www.ire.org
Sex Offender Registries. It can happen with players and staff.
Tax Liens. Much like a bankruptcy filing, a tax lien can give you a lot of insight into the financial
responsibility of a coach or player. If your athletic director can’t pay his taxes or electric bill,
should he be put in charge of the department’s large checkbook?
Registered Businesses. Does your coach run a lucrative side business? You should check via
your Secretary of State’s Office.
Civil lawsuits against an athletic department/pro team. NCAA wrongdoing can be found in
seemingly unrelated civil lawsuits. It happened at Ohio State with long-ago fired basketball coach
Jim O’Brien and at the University of Miami, in which a booster used a Ponzi scheme to pay for
access to the Hurricanes football team.







Complaints filed with the state attorney general or secretary state. These can be everything
from ticket fraud to workers comp issues.
Building inspection reports. Can include fire safety violations, Americans with Disabilities Act
complaints, poor plumbing, etc. Good to know/have when part of a stadium collapses.
Charities. Some college coaches, former college players and pro athletes- may have their own
charities. Check these charities out. How are they run? Are they doing legitimate charities or just
press release fodder? Use the BBB’s charity accountability standards as your guide.
Citizen Audit. What other boards does your coach sit on? Has your coach made donations to
other non-profits? Has your coach been paid in some capacity to work for other charities outside
your university? Luke Rosiak, the man behind Citizen Audit, has scanned 10 years of 990s and
allowed for quick searching of hundreds of thousands of documents. It’s a terrific resource for
following the money.

The Pros












League websites. Each has a wealth of data on stats. The stats are so slick now that the
leagues track factoids such the distance run by each player during a football taken, precisely
where on the court each shot was taken during a basketball game.
SeanLahman.com. Archive of baseball data back to 1981
Minor league baseball. Tons of stats, attendance, etc. http://www.milb.com/index.jsp
Charities 2.0. Many pro athletes/coaches have their own charities. Check these charities out.
How are they run? Are they doing legitimate charities or just press release fodder? Use the BBB’s
charity accountability standards as your guide.
Stadium deals. Field of Schemes tracks stadium deals across the country.
Player salaries: Through documents, agents and research, USA Today has compiled a
comprehensive database of salaries of professional athletes in the NHL, NFL, NBA and MLB.
Agents: Agents are obviously the link between players and teams, often a multimillion dollar link.
There are several agent directories online and it might be worth investing in one. (Example:
http://www.sports‐agent‐directory.com/) In some states, like Ohio, agents have to be licensed.
Agents are obviously good sources, but take them with a grain of salt. USAToday.com, ESPN
and many other sites have been publishing salaries for several years, but agents can be a good
source for new contracts and new players.
Teams: With few exceptions, most teams are privately owned in the U.S. But you can often look
into the individuals or companies that have a stake in them. Many of those people or companies
end up having some sort of public disclosure of their assets or finances. Use the same tools to
investigate them as you would any business.
o For public companies, examine their filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission at www.sec.gov . Start with the company's annual report, or 10K. They will
include the names of the executives and the board of directors along with their
compensation. The SEC also has information on investment advisers and brokers at
http://www.sec.gov/investor/brokers.htm .
o For nonprofits, use services such as Guidestar.org or CharityNavigator.org to look at their
IRS 990 files, which give the company's financials.
o For private companies, you can rely on Hoovers.com for some free information and a
more‐detailed report for a fee. If you have access to services such as Lexis‐Nexis or
Westlaw, you might also have access to Dun & Bradstreet reports that offer even more
detail.

o





Yahoo! Finance has a great (FREE!) collection of sports‐related companies, both public
and private.
Sponsorships and endorsement deals. (Check public companies' 10‐Ks to see how much they
spend on advertising and if they make specific mention of the value of sports marketing.)
Unions: Players unions also have a significant impact on rules and salaries. You can keep tabs
on them through the U.S. Department of Labor site.
Immigration: You can track when teams request visas for players, coaches or trainers through
the Foreign Labor Certification Data Center or FLCDataCenter.com . It also includes wage
information and the status of some applications. Players generally come in on P‐1 or P‐2 visas,
but you'll want to check to make sure.

Ten Places to Start an Investigation – on campus or among the pros
1) Athletes & Crime
a. What percentage of athletes on your local college or pro team has been involved in crimes?
What type? Did they result in charges? Did they end in convictions? How does that compare to what
happens to a similar subset of male suspects? Are there patterns in the narratives?
b. How are coaches, teams, schools responding to criminal behavior?
c. What are teams/schools doing to be proactive about preventing crime among athletes?
d. Are athletes victims of crimes? (Fraud, theft, extortion, etc.) Theft of athletes is underreported.
e. Weapons violations?
f. Local, state & national criminal case searches are first step in researching a case, but:
i. Athletes often go by initials, middle names or nicknames on rosters. Make sure you
have the athlete’s full legal name before doing a search.
ii. Athletes are more likely than non-athletes to have legal counsel even for minor crimes.
iii. Athletes/coaches may have more incentive to get crimes sealed/expunged. So make
sure you include a search of local media for reports of crimes whose case files might now be
expunged. Bail bondsmen & jail incarceration records are also good sources.
iv. Make sure you check courts AND ALSO local law enforcement for cases that did not
result in charges - especially important in sexual assault/domestic violence incidents.
g. Set up social media monitors for all athlete, fan blog & campus newspapers. Often crime news
breaks there first. Grab social media chatter regarding a crime ASAP b/c it often gets deleted.
h. Develop relationships with the attorneys who most often represent athletes. Every team –
college & pro – has a liaison to the police dept. For local reporters, building a relationship w/that
person or another assistant/staffer is key on staying on top of reported crimes.
i. A good effort at logging athlete crimes: Arrest Nation: the sports arrest database

j. Note: Making comparisons across jurisdictions is tricky because public records, expungements,
local law enforcement/prosecutor bias, & community standards can influence how many crime
reports you can get your hands on. Comparing within a state is a much better barometer.
h. Make sure you have the student athlete’s correct name. You’d be surprised how many kids use
abbreviations (AJ, TJ, etc.) or nicknames. You need the real name in order to search for any
criminal records.
i. Don’t just rely on court records. A lot of crimes involving athletes don’t end up in charges being
filed. Request records of “incident” and “arrest” reports from the police/sheriff’s offices, and
booking records from the jail, to find cases that may have never been reported.
j. Public records requests of correspondence among coaches, university administrator, and law
enforcement can yield great details on how crimes were addressed, but be prepared to fight
student privacy/FERPA redactions.
2) Campus cops
a. Crimes referred to student judicial affairs instead of local prosecutors?
b. Denied by FERPA? Doesn’t apply to criminal records.
c. Private college PDs subject to public records laws in TX, VA, OH, GA, & NC; are yours secret?
3) Campus Sexual Assault & Title IX
a. Understanding Title IX & enforcement (from USDOE public affairs’ Jim Bradshaw):
i. OCR’s April 2014 sexual violence guidance.
ii. OCR’s April 2011 Dear Colleague Letter addressing sexual violence on campus.
iii. Guidance on Title IX coordinators.
iv. Title IX “Reading Room.”
v. Frequently asked questions about sex discrimination.
vi. NotAlone.gov with help for students and schools.
vii. OCR Complaint Process.
b. Track complaints via Joshua Eaton’s site or Chronicle of Higher Education (which has email
updates).
c. FERPA can restrict your access to the name of other students (incl. victims/witnesses, without
written consent of those students). But if alleged perpetrator in a disciplinary proceeding related
to a crime of violence or non-forcible sex offense is found to have violated school’s rules or
policies, you can get his/her name, violation committed, & any sanctions.
d. Title IX lawsuits are typically filed in federal court (www.pacer.gov). The “Nature of Suit” code is
often 440 or 448. Also look for lawsuits from expelled or disciplined students for unjust removal.
e. Examples: ESPN Outside the Lines on sexual assault at Baylor and the University of Missouri.

f. The FERPA exemption. FERPA allows colleges to release the names of students who have
been found responsible for a crime of violence, the punishment they received and the date that
the case was resolved. Some states have laws on the books to block release of this information
but it is public in some states such as Ohio and Florida.
4) Fan Rights & Safety
a. Food and beverage
i. Look through health department inspection reports for stadium vendors & athlete food
caterers for critical violations, what kind of violations, repeat offenders, and what’s being done.
Get copies of official – and social media - complaints from fans about food.
ii. Check alcohol citations & DUIs. Get copies of vendor serving rules. Are they enforced
both in and out of the stadium? If not, has that created problems?
iii. Examples: Outside the Lines takes deep (and icky) dive into contaminated food at
sports venues in 2010 and exposes questionable food safety during the World Series in 2015.
b. Americans with Disabilities Act
i. Get ADA complaints from local and federal authorities. (Complaints can be filed here:
https://www.ada.gov/filing_complaint.htm) The U.S. Dept. of Justice enforces ADA.
ii. Check for ADA lawsuits against sports venues.
iii. Check with local disability rights groups, including veterans’ associations.
c. Fan injuries
i. Check baseball stadiums (or other sports with flying debris, incl. NASCAR). Also, fanover-railing problems. Check for police reports/lawsuits.
ii. Fan-on-fan violence. Beyond the police reports, request text messages sent to stadium
security during games, now that many venues have text message reporting systems.
d. Fan behavior
i. Check police blotter for arrests for underage drinking, public urination, drunk and
disorderly at tailgates.
ii. Request stadium incident reports for fans ejected from the game.
e. Worker safety: Is your stadium on par for keeping its workers safe? Check state regulator and
federal OSHA data (available through the NICAR database library) for incidents and, if available,
workers compensation claims in your state.
f. Security: Although it might be hard to get information due to public records exemptions,
consider a story on how well equipped the stadium is in case of an emergency. What is being
done to prevent acts of terrorism? To respond to natural disasters? For some ideas, check out
the National Center for Spectator Sports Safety and Security.

5) Academic Fraud – Happening More & Penalized Less
a. If coaches or athletic department workers are not involved, it’s almost never an NCAA violation
b. Get aggregate data comparing standardized test scores of football/basketball players to rest of
student population (Example: Mike Knobler’s excellent AJC investigation)
c. Get breakdown of online vs. traditional classes for big money sports & how it’s changed
d. Get aggregate academic misconduct violations among regular students vs. athletes; request
information on type of cheating activity & penalties students faced.
e. Get correspondence between athletic academic advisers & athletics compliance officials (start
w/football & men’s basketball advisers & counselors), and/or correspondence between coaches &
academic advisers or faculty members (former Rutgers coach Kyle Flood: “I am sending it from
my personal email to ensure there will be no public vetting of the correspondence”)
f. Examine the path football players take from high school to college, particularly NCAA “nonqualifiers” and junior-college transfers who don’t stick around long.
g. Write about the increasing use of the “academic gap year,” when marginal students can make
miraculous academic recoveries & how players use it to gain NCAA eligibility.
h. Investigate prep schools’ shady academic credentials & ties between college coaches and
ACT testing sites
i. Talk to academic advisers at community colleges that serve as big feeders to big
athletic depts
j. Track down former academic advisers for major-college athletic departments, particularly ones
who have left the profession
k. Search the UNC data trove, including appendices (thanks WRAL.com & your #UNCdocs work)
l. Study the Southern Miss case file
m. Search “academic misconduct” in NCAA infractions database & why it’s increasing (metadata)
6) Athletics Finance 101 for colleges
a. NCAA budget database: Education Department’s EADA (Equity in Athletic Disclosure Act)
b. Better: FOIA revenue-and-expense statements each university submits to NCAA each January
c. Where is a school’s big spending increases?
d. Big salaries? WaPo examples: coaches’ buyouts and administrator pay.
e. Use Moody’s Investors data to explore increasing debt obligations
f. Check budget - How many people does it take to recruit a player? Have costs grown?
g. Student fees & institutional subsidies; HuffPost/Chronicle: “The $10 Billion Sports Tab”

h. Knight Commission’s Athletic & Academic Spending Database: athletics vs. academics
spending
i. Power Five schools force Mid-Majors to spend more – data in USA Today’s 10+year
database
j. Have schools’ costs of attendance (via their own websites) changed as NCAA allows more
spending on student-athletes? If schools’ total reported cost of attendance goes up, they have to
budget more financial aid for all students, not just top sports recruits. Examples: Chronicle on
fluctuations in aid allowances and CBSSports on analysis of FBS cost-of-attendance budgets.
k. How much are student fees propping up big football budgets? Talk to student government
leaders (past & present) and former university administrators. Get meeting minutes & athletic
requests from student fee committees. What’s the university’s goal for reducing its reliance on
fees? Examples: Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel and WTSP’s most recent story on USF.
l. Keep tabs on program cuts across all NCAA levels via email: UltimateSportsInsider.com
7) The Never-Ending Chase for Stadium Subsidies
a. The subsidy blueprint: How it usually goes down; Peter Gammons on MLB “blackmailing” cities
b. READ contracts carefully for fine print! Example: Tampa Bay Buccaneers only get richer
i. FOIA: drafts of contracts
ii. Public venue; but does team keep naming rights, ad revenues, ticket taxes, etc?
iii. Discounted rent? Parking concessions?
iv. Fatal “state-of-the-art clause?” Ex: VICE Sports & recent $187M D-Backs demands
v. Property tax breaks? Sales tax breaks? PILOTS?
vi. Revenue from non-sporting events?
vii. Maintenance costs on new facilities? Maintenance responsibility on old facilities?
c. What other money will team capture from local economy?
i. Not just sports businesses; real estate businesses now – what effects on other local
biz?
ii. FOIA: LLC records, property records
iii. FOIA: emails to elected officials, gov’t real estate departments
iv. FOIA: bond capacity studies, site consultant reports & studies
d. Ticket prices WILL soar
i. Example: “Teams want your money so they can rip out seats & charge you more”
ii. Are you lucky enough to gain window into financials or biz plans via subsidy
application?

8) Economic Impact Fallacies
a. Never believe the report!
b. FOIA: the actual study
i. Who paid for it?
ii. Did the study neglect opportunity cost or the substitution/cannibalization effect?
iii. Where is economic impact really going? Local? Or large chains in other cities?
c. Contact author, local academics/economists
d. REMEMBER: pro sports are retail businesses
e. How real are those “heads in beds?”
f. Examples: Rays Spring Training; Yankees Spring Training; Vocative on Spring Training
9) Politicians Love Stadiums!
a. FOIA: Emails & texts (don’t forget personal accounts/devices)
b. FOIA: comp tickets & suite attendees at public/university facilities
c. FOIA: gift disclosures
d. The “new stadium will bring new events to town all year long” claim
i. FOIA: Does your city have demonstrated need for new sports or entertainment venues?
ii. FOIA: How full are other major (publicly-run) sports, concert, & event venues?
iii. SOURCE: Competing venues – is there a need, or will new facility cannibalize biz?
iv. Resource: What kind of cities are stadium subsidies right for?
e. For every winner, there is a loser - what are your community’s other needs?
i. Example: Tampa Bay, Atlanta, Cincinnati, Glendale, Hartford
ii. SOURCE: Don’t forget the human element of whom the decisions will impact
10) Medical care
a). Concussions. Dozens of former athletes have sued the association over problems they have
experienced years after they were concussed. Many of those lawsuits have been consolidated
into a class-action claim, and the association is in settlement discussions to resolve the first wave
of problems. But with concussion research at an early stage, and more and more players willing
to take on colleges for their deficiencies in protecting them, this issue will be around for years.
i. How are colleges responding to the claims?

ii. What protocols do colleges or conferences have to protect athletes and how have
those changed?
iii. When and how are athletes tested for concussion, and what measurements do
colleges use to ensure they are returned to play safely?
iv. What types of players are at the most risk for concussion, and how are medical teams
treating them?
.
v. How do colleges protect their medical staffs from coaches looking to return players to
the field too soon?
vi. Why are the Ivy League and the Big Ten the only conferences with significant limits on
contact in football practice?
b). Mental health. Dr. Hainline, the NCAA’s chief medical officer, has said that mental health
issues are his top concern, which says a lot given the seriousness of the concussion problem.
This area is largely unexplored, in part because players aren’t comfortable talking about it. But a
recent ESPN investigation into the death of a University of Missouri swimmer broke important
ground in this area.
.

