Enforcing the Right to Know
Adam A. Marshall
@a_marshall_plan
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press

Today
 Strategies for crafting requests
 What to do with denials and delays
 Resources from the Reporters Committee
 Q&A

 Protecting & supporting journalists
since 1970
 Amicus Briefs
 24/7 Hotline
 Litigation
 Publications & resources

Welcome to the jungle...
 Public records is a complicated web of statutes,
caselaw, regulations, written and unwritten policies,
and luck

Are public records right for me?
 Consider not filing a records request, and just asking
 BUT!
 There are certainly circumstances when it’s important to get records in
an official way
 Many government officials simply refuse to work outside of the public
records law framework

 If you have a choice between federal FOIA and state public records
law, consider the latter
 Or maybe both! Or multiple local/state entities. Consider the octopus
 Think about public records requests as fruit!

Remember that you’re the public
records cops
• You’re the front line

Starting Out
 Know the law!
 Ohio Public Records Act, ORC §§ 149.43 et seq.
 Michigan Freedom of Information Law, Mich.
Comp. Laws §§ 15.231 et seq.
 Indiana Access to Public Records Act, Ind. Code,
§§ 5-14-3-1 et seq.
 Pennsylvania Right to Know Law/Sunshine
Act, 65 Pa.C.S. §§ 701 et seq.
 West Virginia Freedom of Information Act, W. Va.
Code §§ 29B-1-1 et seq.
 Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS §§ 61.870 et
seq.
 Federal Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. §
552
 And federal agency regulations!

Know the Law—States
 RCFP publishes free guides to
all 50 states and DC - www.rcfp.org/open-governmentguide

 About to publish 7th edition with
latest information, caselaw,
advisory opinions, and
practices, including:
 More information on electronic
records, like social media posts
 Proactive disclosure
requirements

 Stay tuned!

Know the Law—Federal
 For info about the federal Freedom of Information Act, go to
the FOIA Wiki (foia.wiki)

Before you start writing
 Discuss your idea/plan with your editor and/or colleagues to
clarify your goal(s), get tips, and figure out timeline

What to ask for?
 Public records laws generally apply to records that already exist,
but define “records” broadly
 Think about asking for a wide variety of electronic records
 Email
 Text messages
 Messaging apps—Facebook Messenger, iMessage, WhatsApp,
Signal, Confide, G-Chat, Slack messages
 Call logs

 Communications to/from PR shops are often illuminating

Records format issues
 Specify the format of the records you want them in!
Especially important for electronic records, like databases

Framing the Request
 Think carefully about each and every word of what you ask
for
 Solve problems up front, not after the fact
 As a general rule, ask for precisely what you need; nothing more,
and nothing less
 Tradeoff between scope of records and timeliness of response
 Consider using keywords, dates, individuals, and locations as
limiting factors

 After you write your request, try reading it from the
perspective of the records officer
 Volunteer?
 “I’m requesting all emails including attachments between Simone
and John regarding IT contracts since June 2017”

Two Kinds of Requests
 The Targeted Request
 Asks for something specific that you already know exists.
 Provide all detail you have
 If possible, provide title, date, author, office, etc.
 BUT, think about how you know the record exists

Two Kinds of Requests
 The Exploratory Request
 Asks for in the hopes of finding something interesting
 Must still satisfy the specificity requirement of the relevant law
 Words to avoid:
 “all documents pertaining to” X
 “all documents related to” Y
 ”all documents concerning” Z

 Consider keyword searches
 e.g., all records that contain or reference “execution” or “Van Hook”

Examples
 The targeted request:
 "The memo from the city auditor to Mayor Ginther titled [X], dated
April 13, 2018."

 The exploratory request:
 "All emails from Scott Pruitt to email addresses ending in *.com that
were sent between June 1, 2017 and July 30, 2017.”
 "All text messages to or from the Columbus police chief that contain
the words “octopus” or “octopuses”.

Records Systems
 Sometimes, it can be helpful to include information about
agency records systems in the request
 States: consider researching record retention schedules from
archives, secretary of state, etc.
 Federal: FOIA Mapper (www.foiamapper.com) and foia.wiki

 Federal example: FBI
 Central Records System (CRS)

Sending it in
 State/local: varies
 Ohio just about to implement recognition of electronicallysubmitted requests for statutory damages purposes

 Federal: Check the agency website and regs
 Some accept via email/electronic portal, some by fax, some by
snail mail
 If mailing/faxing, be sure to CLEARLY mark it as a FOIA request
on the outside/cover sheet

 DOCUMENT EVERYTHING!
 This will make you, your editors, and your lawyers happy later on
 iFOIA has built-in features for this

RCFP’s iFOIA

Sneak Peek: iFOIA 2.0 beta demo

link

Disappointment
 Unfortunately, the statutory deadlines for public records
requests are not always followed, and for federal FOIA
requests are rarely followed.
 Redactions and withholdings are increasingly common.

Addressing Delay
 Make a new friend
 Follow up!
 Ask for estimated date of completion
 Consider negotiating/limiting request

 Talk to your editor/attorney
 Consider writing a story

Turning up the heat: denials and delay
 State/local avenues
 Administrative appeal within the agency
 Michigan

 Ombudsperson/Independent agency review
 Indiana: Public Access Counselor
 Pennsylvania: Office of Open Records

 State AG
 Kentucky: requests for review of agency denials sent to AG

 None—proceed to court
 Ohio (more on this later)

 Federal
 Administrative appeal
 OGIS

Otherwise…

Ohio & Records Lawsuits

If you have questions:
 Contact your attorney
 Call/email the RCFP hotline:

Q&A

