Digging deep
Corey G. Johnson
Tampa Bay Times

Mindset tip 1: Be skeptical.
Demand proof from everyone.
Then, verify verify verify.
• Unfortunately, it is legal in the U.S. to mislead or lie to a journalist.
• Whether you’re asking about misspending, sexual assault, aging
infrastructure, fire safety, flood plains, building code violations or food
safety, expect the officials in charge to deny, mislead or dramatically
downplay problems. Some will flat out lie.

Mindset Tip 2: A document state of
mind
• Although officials might not be forthcoming with you, the
problem is documented somewhere in an e-mail, memo or
report. Internal staff meeting minutes, notes and audio
recordings often capture these issues.
• The open record laws are your friend.

Directories and Org. Charts
Telephone directories and organization charts will
give you life. Old ones from 3 to 5 years ago are
superb. Current ones are sublime.
Get them through the website. Get them through
friendly employees.
Get them through your local library, secretary of
state, or local municipal clerk. Get them through a
Freedom of Information Request, if you must.
JUST GET THEM

They look like this

And this

And this

Appointment calendars

Incident Report Addition

Carded By

Report Number

Columbus, Ohio Division of Police
Under “Items not previously reported” describe completely each item stolen. Provide model and serial number , if
known. List replacement value for each item stolen. If items have been recovered, list with model and serial numbers.
Check box “S” for stolen and “R” for recovered. Fill in bottom of this form completely . If any items were recovered, list
date and location of recovery and sign. If completing on the Division of Police Internet Site, you may complete the form
on line, then print and mail the form to: Columbus Division of Police Records Section, 120 Marconi Blvd,
Columbus, Ohio 43215-2838.

Items Not Previously Reported
Description of Article(s) Stolen/Recovered

Model #

Serial #

TOTAL VALUE OF PROPERTY
Victim/Owner

$

Address

Date of Occurence

/

Location

Type of Offense

/

Date of Recovery

/

Location

/

Your Signature

S-36.152

Value

(11/05)

Officer

Badge # Assignment

S R

So you have no responsive records,
huh? Take a journey inside the agency’s
archival files
• When our records request for enforcement policies and meeting minutes
turned up “no records,” we pushed to see the agency’s index of their
archival files. From these indexes, we flagged about 25 boxes of older
records, believed to contain these documents. After receiving files from a
government warehouse, we were given an onsite office to review reams
and reams of paper.
• Weeks later, those boxes turned up the meeting minutes and policy
documents we sought. But there was a bonus: the boxes contained tons
of other great records, we didn’t know existed. Some of the extra, but
critically important documentation included:
• A internal study of enforcement problems filled with statistics and charts
• Scores of memos documenting bureaucratic chaos
• Complaints from employees, schools and other state officials
• Budget raids of the agency’s funds by the Governor’s office
• And letters showing top managers at the regulatory agency were also
members of a powerful school construction lobbying organization
pushing for lax safety rules and minimal government oversight.

A day at my state office

Examples from the field

Postscript
If you want to keep the conversation going…
Corey Johnson
Email: cgjresearch@gmail.com
Cell: 916-346-8584

