Panel: Decoding business & financial documents, IRE 2018
Speaker: Jo Craven McGinty writes The Numbers column for the
Wall Street Journal. Previously, she worked for The New York
Times and the Washington Post, where she and a team of
reporters won the 1999 Pulitzer Prize for Public Service. She also
has reported for Newsday on Long Island and the Times-News
and Herald-Sun in North Carolina. @mcjomcg

Document: The Wall Street Journal compiled a list of stockbrokers
and brokerage firms from more than 300,000 SEC Form Ds.

Tips from WSJ reporter
Coulter Jones

Also known as the Notice of Sale of Securities, the form provides
basic information about a company including names and addresses
of executive officers.

Source: https://www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/srch-edgar?text=FORM-TYPE%3DD&first=2018&last=2018
Document: The Journal compared the disciplinary records of those brokers with the
average for the brokerage industry using data from Broker Checks from FINRA.
Source: https://brokercheck.finra.org/ Alternate source: http://slcg.com/

Tip: Look out for Form D amendments (filing type D/A). Most are amended once or
twice but some may be amended dozens of times. It's easy to over count. We looked at
more than 300,000 filings, but there were only about 185,000 unique private offerings.
Tip: The Central Index Key (CIK) is used on the SEC's computer systems to identify
corporations and individuals that have filed disclosures, but some companies have done
more than one issuance. You need to track accessions to decipher if its two different
offerings by the same company or one of several amendments. Accession numbers are
unique numbers generated by EDGAR for each electronic submission.

Document: The annual proxy statement (DEF 14A) filed with the SEC
informs shareholders of important matters at an upcoming shareholder
meeting, including the compensation of the company’s top executives. If
you look carefully, there are many potentially significant stories that can be
gleaned from the proxy statement. The Journal looked at pension benefits.
Source: https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html
Tips from WSJ reporter Helpful info: https://www.sec.gov/fast-answers/answersproxyhtfhtm.html
Mark Maremont

Document: To analyze the pension, Maremont went back to prior filings, including Mr.
Hammergren’s executive employment agreement and a raft of amendments to it. “It
became clear that Mr. Hammergren’s pension had been artificially boosted by a series of
board decisions and other maneuvers, and that absent those unusual factors, his pension
would have been “only” about $36 million.”
Source : https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html
Tip: “This material was so complex I was able to calculate all of this only with the help of
an actuarial firm. There was no way a layperson or even a savvy shareholder could have
figured this out without extensive expert help.”

Document: Companies that might have been formed by Trump attorney
Michael Cohen to pay hush money to adult film actress Stormy Daniels
were identified in state lists of new companies.

Tips from WSJ reporters
Michael Rothfeld
and

Sources: opencorporates.com (free), tlo.com (paid)
Note: The same information is available for free from each state, though
it's harder to search each state individually.
Document: The reporters then asked the Delaware secretary of state's
office to email them the incorporation documents that are on file.
These documents aren't available online.

Joe Palazzolo

Tip: opencorporates.com has more search options if you register, which
you can do by linking to a social media account like LinkedIn.
About the data: wired.co.uk/article/opencorporates

Tip: Search for companies that might have the same address, or that might use the same
registered agent or office of a registered agent. Basically, look for commonalities with
entities that are known to be associated with a particular person or company.
Tip: Often, people don't put their names on the documents, but use lawyers instead to
distance themselves. In this case, Mr. Cohen's decision to do that allowed us to tie the
company to him; however, we also verified with the registered agent that he was the
same Michael Cohen as the person we were reporting on.

Document: The Federal Register details regulations for former
employees or members of the commission who go to work for
the companies they used to police. See CFR §200.735–8 "Practice
by former members and employees of the Commission."

Tips from WSJ reporter
Tom McGinty

Document: According to the rules, within two years of leaving the
SEC, former members and employees must file disclosure
statements if they anticipate appearing before the committee on
behalf of someone outside the government. The statements
must include a description of the contemplated representation,
affirmation that while with the SEC the was not responsible for
the matter at hand

More from Wall Street Journal reporter Coulter Jones:
The analysis relied on two primary data sources: SEC Form Ds and Broker Check from
FINRA.
Form-Ds are filed electronically with the SEC whenever a company does a private
offering. Here's one for Telegram's most recent offering, where they sold $850 million.
Tom McGinty scraped the XML files from those reports and put them in a database. Our
team has scraped a lot of SEC forms and although they differ the XML structure has
similarities, but it's probably not doable for most newsrooms.
Separately, Jean Eaglesham FOI'd for the data from the SEC which came in csv (see
attached for 2017 data). The SEC has been looking at the rise of private markets and
written reports on it so we knew they had the data available. I don't know if they
aggregate data like this for all forms.
I got the FINRA data from SLCG, who scrapes the Broker Check site regularly and has
written several reports on bad brokers. (This is a bit of a rabbit hole, but I went with
them because scraping violated terms of service on the site and FINRA doesn't make its
data readily available. Since this story was written, FINRA changed its TOS and Rob
Barry started scraping the data.)
Look out for amendments
It's really easy to over count because the Form Ds can be amended (D/A is the filing
type for amendments). We looked at more than 300,000 filings, but there were really
only about 185,000 unique private offerings.
An amendment is filed whenever there is new information, such as a new broker listed
selling it or more of the offering sold. Most are just amended once or twice, but a few
were amended dozens of times.
There are three dollar amounts listed on the forms (total offered, total sold, total
remaining). You can see in the initial form and then this amended one for Bellwether
Coffee Co. At first they reported having sold $2,711,259 and by the second one it was
$5,016,259. You can't total both because you'd be double counting. Either subtract the
two (if you care about how much was sold in the intervening time period) or just use the
final form for a total. To calculate this takes a little bit of work. In the data, both our
scraped forms and the FOIA data, you have two ID fields: accession and prior
accession. I used R and SQL to basically say if accession is listed as replaced, use that
newer form.
A company can have more than one round of funding
You can't just use CIKs (Central Index Keys) and look at the most recent form. Several
companies have done more than one issuance. That's why you need to track the

accessions to decipher if it’s two different offerings by the same company or one of
several amendments.
The forms are far from perfect.
The key part in this was pulling out the broker and comparing their records. Brokers
don't have to sell Reg D private, but when they do each one should be listed. Name,
firm, and associated CRD numbers for each. In many cases these were filled out with
the broker's CRD in the firm spot and vice versa. Or a name listed but no CRDs are
listed. (See this form, where a bunch of firms are listed under Sales Compensation, but
no CRDs to verify companies).
Side note: The FOIA data, which is one record per form, doesn't list all the brokers. It
just lists the first broker on the form, meaning a lot of brokers are missing.

More details from Wall Street Journal reporter Mark Maremont: In June 2013, McKesson, a big
drug wholesaler and distributor based in San Francisco, filed its annual proxy statement. This
filing is intended to inform shareholders of important matters at an upcoming shareholder
meeting, but one of the most important features is that it describes the compensation of the
company’s top executives. Over the years the proxy filings have become more detailed due to
various tables and lengthy descriptions of compensation decisions required by the SEC.
But if you look carefully, there are many potentially significant stories that can be gleaned from
the proxy statement.
In the case of McKessson, I focused in on the pension benefit due its CEO, John Hammergren,
who was a relatively young 56 and had only been leading the company for a dozen years or so.
The number in the SEC required pension table on page 49 of the filing popped out as huge -almost $116 million. That already smelled like a story to me.

But further down in the proxy, in a section that few people look at unless a CEO suddenly
leaves the company, is a different set of tables describing payments to top executives if they
die, get fired for cause, or leave voluntarily. In the case of Mr. Hammergren, this table showed
his pension was actually much larger, almost $159 million, and he was entitled to receive it
immediately, in a lump sum, if he left voluntarily.

To me, that seemed like an unusually large pension. In fact, as I researched it, I soon learned it
was by far the largest pension in modern corporate history -- nearly double the largest prior
pension -- and quite possibly the largest ever.
As I dug further, it became clear that Mr. Hammergren’s pension had been artificially boosted by
a series of board decisions and other maneuvers, and that absent those unusual factors, his
pension would have been “only” about $36 million.
To analyze the pension, I had to go back to prior filings, including Mr. Hammergren’s
employment contract and a raft of amendments to it.
What I found was that the company boosted his pension by giving him credit for extra years of
service and for pay that he didn't receive. It also waived a penalty for early retirement.
And in a very obscure maneuver, the company used an exceptionally favorable interest-rate
formula to calculate the value of a lump-sum pension, which boosted Mr. Hammergren’s benefit
by more than $50 million alone. The interest-rate formula was disclosed in another obscure
table (see lump sum interest rate -- the lower the interest rate, the higher the lump-sum benefit.)

This material was so complex I was able to calculate all of this only with the help of an actuarial
firm. There was no way a layperson or even a savvy shareholder could have figured this out
without extensive expert help.
I should add that a company spokesman said the pension was affected by an employment
contract put in place more than 14 years before, combined with “outstanding company
performance.”
IMPACT
The giant pension plan was immediately picked up by dissident shareholders, who cited that
along with broader concerns about excessive pay at McKesson. Shareholders voted by a 3-1
margin, passing a vote of no-confidence in McKesson’s pay program.
This happened the following year -- Hammergren reduced his pension to only “$114 million,” a
cut of $45 million but still the largest pension ever.

Global Finance: CEO's Pension Benefit Is Cut by $45 Million
Everdeen Mason, Michael Rapoport
By Everdeen Mason and Michael Rapoport
669 words
1 March 2014
The Wall Street Journal
J
B3
English
(Copyright (c) 2014, Dow Jones & Company, Inc.)

McKesson Corp.'s chief executive agreed to cut his record-setting $159 million pension

benefit by $45 million and the medical-products company revamped its incentivecompensation program for top executives, in the wake of complaints from activist
investors.

Even with the pension benefit reduction, CEO John Hammergren is due a lump-sum pension
of $114 million, still among the richest pensions in the history of corporate America,
according to analysts. The 55-year-old executive is eligible to retire this year with full
pension rights.
McKesson said the changes to pay structure announced Friday are intended to address

feedback from shareholders, who voted "no" by more than a 3-to-1 margin last year on
a nonbinding resolution to approve McKesson's executive-compensation package. Mr.
Hammergren received $51.7 million in compensation for fiscal 2013, which ended March
31 of last year.

The company's executive pension plan, adopted three decades before and not
modernized, used an incredibly beneficial (low) interest rate that was published by the
PBGC, which resulted in a huge increase in the pension benefit when paid as a lump
sum (the plan as I recall also mandated a lump-sum payout). The lower the interest
rate, the bigger the lump sum. I'm sure you understand why. (It's the opposite of buying
an annuity --it costs you a lot more in an upfront lump sum to buy a fixed annuity in a
low interest rate environment.)
The PBGC rate originally was used to provide slightly more generous payouts of small
pension plans that the agency wanted to pay out in a lump sum (like $7,000) rather than
paying tiny amounts every month to some recipient. It was never intended to be used
for giant executive plans and in any case was not even used by the PBGC any more
.
At the time the article was written, this outmoded PBGC rate was historically super low,
at 1%, while a rate that the IRS publishes that most companies use for lump-sum
pensions was at 3.7%. It was explained, in a shorthanded way, in the sidebar:
Beneficial Discount Rate
McKesson pays its executive pensions as a lump sum rather than annually. Actuaries
use an interest rate, also known as a discount rate, to give a current value for a stream
of future payments over an executive's expected lifetime. The lower the rate, the larger
the lump sum.
McKesson's executive pension plan, adopted in 1984, uses a low, since outmoded, rate
published by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. That rate of 1% as of March 31 is well
below a rate set by the Internal Revenue Service of about 3.7% for a similar-age
person, that is used by most firms to calculate lump-sum pensions for rank-and-file
employees.
McKesson's use of the 1% rate, instead of the IRS rate, increased the size of its chief's
lump-sum pension benefit 52%, according to Bolton Partners Inc.

McKesson used a different discount rate in the pension benefits table, 2.3%. they had a
good reason -- but it's one of the reasons the pension benefit in that table was so much
lower than the $159 million number that he would actually have received.

More details from Wall Street Journal reporters Michael Rothfeld and Joe Palazzolo:
When we were trying to locate a company that Michael Cohen used to make a hush
money payment to Stormy Daniels, we only had an idea of the time period it was
created in (around October 2016) and a general sense of some possible names. We
didn't know what state it was in.
We identified states where we thought Cohen might have created the company, like
New York, because he lives and works there, and other states where people generally
incorporate when they want confidentiality, like Delaware, Nevada and Wyoming.We
focused most on Delaware because it seemed the most likely candidate in our case.
We obtained from different states lists of new companies established in the time period
we are looking for. Attached is a new company report we obtained from the Delaware
secretary of state's office for October 2016. We also did similar searches on
opencorporates.com and in databases like TLO. With opencorporates, while it is free,
you have more search options in terms of the number of records you can search and
the filters you can use if you create a registration, which you can easily do by linking to
a social media account like LinkedIn.
How to use these records depends on the circumstances, what you already know from
your reporting and what you are looking for. However, generally speaking, some things
you can do are to search for companies that might be linked by an address, or that
might use the same registered agent or office of a registered agent, or in the same state
-- basically look for commonalities with entities that are known to be associated with a
particular person or company.
Take your findings back to your sources and ask more questions, to see if they can
recall or find out more information beyond what they originally told you.
Through our reporting, we identified several companies as the potential focus of our
inquiry. We then asked the Delaware secretary of state's office to send us the
incorporation documents that are on file - which they did by email. They can also be
searched at a terminal in Delaware. These documents aren't available online. Through
the attached incorporation documents for Essential Consultants LLC, we saw that
Michael Cohen had listed his name on the paperwork for the company he used to pay
Stormy Daniels. Often, people don't put their name on the documents, but use lawyers
instead, to distance themselves. In this case, Mr. Cohen's decision to do that allowed us
to tie the company to him - however, we also verified with the registered agent that he
was the same Michael Cohen as the person we were reporting on.

