Panel: Decoding business & financial documents, IRE 2018
Speaker: Kelly Carr is a freelance investigative reporter and a
senior associate at Quinlan Partners, a licensed private
investigative firm. Recently, she worked with The Boston Globe's
Spotlight Team where she wrote about registration failures for
U.S. planes and pilots. Her previous investigations have exposed
accounting malpractice at the Pentagon and the corrupt use of
shell companies. Her work has won a variety of honors including
the George Polk and Gerald Loeb awards.
Digging into shell companies
- A shell company is a business entity that has no significant
assets or operations. It exist mainly on paper and has no “true”
physical presence, outside of a mailing address, and lacks a brick
and mortar footprint.
- Shell companies can be formed for a variety of legitimate
reasons including to protect trade secrets, for ease in asset
transfers, to serve as a holding company for intellectual property
rights, for use in corporate mergers, to hold property or other
assets or they could be used for a business that has been set up
but no official action has been taken.
- Shell companies can also be used for nefarious purposes, which
might include, but is not limited to, money laundering, tax
evasion, market manipulation (pump and dump stock schemes),
fraudulent services scams, fraudulent invoicing and loans,
financing terrorism and international drug running.
- Lax U.S. incorporation laws enable corporations to operate
secretly. Some states, such as Delaware, offer similar (or more
enhanced) secrecy selling points as well-known offshore tax
havens. For example, many states do not require beneficial
ownership information (aka the name of the true owners of a
company) to be disclosed when forming an entity. A company's
officer(s) on paperwork filed with the state might list an attorney,

nominee director or a front person - not necessarily the true
owner or person who controls the company. The address listed as
the company’s headquarters might be tied to a law firm, mass
incorporator or residence where no business is actually taking
place.
- Stories involving shell companies might include: consumer
scams, penny stock scams, reverse mergers, government
contracting scams, political donations/expenditures, asset
purchases/transfers/hiding (real estate, boats, aircraft etc.),
facilitating financial flows of corrupt organizations (hiding
payments/assets/money flow). You most likely will bump into a
shell company no matter the beat you cover. Once you do, try to
dig beyond the surface and find more connections. You might
soon uncover a local/national/international underground
enterprise.
- Approximately one in six aircraft registered with the Federal
Aviation Administration were registered using some kind of
secrecy tactic, including shell companies, according to research
conducted for The Boston Globe series “Secrets in the Sky.”
 To find the owner of a U.S. airplane, start your initial search

for an aircraft here:
http://registry.faa.gov/aircraftinquiry/name_inquiry.aspx
 If an aircraft is owned by a business entity, cross reference
information in state business incorporation records, online
searches and by requesting an aircraft's full file from the
FAA. The cost to request the complete record is $10. You
can request that information here:
http://aircraft.faa.gov/e.gov/nd/
 You can read the Globe series here:
http://apps.bostonglobe.com/spotlight/secrets-in-thesky/series/part-one/
Other helpful sites/searches for backgrounding shell companies:
- Open Corporates: https://opencorporates.com/
- Corporation Wiki: https://www.corporationwiki.com/

- SAM (excluded parties list system):
https://uscontractorregistration.com/search-sam-cage-duns/
- Make sure to run online searches company address and phone
number to see if any associated companies/officers appear.

