Panel: Decoding business & financial documents, IRE 2018
Speaker: David Milstead writes for The Globe and Mail, the national
newspaper of Canada, on investments, accounting, executive
compensation, and corporate governance. He worked at Denver’s
Rocky Mountain News from 2001 until the newspaper closed in 2009.
He has also worked for The Wall Street Journal. Milstead has
individually or jointly won nine awards from SABEW. He passed the
Level I exam in the Chartered Financial Analyst program in 2007.
@davidmilstead

Red Flags and Hidden Gems in
Financial Documents
David Milstead
Columnist, The Globe and Mail

Today’s topics
• SEC forms you should know, and what’s inside
• A special look at proxies and compensation

Top SEC forms
• 10-K: The annual report
• 10-Q: The quarterly report
• 8-K: The Current Report
• 14A (PRE 14A, DEF 14A): The proxy
• Forms 3,4,5: Stock ownership
• Forms 13D, 13F, 13G: Institutional ownership
• Forms S-1 and 424B4
• UPLOAD and CORRESP
https://www.sec.gov/forms
Google: Regulation S-K - Code of Federal Regulations

Be a 10-K wizard

A guiding principle
If something looks interesting, go back to last
year’s 10-K and see how that disclosure has
changed from one year to the next

(Risk factors)

The footnotes (Amazon)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Note 1—DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS AND ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Note 2—CASH, CASH EQUIVALENTS, AND MARKETABLE SECURITIES
Note 3—PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Note 4—ACQUISITIONS, GOODWILL, AND ACQUIRED INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Note 5—LONG-TERM DEBT
Note 6—OTHER LONG-TERM LIABILITIES
Note 7—COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Note 8—STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Note 9—ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
Note 10—INCOME TAXES
Note 11—SEGMENT INFORMATION
Note 12—QUARTERLY RESULTS (UNAUDITED)

The footnotes (GE)

Notes about notes: Income taxes
Look for the financial statement footnote labeled "INCOME TAXES."
Here's Home Depot's disclosure (p. 51):
The Company has not provided for deferred income taxes on approximately
$3.5 billion of undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries because of
its intention to indefinitely reinvest these earnings outside the U.S. The
determination of the amount of the unrecognized deferred income tax liability
related to the undistributed earnings is not practicable; however,
unrecognized foreign income tax credits would be available to reduce a
portion of this liability.

Search for similar language, phrases like "permanently reinvest" or
"indefinitely reinvest" or "undistributed earnings."

Reasons for an 8-K

More 8-K reading
• https://www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/readan8k.
pdf
• https://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/form8k
faq.htm

Forms 3,4,5: Stock ownership
• Form 3: Initial statement of ownership
• Form 4: Change in ownership
• Form 5: Annual statement of ownership

Form 4

Institutional ownership forms
• Form 13D: Filed when a person or company
acquires 5% of a voting class of a company’s
shares. Must be filed within 10 days.
• Form 13G: Same, except owner does not
intend to change the control of or influence
the company
• Form 13F: List of stocks held by institutional
investors (minimum $100M in assets)

Forms S-1 and 424B4
• Form S-1 is a registration statement for the
initial issuance of stock (IPO)
• Form 424B is the final version of the
prospectus for an IPO

UPLOAD and CORRESP
• UPLOAD: A letter by SEC staff to a company
asking questions about the company’s filings
• CORRESP: The company’s responses

The proxy (14A)
• Delivered to shareholders in advance of the
annual meeting
• Information on the vote on directors and any
other issues
• Director and executive compensation
• Insider stock ownership
• Information on the auditor (fees paid)
• Related-party transactions

Stock ownership
• Beneficial owners table
• Executive stock ownership
– Grants of plan-based awards
– Outstanding equity awards at year-end
– Option exercises and stock vested
– Potential payments upon termination

A guiding principle
• Always check to see what date is on the table
of stock ownership, and what stock price is
used to calculate any values
• Compare that stock price to current prices
• Use Form 4s to update stock holdings since
the proxy was filed

Related-party transactions
Transaction between two parties with a special
relationship, such as between the company and
a director, officer or major shareholder

ETHICS WAIVER JUST PART OF RED ROBIN'S 'UNBRIDLED CULTURE'
Date: November 16, 2004
By David Milstead, Rocky Mountain News
Red Robin Gourmet Burgers tells Web site visitors that the company's core values "create an unbridled culture . . . Sometimes extraordinary things happen
as a result of our 'Unbridled' philosophy, we call these 'Unbridled Acts.' "
The company's board of directors created another kind of unbridled act recently when it waived its code of ethics for its CEO, Mike Snyder, and its senior
vice president of operations, Robert J. Merullo.
It seems that Snyder and Merullo, in addition to their roles as Red Robin executives, own just more than one-third of Mach Robin LLC. Mach Robin is a
company that operates 32 Red Robin restaurants in Illinois, New Mexico, Idaho and Nevada and Canada.
Mach Robin has the area development agreement for Boise, Idaho, and plans to expand into nearby Meridian, Idaho. To do this, Red Robin had to waive its
company code of ethics on "diversion of corporate opportunity" for Snyder and Merullo. Then, under the terms of the Sarbanes-Oxley corporategovernance law, it had to disclose the waiver in an 8-K filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The code, posted on the Red Robin Web site says this: "You may not take advantage of a corporate opportunity yourself or give it to another person or firm.
Your duty to the Company is to make sure that the Company knows of the opportunity and has a fair chance to decide whether to pursue that opportunity."
Chief Financial Officer James McCloskey said Red Robin, which has 130 company-owned stores and 116 franchised locations, "would never add one unit in
Boise in the middle of a franchise territory," so it's not interested in an opportunity to engage in that business. "Any time that franchisee adds a store, we're
going to have this waiver of the code of ethics."
What about the larger issue of having a CEO also be a franchisee? Doesn't Snyder benefit more from the dollars Mach Robin can keep away from Red Robin,
rather than from the dollars Mach Robin sends to the corporate parent? In 2003, Mach Robin and its Canadian affiliate paid nearly $1.8 million in royalties
to Red Robin.
McCloskey notes that Snyder was a franchisee before he ever joined the corporate parent. "What screwed it all up is they made Snyder the CEO," he jokes.
Why hasn't Snyder, who made more than $950,000 in salary and bonus in 2003, sold out his minority interest in Mach Robin? McCloskey says the Red Robin
board is "legally focused" on potential conflicts and since "every (franchisee) gets the same deal, there aren't a lot of (ways), if Mike wanted to favor the
franchisee, he could."
Also, McCloskey said that Snyder's Red Robin stock - he owns almost 10 percent of the company - represents a "much, much bigger risk" than Mach Robin.
"He's not going to screw up Red Robin to help his franchise." (I did the math: His Red Robin stock is worth more than $70 million at the company's recent
highs.)
This, however, is not an isolated example of Red Robin's insider ties.
The Red Robin proxy discloses that the company spent $273,200 in 2003 on an "indoor plant maintenance supplier," Tropical Interiors, operated by Brad
Snyder, brother of the CEO. Tropical Interiors provided services to the headquarters and the company's Colorado restaurants.
McCloskey said Tropical Interiors, owned by Brad Snyder's wife, Nancy, has a long-standing relationship with Red Robin and that the business existed before
the two married.
Brad Snyder declined to comment, saying Tropical Interiors does not talk about its customers.
Were it not for "so much grief from this environment of conflict of interest," Red Robin would probably use Tropical Interiors for all its restaurants,
McCloskey said.
Investors seem not to care about these matters. Red Robin stock topped $50 last week, a rapid return from its $12 IPO price in July 2002. It's up 60 percent
this year, and it's up 7.7 percent from last Tuesday, when the ethics waiver was disclosed.
You could even say it's "unbridled."

David Milstead
My bio and recent investing columns:
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/authors/davi
d-milstead
phone: 303.800.6423
cell: 303.638.6291
david@davidmilstead.com
Twitter @davidmilstead
Denver, Colorado

