Under Pressure: Coping with stress, and knowing you’re not alone
Tips from around the country compiled by Ken Armstrong; ProPublica;
ken.armstrong@propublica.org; @bykenarmstrong
Coping with job-related stress is something I've struggled with my entire career. I'm not
much of a drinker, I don't smoke or do drugs, but under pressure I've turned to food. Sad
to admit this, but I've packed on 35 unwanted pounds from stress-related eating of
burgers, fries and other cheap eats. About a year ago I was overwhelmed by a sudden
sharp pain in the upper left side of my body, a pain that stayed with me for about four
months. That was the scary wake-up call. The agony was so intense, I thought I might be
dying. Since then, I've exercised more and eliminated most of the horrible foods.
Although a bit late to realize this, I'm clear the successful journalist of tomorrow must
have healthy systems of joy outside of the newsroom, so that they have an outlet of
protection and restoration whenever the storms come. Mine are long brisk walks, a
session on the treadmill, a few sprints on the basketball court and lots of laughs with
friends.
— Corey G. Johnson, Tampa Bay Times
1. Talk It Out.
Reporters are trained to pull out the most heartbreaking details during an interview, and
to pick up on painful scene grabbers — however small — while out on the beat.
Hearing and seeing trauma impacts our psyches, and we don’t do a good job opening up
to our colleagues about how reporting and writing horrific stories impacts our emotions.
Don’t let your feelings bottle up inside. Talk About It! A lot!!
2. Burn It Off.
Too many of our colleagues turn to booze to get the edge off of stress. Many of us have
addictive personalities. Channel that energy into a meditative exercise: Yoga, longdistance bike riding, daily jogs, etc.
— Simone Weichselbaum, The Marshall Project
Two things come to mind: never, ever go to Orlando in the summer. And have smart
techie friends who can help you change the horrible font on your computer.
On a more practical front, there’s this:
As an editor of papers large and small, the biggest source of stress was the feeling that I
should be able to do it all. Surrounding myself with experts who knew the law better than
I did, who were fixated on the details (from grammar to math to subject-matter expertise)
that ensured the credibility of a story, who could spot holes that I might miss and who
never lost sight of the big picture — and then listening to them — allowed me to sleep at
night. The biggest stress inducer I know is failing to listen and thinking I can do it all
alone.
— Kathy Best, Missoulian
Going for a walk, hike in the woods, or a bike ride has always been helpful to me.
— Marty Baron, Washington Post

1. A good boss makes all the difference. Having an editor you trust, who has your back,
who speaks frankly, who lets you vent, who keeps you informed, and who has your best
interests at heart is among the best antidotes to work stress. Choose wisely.
2. Bite your tongue. Don't react hastily to bad news (or perceived bad news), whether
from a source, your editor, a reader or a newsroom executive. Often, the news, even if it
is bad, is not quite as alarming as you think and can be tempered by a smart reply.
3. Exercise. It absolutely helps.
— Craig Welch, National Geographic
I have a spiral notebook of big sheets of blank white paper in it (like an artist would use).
When I’m stressed or just need to sort things out in my brain, I write “Things on My
Mind” in the middle and draw a circle around it. Then, like a brainstorming map, I write
out ALL the very specific things giving me anxiety that day, from a story, to personal
stuff, and draw lines between things that are connected. It helps to download everything,
get it out of my brain, and process it in a non-hierarchical spatial way, as opposed to
writing in prose or in list form. (I actually write the date on these and keep them
sometimes. Looking back months or years later, I often see how much I’ve moved on
from dumb things that used to stress me out, which gives perspective.)
— Maya Lau, Los Angeles Times
This probably isn't very revelatory, but my best stress management is the gym. Spend an
hour doing something physical, and make it your time without interruptions. I went
through a rough patch last year and threw myself into a workout routine that ended up
being a healthier coping mechanism than other options. Probably the closest I'll ever get
to church.
— Tyler Dukes, WRAL, North Carolina
Find a quiet spot, never bring a phone. Close your eyes, breathe and pray — for peace
and clarity. Stress impedes creativity and will not add one day to your life. Focus on what
success looks like. Then prioritize the steps you must take to win. What can you solve
immediately, what do you need help with? Do not despair. Remember — the harder the
challenge, the greater the reward.
— Manny Garcia, USA Today Network
To deal with the stress of stories/projects I'm working on, I take long walks with my dogs
and swim laps (upside of Dallas' hot climate). Key to each: I do not have my phone on
me.
Unplug, for at least a little bit.
— Cary Aspinwall, Dallas Morning News
Next time you start feeling overwhelmed, pick one thing you can do and do it. Repeat as
needed.
— Patti DiVincenzo, WSB-TV, Atlanta

Get OUTSIDE and exercise, hard, almost every day. Nothing makes me happier, and
more calm, and able to sleep.
I’m often angry at something — usually an editor, or a source, or a flak, or someone. But
acting on being mad has almost never served me well. When I get angry, or upset, or
stressed, and feel abused, and I want to lash out, I TRY to do this:
I write an email, or a note, blistering the person.
Then I put it away, overnight.
The next day, I look at it.
But more likely this is what happens:
I never look at it again.
The key is writing it, getting it out of you — and then getting away from it,
overnight.
— Chris Solomon, Outside Magazine
I was the poster child for stressed out, unhealthy middle-aged journalism—overweight,
cocktail happy, didn't sleep enough, didn't eat right—and then I got seriously ill (bleeding
ulcers, massive hernia, disintegrating esophagus). I got the mechanical stuff taken care of
via surgery, and I got my mind and body right by working out. I lift weights two or three
days a week and do an hour to 90 minutes of studio yoga seven days a week. But even if
you just go take a half hour walk in the middle of the day to clear your brain, it's worth it.
You have to demand your right to have a life outside the office. Don't check your email
after hours (or if you must, check it once at 8 p.m. or so, to confirm meetings for the next
day, and then don't check it again until you're awake, caffeinated and fully dressed).
Establish a cutoff for answering your cell phone after work hours (i.e., let it go to
voicemail after 8 p.m.). Stay the hell off of Facebook (it's just a way for people to be
shitty to each other) and disconnect altogether if you can on the weekends.
— Mary Duan, Monterey County Weekly
It’s a work in progress. Taking care of yourself is the main thing.
1. Exercise while listening to a podcast that gets you out of your head. Fresh Air with
Terry Gross or This American Life or anything absorbing. Take a break from the
churning wheels in your head.
2. Clean your house, garden, cut the lawn while listening to music. It gives me a sense of
control and order and the satisfaction of completing a task that’s not akin to climbing a
mountain with a boulder strapped to my back.
3. Source management is sometimes hell. I’m on the phone with sources round-the-clock,
at times just listening to them talk about problems in their lives that don’t pertain to the
story. On days in which you are stressed, and if the story is coming along, have a cut-off
hour on your cellphone. Last night, I gave my phone to my 14-year-old at 10 p.m. and
told him to hide it on me. He just gave it back to me at 7 a.m.
— Wendy Ruderman, Philadelphia Inquirer
For your question, I was trying to come up with a wise answer, but instead I’ll just tell the
truth: Bourbon.
— Michael LaForgia, New York Times

Other than the normal suggestions, (I live on the beach, so I run or walk almost every
morning, and this helps a lot, probably more than anything) ...
But as for keeping my head together and focused on the project, the most important thing
for me is to stay organized. The project I am working on now includes thousands and
thousands of pages of records. I organize them into three-ring binders.
One binder is the transcripts of my interviews, divided by names and/or subjects.
One binder is for the key documents I know will be mentioned in my story (i.e. a lawsuit,
emails, the police report, etc)
One binder for clips and research on the topic(s)/subject(s) I am writing about, i.e. inmate
overcrowding.
Some people are able to keep these records in a computer file, but I prefer to have the
paper at my fingertips as I am writing, thus I always have too much paper.
This also helps in the fact-check process because I don't have to root around for the docs I
need to check that what I wrote is accurate.
— Julie Brown, Miami Herald
I bought a new set of Craftsman tools, the set I had eyed for years, and on one hot
afternoon I replaced the strut assemblies on my car. My mind was free for about four
hours. Then I washed my hands and went back to work.
— J. David McSwane, Dallas Morning News
I compartmentalize. Work stress stays (mostly) in the work compartment, where it serves
(mostly) as fuel. Unfortunately, I'm not sure that's a learned skill. It may just be luck of
the genetic draw.
— Bill Keller, The Marshall Project
High-intensity exercise, quality sleep, yoga, meditation, wine, listening to a podcast,
deep-breathing, massage, knitting, listening to relaxing music, reading a novel, writing in
a journal, shelving the iPhone and chatting with thoughtful friends all might provide a
temporary reprieve from stress, but you also might try changing your mindset, realizing
you're facing a challenge and embracing the stress. Or did I mention wine?
— Eric Eyre, Charleston (West Virginia) Gazette-Mail, whose stress relievers also
include: “Just about any song by Pat Metheny Group," and: “I type on a manual
typewriter -- preferably one manufactured in Switzerland or West Germany”
I wish I had the answer. The two things that have consistently helped me:
1) This is absolutely essential: Having a network of fellow writers with whom I can
check in with by phone, text, email, or in person (whatever is needed). We help buoy
each other’s spirits.
2) This is not for everyone, but has been a lifesaver for me: Taking a prescription sleep
aid during deadline and/or times when I am doing intense periods of writing. When I’m
in the throes of writing, it’s very hard to turn my brain off. And when I can’t turn my
brain off, I can’t sleep. And when I can’t sleep, I am not in a good headspace. Taking a
low-dosage sleep aid, when needed, has done wonders for me.
— Pamela Colloff, ProPublica / New York Times Magazine

Try to let go of that story detail you’re stuck on, the one keeping you up at night waiting
for angry readers and sources. Go to sleep, because it will be the thing you barely
considered that has people calling at 7 a.m.
— Caroline Grueskin, The Advocate (Louisiana)
Try to not let the story consume your life. Work out. Don't eat pizza every day (or
whatever else is laying around the newsroom.) Remember that fruits and vegetables exist
for a reason. Becoming a mess of a person won't do good things for your story.
— Ellen Gabler, New York Times
Really the best way I try to deal with stress at work is to not let things pile up. Keep on
target. Keep focused. Stay on mission. I consider myself pretty task-oriented. So, for
me, the stress builds when I feel like I'm standing still or not getting enough done or
falling behind. Deadlines will shift, of course, on any project. But just keeping a
functional, flexible backout schedule where you can chart and manage your progress
gives me a great deal of peace of mind because it helps me see the end game. And if I
have peace of mind, my stress level stays in check.
— Mark Katches, Oregonian
Well, it’s a rather banal suggestion but for me any sort of exercise, even a 15-minute
walk, is the best antidote to my stress. The problem is that when I’m stressed I don’t
always heed this simple solution.
— David Grann, The New Yorker
I think I tend to gaslight myself, especially when I’m working on a really hard story. “Did
I give person A enough time to respond? Am I being unfair? Am I being too fair? Do I
understand the topic I’m covering well enough?” I think this is something that plagues a
lot of journalists.
I find the best way to de-stress is to stay intensely organized — anything you can look at
and quickly prove to yourself “Yes I’m doing a good job.”
We recently were doing a story where he had upwards of 20 people to contact. We
created a spreadsheet that listed every person we were trying to reach, the dates we first
tried to reach them and the various days and methods of future attempts.
After we published the story, they all began to say that certain things were taken out of
context, or they didn’t get enough time to respond to our requests. I was able to look at
the spreadsheet (and quote it to the other parties) and quickly set my mind at ease that we
had done our due diligence.
— Dylan Goforth, The Frontier (Tulsa, Oklahoma)
It’s always a challenge especially in the crunch time before publishing a big project. For
me, running helps a lot and I train with a group in NYC and do road races and marathons.
It’s nice to pour competitive energy into something else and to meet up with a group of
people who nerd out about running workouts instead of stories and journalism … But I’m
still always susceptible to grabbing a handful of candy or a glass of wine to cope, too!
— Rosalind Adams, BuzzFeed News

I used to drive to work most days, talking on the phone or listening to the radio or both.
That left me with no time to think or really relax between home and office. Now, I ride
my bike almost every day, even in the winter. I arrive at work and home in the evening
feeling vastly better. If riding isn't practical, I park far from the office and walk, keeping
my phone in my pocket.
— Nigel Jaquiss, Willamette Week (Portland, Oregon)
I am super, incredibly fortunate to work in a building that has a gym. And I try to carve
out time each day to use it. But I know I am stupid lucky to have that. Otherwise, I
exercise at night. I’m already a generally pretty anxious person and often unbearable to
work with. Without exercise, then you could take the “often” off of the previous
sentence.
— Brandon Stahl, Minneapolis Star Tribune
My “healthy” coping mechanism is going for a run. If I can’t do that because I’m at the
office but not on immediate deadline, I’ll get up and walk around for a bit. It helps to
clear my head and allows me to come back to the story with fresh eyes. In the not-sohealthy category, I stress eat. I’m talking about an entire bag of chocolate or a whole pack
of gum in less than an hour. Lately, I’ve noticed that I’m shopping online more. There’s
something about adding an item to my cart – a book, a pair of shoes, a bag of cotton
swabs – that releases just enough feel-good chemicals to make me (briefly) forget about
the looming deadline or the blank white screen waiting for me.
— Duaa Eldeib, ProPublica Illinois
Take a walk. Keep a pair of tennis shoes in your desk. Nothing clears the mind and calms
the body like a little bit of physical activity. Just take a walk around the block. I'm
amazed at how often this reveals simple solutions to whatever was causing stress before
the walk.
Clear your desk. The combination of relatively mindless work of putting away what has
accumulated and being left with a clear work space helps clear your mind and leaves you
with a kind of fresh start to tackle whatever has been causing stress.
Quick meditation. YouTube has scores of short, guided meditations that can help stop
stress in its tracks. No yoga pants or mat required. Just some earbuds and 10 minutes of
uninterrupted time.
— Laura Frank, Rocky Mountain PBS
Journalism stress can persist through all hours of all days, so sometimes the only way for
me to overcome it is to detach from the job. That means turning off email alerts, avoiding
twitter and occasionally shutting down my phone for hours so that I can turn my full
focus to other things.
— Mike Baker, Seattle Times
Honestly, the main thing I do to manage stress is to make time for weightlifting after
work, especially on stressful days. Nothing puts awful stuff in perspective as well as
squats while listening to Nicki Minaj.
— Rachel Alexander, Spokesman-Review (Spokane, Washington)

Yoga -- at least once a week. Leave of absence/fellowship/trip.
— Lise Olsen, Houston Chronicle
Stress is built into our profession, and I definitely have had my share. Some coping
advice:
—In transit to breaking news (often horrible or scary), you need to compartmentalize
temporarily. Tune out the rest of the world (your family, friends, etc.). In that moment,
you are solely focused on the tragedy you are covering and people impacted. You will
need to decompress later and talk to people about what you have seen, but in the moment,
it isn’t about you.
— When it comes time to write a story (breaking news, features, investigations), put on
headphones, listen to some form of wordless music. Ambient music, classical, Jazz,
whatever. Then triple-check everything and have someone you trust read it over if you
can. The measures will calm your anxiety.
— When you are on vacation, truly disconnect from the news. This directive is simple,
but very difficult to accomplish (I know).
— Cameron McWhirter, Wall Street Journal
Seriously, do any of us deal with stress well? I can tell you some things I do, but I reserve
the right to simply revert to drinking more beer.
I take a walk. Mid-day. If I can get out of the office, I do this as regularly as possible.
Usually a mile or two. This helps break up the day and adds some much-needed
perspective.
I think regular exercise outside the office is important, too. Doesn’t have to be rigorous.
A walk with the dog or a leisurely game of tennis can really help reduce stress levels.
Garden. I get down on my hands and knees and pull weeds. I cut the grass. I plant
tomatoes and fret over how often to water them. I drink a beer sometimes while doing
this.
Go to Sunday Mass with my family. No phone. One hour. Quiet time that helps add
perspective to what’s really important.
Remind myself it’s just a job, and I work to live, not the other way around.
— Jim Schaefer, Detroit Free Press
I do what most folks do. I exercise, talk to my spouse, who happens to fully understand
—which is a bonus—and commiserate with a trusted colleague. And most importantly
for me, I pray. That's actually what works best for me, though I suspect not all that
common among journos.
—Raquel Rutledge, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, who is married to fellow investigative
reporter John Diedrich
My recipe has a strong similarity to my better half. I believe I am truly blessed to have
my life partner understand the stress of investigative work. (And we make a great team.) I
too lean into my spiritual life hard with prayer and meditation when winds are blowing in
an investigation. I also just take a walk or a bike ride.
—John Diedrich, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, who is married to Raquel Rutledge

* I try to boil down the stress I’m feeling to the most specific one or two things that are
bugging me the most. Then I try to take a couple small steps toward accomplishing those
things (if they are to-do’s), or I coach myself to realize they are, indeed, problems I can
conquer.
* One of the things that makes me happiest when I’m stressed or upset is to do something
nice for other people. This is often sending some kudos to staff members for good work
they’ve done lately (a labor of love that often slides to the back burner, sadly). Or it can
be calling a friend who’s down or texting a relative who’s been sick.
* When things get really rough, I remind myself that this is the life I chose — to be a
working mom with a very challenging career, full family life and lots of friends. Yes, it
can be a lot to juggle, but I wouldn’t have it any other way. I love my life.
— Michele Matassa Flores, Seattle Times

