Texas Public Information Act
Best Practices for Requestors/FOI Foundation of Texas Suggestions
Do it in writing
A Texas Public Information Act request doesn’t have to follow any certain format, though there
are letter templates available at http://foift.org/resources/letter-templates/. Your request
simply must be in writing to trigger the act. No “magic words” are necessary. Keep in mind that,
depending on your source and what kind of rapport you’ve developed, it may be more
expedient to simply verbally ask for the information you desire. Assess the situation.
Be Specific
Use precise language to request information. That helps the government employee locate the
information more quickly. It also may save you time in going through documents and money
when it comes to document costs. So-called fishing expeditions are not advised.
Allow redacting, if you can
By stating specifically in your written request that you don’t need certain information in the
given documents, you may get the records faster. (This may be data that you know may lead to
an attorney general ruling request and that you do not need for your reporting.)
Consider Breaking up a Request
If you have a fairly large volume of documents you are seeking, consider making more than one
open records request, perhaps covering smaller time frames or smaller subgroups of the
information you want. This way, when the first batch of information is filled you get it, rather
than waiting on the entire body of information in the request to be compiled. Note that all
requests received in one business day may be counted as a single request for cost purposes.
Response Time
In Texas, the governmental entity is supposed to supply the requested information promptly,
and without delay. If the entity is going to request to withhold information, it has up to 10
business days to make that initial request to the Texas Attorney General’s Office. Once the AG’s
office gets the ruling request, it has up to 45 business days to make a decision.
What if I’m denied information?
Generally, a governmental entity cannot outright deny records in Texas. It must seek an AG
ruling – essentially getting permission to do so – unless it has a previous determination from
the AG or there has been a blanket ruling on withholding such information, such as Social
Security numbers or personal bank account information.
Clarifications
Be aware that a government official may ask you to clarify your request to narrow it. You may
choose to do so to help facilitate the production of documents, but be aware that in Texas it
resets the deadline clock.

