Four Issues Affecting Access to Public Information
•

Access to information about how taxpayer money is spent in the context of government contracts with
private entities. Boeing Co. v. Paxton, 466 S.W.3d 831 (Tex. 2015);

•

Access to information about nonprofit or quasi-public organizations that receive public money and perform
traditional government functions. Greater Houston Partnership v. Paxton, 468 S.W.3d 51 (Tex. 2015);

•

Access to information regarding individuals’ dates of birth. Paxton v. City of Dallas, 2015 WL 3394061 (Tex.
App. Austin 2015, pet. denied); and

•

Access to public information about government business that officials hold on private devices or channels,
such as cell phones or personal email addresses.

NON-PARTISAN
Democratic Party Platform (p. 35):
Under Republicans, Texas has entered into a series of questionable contracts with private companies that have
reduced and harmed state services. Therefore, we support legislation that would close contractor and trade secret
loopholes in the Texas Public Information Act, while providing due process protections for private companies wishing
to keep trade secrets private.
Republican Party Platform (p. 20):
Public Information Act: We support legislation that would close contractor and trade secret loopholes in the Texas
Public Information Act, while providing due process protections for private companies wishing to keep trade secrets
private.

Texas Transparency Stars Program
The Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts' Transparency Stars program recognizes local governments for going
above and beyond in their transparency efforts. The program recognizes government entities that accomplish the
following:
•

Open their books not only in their traditional finances, but also in the areas of contracts and procurement,
economic development, public pensions and debt obligations;

•

Provide clear and meaningful financial information not only by posting financial documents, but also
through summaries, visualizations, downloadable data and other relevant information.

https://comptroller.texas.gov/transparency/local/stars/

Texas Sunshine Coalition

For more information, contact the FOI Foundation of
Texas at:
Email: kelley.shannon@foift.org
Telephone: 512-377-1575

Connect with us:
Website: www.txsunshine.org
Twitter: @TxSunshine19
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/TXSunshine19/

