Presented by the
Freedom of Information Foundation
of Texas

1

 Begin with the mindset that government

information is public.
 Unless there is a specific exemption, or it is
confidential by law, the information should be
released.
 The requestor DOES NOT need to demonstrate
why the information is public.
2

 What makes up public information?
 Public Information is:

 Recorded information in all forms held by those subject to
the Texas Public Information Act (Chapter 552, Government
Code).
 Created by a governmental body or by a third party for a
governmental body and the governmental body has a right
of access. It is a public record.
 It doesn’t matter who is in possession of the records.
 It doesn’t matter where it is stored.
3

 Is Public Information paper documents only?
 Public Information can be in all types of formats

including:
 Letters; documents; printouts; photographs;
 Film; tape; microfiche; microfilm; photostat;
 Sound recording; maps; drawings;
 Voice, data, or video recording held in a computer memory.

4

 Does that include email?
 Yes. Personal email accounts and text messages

are subject to the PIA if the messages pertain to
public business. Legislation enacted in 2013
states that such information stored on any device
is public. (SB 1368, effective Sept. 1, 2013.)
5

 SB 1368 also provided that contracts by state agencies that involve

the exchange or creation of public information shall contain
provisions requiring vendors to make the information accessible to
the public. Since then, a Texas Supreme Court ruling in 2015,
known as the Boeing ruling, has affected the ability of the public to
access some government contracts.

 Access to information about how taxpayer money is spent in the

context of government contracts with private entities. Boeing Co.
v. Paxton, 466 S.W.3d 831 (Tex. 2015);
 Access to information about nonprofit or quasi-public
organizations that receive public money and perform traditional
government functions. Greater Houston Partnership v. Paxton, 468
S.W.3d 51 (Tex. 2015).

 The Texas Attorney General’s Office has seen a significant

increase in requests for decisions since the Boeing ruling. More
than 2,700 AG opinions citing the ruling so far.
 Ruling

has a dramatic chilling effect on access to public
information about how taxpayer money is spent. Now, even
final contracts are being kept secret so long as a private
company says they have competitors.

 The Texas Supreme Court sided with Boeing that its information

with Port Authority of San Antonio could be withheld from public.
 Allowed private companies to assert the competitive bidding
exemption under § 552.104(a) at any time, which had previously
been limited to governmental entities during bidding process.
 Clarified the “test” under § 552.104 is whether knowing another
bidder’s or competitor’s information would be an advantage, not
whether it would be a decisive advantage.

 The Agua Special Utility District attempted to use the Boeing ruling

as a reason to keep secret nearly $500,000 in severance payments
it made to two former employees. After receiving pressure from
Senator Juan Hinojosa, the records were disclosed.
 The City of McAllen relied on this ruling to keep secret the amount

it paid singer Enrique Iglesias to perform at a holiday parade.

 The City of Denton used it to prevent disclosure of its $265 million

power plant contract, the largest expenditure in the City’s history.
 The

University of Texas System was permitted to withhold
information related to the incidence of sports-related concussions
required to be studied by the Legislature on the grounds that it
could put a third party at a disadvantage “in future governmental
research contracts and the development of new technology and
products.”



Can I make a verbal request?



Yes, however, it is not considered a request
under the Public Information Act. A request
must be written to trigger the act.



No deadlines, penalties or recourse are
available if the request is verbal.
12



Can a request be emailed or faxed?



Yes, if it is sent to the public information officer
or the officer’s designee.

13



Can a request be ignored if it’s not addressed
to the public information officer?



No, a request doesn’t need to name the PIO; it
only needs to request documents in existence
at the time of the request.

14



Can a requestor be asked WHY he/she wants
the records?



No.
It doesn’t matter why the requestor wants the
records, and the governmental body is prohibited
from asking why the requestor wants the records.
A requestor may not be asked how the information
will be used, either.





15






What if the government official says he or
she doesn’t understand a request?
They are allowed to ask the requestor to clarify
or narrow the request, if it’s unclear, and this
may speed up the process.
However, because the request is considered
received when the governmental body receives
the clarified request, it may also add additional
time for the governmental entity to comply.
16



A request has been filed, now what?



A good faith effort must be made to comply with the request and
provide information related to the request.
The governmental body is NOT required to create new
information or do legal research.



17



How long does the government entity have
to respond to a request?



Information should be given to a requestor
promptly, meaning as soon as possible under the
circumstances without delay. If a governmental
entity seeks to withhold information, it must ask
for an attorney general ruling within 10 business
days. A ruling can take up to 45 business days.
18





A requestor may be referred to the political
subdivision’s website, but an exact URL link to
the information must be provided. If a
requestor prefers the information in a different
manner, that must be accommodated.
The volume and type of information can affect
the response time.
19



Is there anything that can be done to speed
up the process?



Yes. The requestor can agree to narrow the
request to exclude any confidential information
Or, the request can be split up when asking for
several different types of information



20

◆

◆

By law, certain information can be withheld or
redacted without an attorney general’s ruling.
Examples: Government employee’s W-2 and W4 tax form information, personal bank deposit
information and credit card information;
private email address of a member of the
public who communicates with a public official;
certain autopsy photos.
21



The governmental entity sent me an invoice saying they’re going
to charge me for the documents – can they do that ?
1. Yes. If the entity follows the legal amount it can charge it is authorized to recoup some of its
costs. See Cost Rules in Texas Administrative Code.
2. The requestor generally must be allowed to view the information at little or no cost in person
within normal business hours.
3. If the entity fails to provide a written estimate prior to duplicating or preparing the records
requested, the most that can be charged is $40.00

22



What if the governmental entity refuses to release
the information and seeks an AG decision?



Within 10 business days, the entity must:
1. Request a ruling from the AG, stating which exceptions under the
law apply to the requested information they wish to withhold.
2. Notify the requestor that they intend to seek an attorney
general opinion and provide the requestor with a copy of the
communication to the AG, redacted if necessary.
23

 Not later than the 15th business day, the governmental body must:

 Submit written comments on why the stated exceptions apply that would
allow the information to be withheld.
 Submit a copy of the written request for information.
 Submit a signed statement as to the date on which the request for
information was received or evidence sufficient to establish that date.



What if they miss the deadline?



If the governmental entity misses either the 10day or the 15-day deadline, the information is
presumed to be public and must be released
promptly unless there is compelling reason to
withhold it or unless the law specifies
otherwise.
25



How long does the ruling process take?



If the attorney general’s office has not already issued
a previous ruling they have up to 45 business days to
issue a ruling.
That may be extended once for an additional 10
business days.
The AG must provide the requestor with a copy of
the ruling.




26

 Once the Office of the Attorney General issues its ruling, the

governmental body, the requestor or a third party may file a
lawsuit for judicial review.



What are the consequences for noncompliance?



There are three types of remedies for not complying with the
PIA:
1. Informal resolution of complaints
2. Criminal penalties
3. Civil remedies

28



What happens if a governmental entity
withholds information that is public?



The violation constitutes official misconduct.
It is a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in a
county jail for no more than six months, a fine of no
more than $1,000, or both.



29

What if the entity destroys information after
receiving a request for it?
It is also a crime to willfully destroy, alter or
conceal public records.







The violation is a misdemeanor punishable by
confinement in a county jail for a minimum of three
days and a maximum of three months, a fine of a
minimum of $25 and a maximum $4,000, or both.
30

 Either the District Attorney or the County Attorney within the

location where the requested materials are being requested;
 Or, if the complaint involves the District Attorney or County

Attorney then it would be the jurisdiction of the Attorney General.

 There are several resources to assist you and answer questions:

 FOI Hotline

1-800-580-6651
 FOIFT Website
www.foift.org
 AG Hotline
1.877.OPEN.TEX (1-877-673-6839)
 AG Website
www.texasattorneygeneral.gov

