The Honorable Ken Paxton, Attorney General
Attn: Open Records Division, MC 014
Office of the Attorney General of Texas
Po box 12548, Austin, TX 78711

RE: Response to City of El Paso’s Request for Factual Clarification
Open Records Decision OR2017-20436, Reference ID #674449
Aaron J. Montes
3349 Freeport, El Paso, TX

Dear Ken Paxton and Committee Members:
I am writing this letter pursuant to Section 552.301 of the Texas Government Code to weigh in on the
city of El Paso’s decision to contest my open records request submitted on June 19, 2017. I respectfully
request the Office of the Attorney General take into consideration my objections to the City of El Paso’s
notice of the following clarification of the facts identified in its letter on June 29, 2017.
My request is as stated:
Open Records Coordinator City of El Paso,
City Development 300 N. Campbell, 2nd Floor,
City Attorney's Office, El Paso, TX 79901
TPIA Request- City of El Paso final contracts and contracts in escrow with property owners in the
footprint of the $180 million Multipurpose Performing and Entertainment Facility.
Dear Open Records Coordinator: Pursuant to Texas Government Code, Chapter 552 (Texas Public
Information Act or TPIA), I respectfully request copies of the following documents in escrow for the
Multipurpose Performing and Entertainment Facility:
* Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and Roberto Assael and his properties for
the arena at 302 Overland Avenue and at 305; 309; 315, 308 and 312 Chihuahua St.
* Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and Alejandro “Alejo” Restrepo and his
properties for the arena at 216 and 220 Overland Avenue.
* Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and Carlos Fernandez and his property for
the arena at 215 W. Paisano St. * Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and Peter
Spier and his property for the arena at 323 Chihuahua St.

* Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and Julio Perez and his property for the
arena at 325 Chihuahua St.
* Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and William D. “Billy” Abraham and his
property for the arena at 212 Overland Avenue.
* Copies of any and all contracts between the City of El Paso and Francisco & Josefa Gonzalez their
property for the arena at 307 Santa Fe St. Also, I request the final contracts giving the City of El Paso
property at the following properties:
* Copies of any and all contracts giving the City of El Paso ownership of 306 and 224 Overland Avenue.
321 Chihuahua St. 301 Paisano St. And, 309 and 325 Santa Fe Street.
Finally, I am a reporter for El Paso Inc., and my mission is to improve the strength of our regional
community through investigative reporting and data analysis, journalism, and provide a forum for
healthy dialogue. Therefore, pursuant to § 552.267(a), I respectfully request that you provide a copy of
the requested public information without charge or at a reduced charge because disclosure is in the
public interest and providing the copy of the information primarily benefits the general public.
What I’d like to weigh in:
*The city argues if the contracts were released, its negotiations with one property owner would be
harmed.
However, the property owner is a lone holdout and has said they are unwilling to sell their property to
the city of El Paso for the Multipurpose Performing Arts and Entertainment Center. And, the city under
its existing purchases would own the whole block except for the one property.
The city has said it can proceed with the project despite the holdout.
“We believe we can proceed with designing around that one hold out,” City Attorney Sylvia Firth told
ABC affiliate KVIA on May 2, 2017.
*The city argues it has not yet closed other real estate acquisitions because the property owners
continue to address title issues or other identified pre-closing conditions.
However, the city has repeatedly told the public it has either purchased property or has gone into final
contractual agreements with owners for their property. Also, the city, confirmed by the City Attorney,
Sylvia Firth, that at least half the properties have a demolition stipulation in order for the city to
purchase the properties. That puts the city in a controlling position over the property contracts.
*The city argues by releasing the contracts it would affect the willingness of other property owners to
sell their properties for the project.

However, property owners already have hired demolition crews to prepare the sites for the project and
handing over the land ready for development and the city granted demolition permits for the demolition
of the mentioned properties.
On Sept. 12, 2017 demolition crews hired by the property owners poked holes through their properties
indicating their willingness to sell.
The city has not closed contracts on certain properties due to demolition stipulations. They have OK’d
demolition permits for eight properties indicating those deals will soon close.
Weighing In on Other Requests:
On Sept. 18, 2017 I received a letter citing two previous rulings by the Attorney General Office that
denied requests.
In ORD2017-10124 which sought “any and all information that would identify the location of the area
for the site of the MPC Project.” The information was requested before the public announcement of the
project and before negotiations began.
However, the city as evidenced by a court document from its declaratory judgement lawsuit in Austin,
lists that it has either purchased property or is in final contractual agreements for the discussed
properties.
The city also says in ORD2017-13191, the city sought permission to except from disclosure “documents
of the current buyout agreements… related acquisition proposals for… parcels in the MPC, as well a
relocation plans for those within the project.”
However, at this point, the city has either purchased properties or is in final contractual agreements for
the discussed properties.

Closing Remarks
These contracts have either already been paid or will soon be paid with public money. As a
governmental body, such transactions are open for review by the public and the press.
The city has argued the release of this information would hinder its negotiating position for these
properties and future acquisitions. If they are allowed to withhold this information, this sets a precedent
that its spending of public funds for real estate to make way for governmental projects can be withheld.
That is not the mark of an open and transparent government.
This issue is in correlation with another public information request I have made asking for the site
assessment and archaeological study of these properties, which was paid for with public money.

The public ought to know what its government is willing to spend for projects with taxpayer money. The
city is not a private business.
In this case, why would the property owners be concerned if they are selling their property and leaving
and will not be involved with building of the Multipurpose Entertainment and Performing Arts Center?

This is a public transaction and it does not seem this issue trumps the taxpayers’ right to know how their
money is being spent for this project.

Sincerely,

Aaron J. Montes
El Paso Inc. / Reporter

