Tip Sheet for prying loose public records
-

Discuss the records that you are seeking with the government agency first - either
the public information officer, a director or a division head. This can help clarify
what records are available and in what format.

-

State agencies have 10 days to respond to a request, but this doesn’t mean they
have to fill it within 10 days if they can cite “extenuating circumstances.” Make
sure that you consistently follow up about your request - especially if they miss
the deadline.

-

It’s easy to lose track of public records requests, so having a central system to
track the requests and deadlines is important. ​UIPA.org​, which was developed
specifically for Hawaii, helps immensely. The system automatically generates the
UIPA form and includes the public records contacts for all state and county
agencies.

-

If you are a journalist using UIPA.org, you likely will want to make sure you
uncheck the box that says make the request public. Otherwise, others can see
what information you are requesting.

-

If a state agency is not providing you with records that are clearly public
information, sometimes it helps to loop the governor’s office or a department head
in so they know what is going on. Sometimes this can expedite matters.

-

If the request entails data that you are trying to analyze, make sure that you
request the files be provided in excel format, or a format that is compatible with
your database program. If you do get stuck with PDF documents for some reason,
there are programs that convert PDF documents into excel formats, such as
Cometdocs.com​. (Still, it’s much easier to have an original data file.)

-

One of the biggest roadblocks to public records in Hawaii is cost. Government
agencies have great discretion on how much they can charge you for records and
sometimes use cost as a way of preventing the release of information. Tips to try
to drive down costs:
- Urge an agency to use redaction software, rather than manually redacting
documents, if they aren’t already.
- Agencies can determine how much they want to charge you in copying fees
and sometimes this can end up being the biggest expense. Always try to
get digital files, if possible. If these aren’t available, it can be easier to bring
in your own portable scanner or use a scanner app on your Iphone.

-

-

Sometimes it makes more sense to go into the office and review the files,
especially if they are in paper format, and then make a determination on
what you need copied.
If the cost of a records request comes back as exorbitant, don’t give up. Try
limiting the scope of the request or finding other ways to cut down on
costs.

-

Sometimes you need records quickly. A common response from government
agencies is that they have 10 days to respond. This isn’t entirely true. According
to Hawaii’s open records law an agency must disclose the record in a ​reasonable
time not to exceed 10 business days. O
​ IP has made clear that when a record is
easily accessible and doesn’t require any significant review, the agency should
not delay in disclosing it and waiting until the 10th day would likely not be
reasonable.

-

Government agencies vary widely in how they respond to public records requests,
from being remarkably helpful to astonishingly difficult. Try to develop a rapport
with agency officials.

-

Sometimes state or county agencies have to file reports or documents with federal
officials. If you hit a roadblock at the local level, sometimes you can have more
success requesting the same documents from federal agencies, especially if they
are operating in an oversight role.

-

Sometimes a denial or a major delay in releasing documents is the story, or at
least part of the story. If an agency isn’t releasing records that are clearly in the
public interest, readers should know that.

-

The Civil Beat Law Center​ is great resource for local journalists who have
questions or run into roadblocks when it comes to public records. Despite its
name, it is available to all media outlets and independent journalists and operates
separately from Honolulu Civil Beat. The center can be contacted at 808-531-4000
or ​info@civilbeatlawcenter.org

-

If you have specific questions about Hawaii’s open records law, you can also
contact the “attorney of the day” at the Office of Information Practices at
808-586-1400 or ​oip@hawaii.gov​. They can be helpful if you have a general
question about whether or not specific information is public. They can also point
you to specific OIP opinions, formal and informal, about the release of records.

Contact:
Sophie Cocke, Honolulu Star-Advertiser
scocke@staradvertiser.com

