Source Checklist
Michael J. Berens
Thomson Reuters
michael.berens@tr.com

I classify most sources into 10 general categories. There are many nuances and
variations, of course. And this light-hearted and simplistic list is not meant to denigrate
the important, vital role of sources – the lifeblood of our profession. Interviewing is an art. But assessing motivation
is a critical component of this art. It’s essential to develop an interviewing strategy that compliments the
personalities of both you (yes, you will need one) and your potential source.
Bureaucrat Source
“I despise you, but you’re useful.”
Frequent types: politicians; government officials; law enforcement supervisors.
Strategy: Be relentlessly cordial. Never show frustration. When appropriate, share information that you kept out of
your story because it was unsubstantiated or not fair. Demonstrate how your ethics shaped the story. Share personal
tidbits; make the source know you. Your goal is to differentiate yourself from the rest of the media.
Risks: May not hesitate to sell you out. Remember the turtle and scorpion story?
Ethical Source
“I want to help but I won’t stray from the boundaries of my job.”
Frequent Types: spokespersons; attorneys; prosecutors.
Strategy: Build respect and trust by NEVER asking the person to stray beyond job boundaries. Build rapport over
time. Share your reporting goals; express your sensitivity to the difficulty of the person’s position. Find out what
makes the person professionally unhappy, and then conversationally drill in on that soft spot. Share your own job
frustrations. Ask if there are ways to get what you want, but don’t ask that person for it. More often than not, the
person will form a valuable off-the-record relationship.
Risks: May not hesitate to reveal your plans and words to supervisors.
Puppy Dog Source
“I want to be you. Instead, I’ll shadow your every step.”
Frequent types: whistleblowers; street contacts; low level employees
Strategy: Be accessible within reason. Let the person into your world but try to limit access to details. This person
wants lots of attention, lots of stroking. Call this source and share your enthusiasm, but carefully explain your
boundaries, demonstrate your professionalism. This kind of source often wants immediate results. Educate them
about the process – verifying; record gathering; interviewing.
Risks: May run to another media outlet if ignored too long, or simply patronized.
Reluctant Source
“I’m not sure I really want to be involved.”
Frequent types: mid-level bureaucrats; private company executives; victims of injustice
Strategy: Absolute honesty – always. Demonstrate that their concerns are YOUR primary concern. Layer the
interview process; build gradually. Identify their worst fear and work on it. They often have a very private agenda.
Risks: May disappear once their agenda is fulfilled.

1

Ivory Tower Source
“Snatch the pebble from my hand.”
Frequent types: professors; doctors; researchers
Strategy: Three most important rules: research; research; research. Flatter them by saying you read their work, and
then pick out a detail.
Risks: They may bolt if they find out you’re faking it
Momentary Source
“I’ll never see you again.”
Frequent types: breaking news scenes
Strategy: Identify yourself first. Avoid journalist stereotypes – how are you feeling now? Stand away from the pack.
Explain that you ARE doing a story and wanted to know if there was anything they would like to add, something
readers should know. Never ask if you can ask them a question.
Scrooge Source
“I hate my job. I hate my co-workers. I’ll give you whatever you want.”
Frequent types: Government workers; mid-level law enforcement supervisors; clerical staff. Strategy: Despite their
anger, they will respect your neutrality. Demand records. Make them feel central to the story. Capitalize on their
need to be wanted; praise their insights.
Risks: May abandon you if they feel ignored
Barricaded Source
“You’ll never penetrate my defenses.”
Frequent types: bureaucrats, i.e. hospital officials; military; elected officials.
Strategy: Send the message that you are never going away. Show you don’t need their blessing to gather
information. Call frequently with updates on your progress and pepper them with e-mails to document your
willingness to share your findings (I found another lawsuit that you settled for wrongful death).
Risks: They may never crack. Or, they may try to play slick semantic games and slip an error into your story.
Cloistered Source
“You’ll never understand. You’re not one of us.”
Frequent types: Ultra-religious followers; highly-skilled professionals
Strategy: Research is essential; find common ground. Listen carefully; take lots of notes – show them every word is
valuable. Let them know that they can be a central expert in the story, but there are many others willing to fill the
role if necessary. Explain why you want THEM more than any other.
Risks: Scant tolerance for sloppy research. Like a switch, they can click you off without remorse.
Headline Source
“I’ll tell you whatever I think you want to hear – even if it’s not quite the truth.”
Frequent types: politicians; casual contacts; most anyone.
Strategy: Constantly probe for inconsistencies. Ask them HOW they know the information; trace it to the source.
Ask for records. If they are a long-term source, teach them how to be a better source.
Risks: May unintentionally mislead you or waste your time.

2

