USING OPEN RECORDS LAWS
TO UNCOVER SECRETS
Dee J. Hall
Managing editor,
Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism
Secretary, Wisconsin Freedom of Information Council
dhall@wisconsinwatch.org

What is Wisconsin’s public records law and
why do I love it so much?

Because she is so beautiful!

Chapter 19
Wisconsin’s public records law
19.31 Declaration of policy. In recognition of the fact that a representative government
is dependent upon an informed electorate, it is declared to be the public policy of this
state that all persons are entitled to the greatest possible information regarding the
affairs of government and the official acts of those officers and employees who
represent them. Further, providing persons with such information is declared to be an
essential function of a representative government and an integral part of the routine
duties of officers and employees whose responsibility it is to provide such information.
To that end, ss. 19.32 to 19.37 shall be construed in every instance with a presumption
of complete public access, consistent with the conduct of governmental business. The
denial of public access generally is contrary to the public interest, and only in an
exceptional case may access be denied. (emphasis added)

Obsessed with records: True portrait

What types of records can you get?
At any one time, I have at least one and possibly
more open-records requests pending. Open-records
requests are the No. 1 strategy that I use to peek
behind the veil of government.
Anything that’s on paper or digital, you can ask for
and, in most cases, get.

Dozens of types of records are covered by
the open-records law:
Audits, databases, payroll documents, time slips, office calendars, phone messages, text
messages, chats, complaints, police reports, criminal referrals, disciplinary reports,
airplane flight logs and passenger manifests, official calendars, prosecutors’ files, 9/11
tapes, surveillance video (including cameras on police cars), “work product,” invoices,
receipts, “secret” court documents, applications for jobs, resumes, data from gated
government parking garages, sick notes turned in by public employees, photos, emails
(including those sent and received from private accounts if done for public business.)
You can obtain drafts but usually only after it has been circulated beyond the person
who requested it or wrote it. It’s sometimes interesting to compare the drafts of bills,
reports and contracts to the final version.

Who can request records?
Anyone. The requester need not state the purpose of
the request.
The requester generally need not identify himself or
herself.
Motive is generally not relevant, but judges have
considered the context in decisions.

What if they say no?
Forget about it!!!
I never take no for an answer, at least not at first. Make sure the agency spells out the reasons for denial and figure
out whether you can make an argument against those exceptions by consulting the open-records law and relevant
court cases. Common reasons for denial under the open-records law include trade secrets, pending investigations
and concerns about job applicants being scared off by public disclosure. Push back against such reasons unless they
are spelled out in state or case law.

Appeal.
If you are refused a public record, you can ask the local district attorney to force the agency to give it up. To
research case law and advisories that might fit the records you’re seeking, you can consult the Wisconsin Freedom
of Information Council website, www.wisfoic.org, or the Attorney General’s Public Records Compliance Guide.

Sue.
If all else fails, file a lawsuit. You can even do it without a lawyer. If you win, you can recoup your legal costs.

What can’t you get?
Medical and psychiatric records: This is not a hard and fast rule, but such records are very difficult to get
unless the person mentioned in them agrees to it. I have had success in several cases in which people with
mental illness or other medical problems have agreed to let me receive copies of their medical records.
Prosecutors’ files: Prosecutors can give you access to their files if they want, but a 1991 court decision
allows them to exempt such files if they choose.
Lawmakers’ records: While you can have access to state legislators’ records, they are not required to
retain them, like other public officials are. That means they can delete emails as soon as they come in, or
ash-can records they might find embarrassing. They can’t do it if you’ve already requested them.
Juvenile court records: You can see juvenile court records and even quote from them, but you generally
cannot keep copies and cannot reveal the names of juveniles involved.
Candidate finalists for the University of Wisconsin; and police confidential informants: For some
reason, our wise leaders have placed these two vastly different types of individuals in the same category.

How do you ask for public records?
You need to start with a written request. The Wisconsin Freedom of Information Council website
is set up just for that purpose. Consult http://www.wisfoic.org/ for help.
Also, please email me at dhall@wisconsinwatch.org and I’d be happy to send you an electronic
copy that you can modify for your own purposes.
I prefer sending my requests via email because then the date and time of the request are handily
recorded. However, some agencies will only accept requests sent via their website or written
requests that come by fax, snail mail or hand delivery.

Seldom used, sometimes successful strategies
Occasionally, I have hit a wall. Here are three strategies I have used to tear
that wall down.

Strategy 1
1) Ask the DA: The Oshkosh Police Department denied access to a polygraph test that
it had claimed proved that their key witness in a murder trial was telling the truth. The
police denied access to the polygraph material claiming it was a “private medical
record.” I argued that this purportedly private information was revealed in open court
and asked the Winnebago County district attorney to order the police to turn it over.
They did. Two polygraph examiners examined the results and determined the test was
so flawed there would be no way to determine whether the man was telling the truth or
lying.

Strategy 1 continued
Ask the DA II: Prosecutors can shield their files from public review. But sometimes, a
district attorney will agree to open them up. I’ve seen full-fledged prosecution files
complete with sticky notes and words scrawled in the margin in three Wisconsin
counties. In each case, I found a story.
•

In one case, I found proof that an assistant DA had knowingly kept an 18-year-old high school
student in jail for a month on a warrant issued against the young man’s brother, despite
repeated warnings from jail officials that the wrong person was behind bars.

•

In another case, I discovered that a prosecutor ordered extensive editing to a police videotape
used to convict a Green Bay police officer of arson — editing never disclosed to the defense.

•

In a third instance, I found former state Sen. Gary George had used his taxpayer-funded chief
of staff to work on cases for his private law firm.

Strategy 2
Ask the judge: After a series of stories I wrote about a history of sexual harassment by
the former head of Madison’s Overture Center for the Arts, one of the victims filed a
federal lawsuit, seeking compensation for the years she had been harassed by Robert
D’Angelo.
I discovered that depositions of top Madison officials, including two previous
mayors and the current mayor, were filed with the U.S. District Court. Unable to access
them by PACER, I wrote a letter to the judge, asking to see the depositions. During a
hearing, he said the depositions had been sealed, to which all of the attorneys nodded in
agreement. When I reminded the judge that he had never ordered them sealed, he fairly
quickly opened up the depositions. They revealed that one former mayor who had
claimed she had “no idea” about D’Angelo’s lengthy history of harassment had in fact
kept an envelope in her desk at City Hall with all of the dirty secrets.

Public records to the rescue!

Sometimes public records are the
only way to the truth. Here are stories
in which public records played the
hero.

Arson or accident?
I used records from the State Fire Marshal’s Office
to expose the use of private, unaccountable
insurance companies in investigating alleged
arson, despite their obvious financial conflicts of interest.
The most important material was contained in
the fire marshal’s investigative file, which showed that
bar owner Joseph Awe was considered a suspect
on day one, even though he was 35 miles
away when the blaze broke out.
Awe has since been exonerated.
And he recently won an undisclosed settlement from his
insurance company.

Paroles fall under
Walker
Advocates for parole-eligible inmates had been
complaining that the state was no longer granting
paroles. But the state Department of Corrections
and state Parole Commission refused comment.
Their own records, however, showed a clear
trend: The number of paroles had plummeted
soon after the Gov. Scott Walker took office
and appointed a new head of the Parole
Commission. It was the state’s own records that
allowed us to reach those conclusions, bolstering
what activists were hearing from prisoners and
their families.

Bonus!
Sometimes the best records
are right in plain sight.
This was an email sent by
a wealthy dad to an aide to
Rep. Joel Kleefisch,
who wrote a bill to get him out
of hefty child-support
payments. The message was
among the drafting files on
the state legislative website.
Lawmakers have since removed
the files from the Internet but
you can get them at the
Legislative Reference Bureau.

Oops!
The public outcry
forced Kleefisch to
withdraw the bill
but not before he
was left with a little
bit of manure on
his shoes.

News organizations of all sizes use Wisconsin’s
public records law

The cost of open records
Records generally cost 10-25 cents per page. Anything above 25 cents, except for court records, is suspect,
according to guidance from the Attorney General’s Office.
Records custodians in Wisconsin can charge for the cost of locating records when it exceeds $50, although they
also can waive those fees if you ask them to. The exception here is court records, which tend to run $1.25 a page
and are rarely, if ever, waived. (I usually to ask defense attorneys, prosecutors, or plaintiffs for lawsuits to save
the high cost of court records.) Some clerks will let you take photos of records for free, but the attorney general
has advised that clerks can charge $1.25 a page for that as well.
If you receive a hefty estimate for locating records, you have a few options:
• Ask for a specific breakdown on how many hours, who would do the searching and what that person earns
per hour.
• Discuss how the search could be streamlined or the records request modified to reduce search fees.
• Ask for a waiver of some or all of the fees.
Records custodians cannot charge you for the cost of reviewing and redacting records. Those charges are
considered part of their public duties as custodians.

Recent open records wins, losses
A Racine County judge allowed the Racine city
attorney to shield records of his dispute with a
member of the City Council, citing attorney-client
privilege.
In November, a Dane County judge ordered the
state Department of Justice to release unredacted
disciplinary records of 19 employees after the DOJ
had stonewalled the Lakeland Times.

The state Department of Natural Resources denied a
request from The Associated Press for records
regarding the conduct of a DNR employee. The
DNR contended that identifying the employee
would damage morale and hurt its ability to hire
staff and conduct future investigations.
A month later, the department relented and released
the record, which showed that the employee had
been disciplined for harassing female co-workers.

The Wisconsin Legislature continues to enjoy a
unique exemption: Members can destroy records as
soon as they receive them. Sen. Chris Larson calls
this “an invitation to corruption.”
He noted that some lawmakers destroyed the emails
they received urging them to vote against the
package of lame-duck bills they passed in
December. He is proposing to eliminate that
loophole.

The Oconto County Record had to sue the Oconto
Police and Fire Commission to get records naming
finalists for the position of police chief.
Why are these records important? The public and
journalists often uncover information about a
finalist’s background that a search committee
misses.

Challenges ahead for Wisconsin
The status of police body camera video: Will it be public?
Proposals to expand expungements could lead to court files being
permanently sealed or even destroyed.
Long delays and high costs continue for requesters.
The Center for Media and Democracy has raised concerns about
a possible merger of the Legislative Reference Bureau and
Legislative Council, which could lead to reduced transparency,
such as the sealing of bill drafting files.

