Inside the Mind of a
Records Custodian
What The Legal Advice and Arguments Tell Us

Like any good legal beagle, let’s sniff around a little
and give the “smell test” to the advice that is given
to custodians.

League of Wisconsin Municipalities
Public Records FAQ 2
Are municipal employee disciplinary or personnel files open to the public
under the public records law?
Yes, in some cases. Public employee disciplinary or personnel records are
not exempt from disclosure under the public records law. Instead, records
custodians must, on a case-by-case basis, engage in a balancing test,
weighing the public policies favoring disclosure, including the presumption of
openness described in Wis. Stat. sec. 19.31 against any public policies
favoring keeping such records closed, including the public policies
established by Wis. Stat. secs. 19.85(1)(b), (c) and (f) and other statutes,
against releasing public employee disciplinary or personnel records.
https://www.lwm-info.org/1075/Public-Records-FAQ-2

League of Wisconsin Municipalities
Public Records FAQ 5
Does an e-mail message sent to or by a municipal employee or official constitute a public
record under the public records law?
Yes, in some cases. A “record” under the public records law is broadly defined . . . . Wis.
Stat. sec. 19.32(2).
However, the substance of a record determines whether it is public or not. The public
records law does not apply to purely personal records kept by an authority. . . . .
In general then, purely personal e-mails sent or received by employees or officers on an
authority’s computer system, evincing no violation of law or policy, are not subject to
disclosure in response to a public records request. However, personal e-mails may take on
a different character, becoming subject to potential disclosure, if they are used as evidence
in a disciplinary investigation or to investigate misuse of government resources. A
connection then would exist between the personal content of the e-mails and a
government function, such as a personnel or ethics investigation. . . . .
https://www.lwm-info.org/1077/Public-Records-FAQ-5

League of Wisconsin Municipalities
Public Records FAQ 8
How should a records custodian determine whether a request for a public record
should be granted or denied?
Wisconsin strongly favors the public’s right to access public records. Accordingly,
assuming the request is sufficiently specific (see Wis. Stat. sec. 19.35(1)(h)) and
involves a public record (see Wis. Stat. sec. 19.32(2)), a copy of the record must be
provided to any person who requests it unless: (1) a state or federal law exempts
the record from disclosure; (2) Wisconsin case law exempts the type of record in
question from disclosure; or (3) the harm to the public interest from disclosure
outweighs the public interest in inspection. Therefore, when a municipal clerk or
other custodian is faced with a sufficiently specific request for a public record s/he
should first determine whether a statutory exception or a court decision limits
access to the requested record. . . . .
https://www.lwm-info.org/1080/Public-Records-FAQ-8

League of Wisconsin Municipalities
Public Records FAQ 8 [cont’d]
....
. . . . If it is uncertain whether a statute or court decision applies to a
particular record or what procedures should be followed, the custodian
should consult with the city or village attorney.
In a typical records request, access to the requested record is not limited or
prohibited by any statute or court decision. Ordinarily, the custodian must
engage in the above-referenced balancing test. This requires the custodian
to weigh the competing interests involved and determine whether disclosure
would result in harm to the public interest that outweighs he recognized
public interest in allowing access to public records. . . . .
https://www.lwm-info.org/1080/Public-Records-FAQ-8

League of Wisconsin Municipalities
Public Records FAQ 8 [cont’d]
. . . . If a custodian cannot articulate a specific public policy reason for
denying access to a record, then the record must be released.

Lakeland Printing Co., Inc. d/b/a The Lakeland
Times v. Wisconsin Dept. of Justice, et al.
Defendants’ public policy reasons for justifying redactions of disciplined DOJ
employees’ names, as described by the Court in its Decision and Order:
● The infractions were work rule violations, not criminal conduct or the type
of more serious misconduct involving accountability to the public that
concerned the Court of Appeals in Kroeplin v. Department of Nat. Res., 2006
WI App 227, 297 Wis. 2d 254, 725 N.W.2d 286.
●There is a public policy interest in protecting the reputation and privacy
interests of public employees.
● The employees at issue are not highly placed DOJ personnel in whom
there might be a more significant public interest. Cf. Wisconsin Newspress,
Inc. v. School Dist. Of Sheboygan Falls, 199 Wis. 2d 768, 787, 546 N.W.2d 143
(1996).

Lakeland Printing Co., Inc. d/b/a The Lakeland
Times v. Wisconsin Dept. of Justice, et al. (cont’d)
●Publicizing the names of employees who are committed to correcting
their behavior would embarrass them, be counter-productive and
would not serve the public interest in having these employees correct
their actions following imposition of discipline.
●Supervisors are more likely to be deterred or inhibited from
investigating possible employee misconduct and imposing discipline in
appropriate cases if the names of disciplined employees are routinely
released to the public.

Lakeland Printing Co., Inc. d/b/a The Lakeland
Times v. Wisconsin Dept. of Justice, et al. (cont’d)
Court’s response to alleged public policy reasons for non-disclosure as stated
in the denial letter (and a few more that were added along the way during
the briefing):
● Public record disclosure is not limited to criminal violations.
● “[P]otential for embarrassment is not a basis for precluding disclosure.”
(Quoting and citing Milwaukee Journal Sentinel v. Dept. of Administration)
● With respect to the “public interest in ensuring that all willing and capable
people are able to find employment,” the opinion states, “. . . This public
interest is not absolute and it is distinct from the issue in the present case.
A public interest in continued employment, especially for employees who
may have serious work misconduct, would certainly give way to the public
interest in transparency.”

Lakeland Printing Co., Inc. d/b/a The Lakeland
Times v. Wisconsin Dept. of Justice, et al. (cont’d)
● With respect to “low profile employees” argument, the Court’s opinion states, “. .
. . a generalized argument limiting access to lower level employees is not an
exceptional circumstance that would favor disclosure. . . . if this distinction were to
be used, it could easily qualify as a blanket exception. A records custodian could
deny access to any employee not in a supervisory role.”
● With respect to “deter supervisors from fully and adequately investigating
conduct,” Court notes that essentially the same argument was rejected by the
Court of Appeals in Kroeplin.
● With respect to “concerns regarding the openness and longevity of internet
search results,” the Court notes that there is “not a statutory or common law
justification for denying full access to records on that basis” at present.
● Ultimately concludes that there was no “exceptional” basis for denying access to
the redacted information.

League of Wisconsin Municipalities
Public Records FAQ 8 [cont’d]
....
Finally, if a record contains information that should be released and
information that should not be released, the custodian must release
the information that can be disclosed and delete the information that
should not. . . . . .

https://www.lwm-info.org/1080/Public-Records-FAQ-8

