Developing sources
on the beat
MARIA PEREZ – MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL
@mariajpsl
maria.perez@jrn.com

Developing sources on the beat
vIf you are new to a beat or a place…
vAsk people around you, your predecessor and read former beat stories to
beat find the people you should be in touch with.
vThen just call them. Tell them that you are new to the beat. Tell them you
want to learn from them, about the beat, about the community.
vMeet in person whenever you can.
vGo to their territory. Meet at their office, their laboratory, in a coffee shop
or restaurant they like, ask them to show you around.
v Always ask them which other people you should meet.

Developing sources on the beat
vThink out of the box. Which would be good sources for your beat that aren’t
traditionally considered so? It could be the bodega owner, or that person in the
block who knows every neighbor, or that small nonprofit that tutors students.
vThink about diversity. Try to build sources that belong to different
minority/socioeconomic groups present in your community and who can bring a
different perspective.
vTry to go to events where you can meet potential sources.
vWrite small stories that can lead you to meet more sources and start to get
your name out. Features can be good for this.

vStay in touch.

How to find
sources…

…when there
seems to be
none?

How to find sources when there seems
to be none?
vTry to resort to databases and public records. Use those as an
index to find people affected by an issue, or who know about
an issue –like attorneys in specific cases.
vAttorneys and other professionals have digital forums. Ask
someone to post a call for anyone who could know about your
tip.
vReach out to people/groups/influencers through social
media.

Sources on the immigration beat
vThere are immigration stories to report even far away from the
border.
vThink about labor, housing, schools…
vGet sources to open up:
vKnocking on doors works far better than phone calls.
vIs there anyone in the community who they trust and can vouch for you?
vBe honest: Explain what you are doing, what you can and can’t do.
vBe extra clear about name use.

MARIA PEREZ – MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL
@mariajpsl
maria.perez@jrn.com

