Health care investigations: Grab-and-go tips on where to start looking in your community
·
​Medicare data:​ ​https://data.medicare.gov/​ includes a whole variety of data points looking
at hospitals, nursing homes, dialysis facilities and more. The data is available to download, so
you can compare facilities in your state or region. It’s also available online in an interactive
format if you just want to poke around. A few examples:
o ​Outcomes:​ You may want to start by looking at the hospital database
“Complications and Deaths – Hospital.” Is there a hospital in your area that is lagging on several
metrics? Is an esteemed institution missing the mark? Another one worth looking at may be
“Healthcare Associated Infections.” Or take a look at the nursing home inspections at
https://data.medicare.gov/data/nursing-home-compare
o
​Costs:​ If you’re interested in finances, try “Medicare Hospital Spending by Claim”
data to explore how much patient visits are costing at different hospitals.
o
​Opioids:​ Medicare has opioid prescribing rates by state
(​https://go.cms.gov/opioidheatmap​ ) and details on prescription trends among individual doctors
(​https://data.cms.gov/part-d-prescriber​ ).
​Influence:
o ​ ​https://www.cms.gov/openpayments/​ allows you to explore how much various
doctors are getting in payments from pharmaceutical or device companies. You can search
online or download the dataset.
o
​One other way to get started is via Propublica’s search tool at
https://projects.propublica.org/docdollars/​. Plug in your state and see which doctors rank as the
largest recipients of industry payments.
·

​Other threads to pull:
o
​Some states provide access to anonymous inpatient data or can run queries for
you. These can be used to assess trends in procedures, outcomes, billings and more. Is there
a specific type of procedure or diagnosis that you are looking at? This is the way to go.
O
​File a records request to your state health regulator for data on investigations and
disciplinary actions against hospitals and health care providers. They may also be able to
disclose complete investigative files.
o ​ ​http://www.hospitalinspections.org/​, from the Association of Health Care
Journalists, can give you a start on looking at hospital inspections and violations.
o
​Spending and salaries at nonprofit hospitals. Health care organizations often have
some of the highest-paid nonprofit leaders. Check the 990s on Guidestar of those in your area.
o
​Charity care: States often track how much free care that hospitals are providing to
the community. Check with your state regulator to find which hospitals are providing the
least/most community-benefit care.
o
​Ambulances: Is your local agency or contractor meeting expectations on
life-support or paramedic response times?
·

Mike Baker | The Seattle Times | 206-464-2729 | mbaker@seattletimes.com

