TIP SHEET/ IRE 2018/ Investigating political influence on health care: By Rebekah Allen, The Advocate
Remember that health care is a business and a lucrative one – which means politics are at play.
Finding the money:
Political donors are often capped at how much they can donate to a candidate, so they will use family
members and business affiliations to increase the size of their donation and expand their influence. Here
is how I tracked down the hidden donors:
1) Start with a master list of donors. I started with Louisiana’s most recent gubernatorial race and
downloaded the full donor lists for the four top candidates, which are available from the state’s
ethics board website. I figured every major donor would donate to this election. So I combined
all of the donor lists from each of the candidates into a master list.
2) Search the donors to identify obvious targets. For my story, these were nursing homes, but you
could apply the same to dentist offices, dermatologists or the like. I searched for the names of
nursing homes, searching for key words that would identify other nursing homes. I also searched
for known business members, lobbyists and association board members publicly identified as
aligned with the nursing home industry.
3) Take the listed donor addresses from the donors identified in Step 2 and search again looking
for other donors who share those addresses. This will yield other family members and affiliated
businesses.
4) Cross reference those business names and people’s names in your state’s business filing
database. Our database is administered by the Secretary of State through its website. This will
tell you other businesses that are owned by these nursing home owners and will thereby give
you additional names under which to search.
5) Now you have a master list of all the likely sources of donations from a given industry.
6) Clean your data with programs like OpenRefine, which is a great program for campaign donation
data because it will help you deal with duplicates, typos and other data errors that can skew
your results. This program is free.
7) You can also use websites that compile donations by industry, although with less precision, like
OpenSecrets.org and Followthemoney.org.
If you’re investigating nursing homes or other health care facilities, here are data you can request:
-

Number of beds and number of vacancies
Health inspection reports and dates of reports
Fines paid by facilities for violations
Medicaid reimbursement rates (including how much those rates have changed)
Audits of facilities
Demographics of patients, by age and sometimes by acuity level

The federal government ranks health care facilities through CMS’s (Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services) star system.
CMS ranks nursing homes, hospices, hospitals, etc. based on measures including staffing, health
inspections, and other metrics.

The star system goes from 1 star (very below average) to 5 stars (very above average)
Contact: Rebekah Allen, reporter
The Advocate, Baton Rouge and New Orleans, Louisiana
rallen@theadvocate.com
@rebekahallen
225-229-8766

