Tipsheet: Investigating Wildlife Issues
IRE Conference, June 2018
Rachael Bale, rachael.bale@natgeo.com
Rene Ebersole, rebersole0@gmail.com
Lee van der Voo, lvdvoo@gmail.com

WHY COVER WILDLIFE?
Wildlife are held in a public trust, and protecting the planet’s biodiversity is something that
should be valued in and of itself. But if that doesn’t float your boat, know that wildlife stories are
really stories about crime, community development, public safety, social injustice, national
security and stability, and government accountability.
Don’t be intimidated thinking that wildlife stories require big travel budgets. There are wildlife
stories around the world—including plenty in your own backyards. Not too many reporters go
looking for wildlife stories, so there’s lots of low-hanging fruit.

TIPS
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

It’s not an animal story or a science story.​ You’re telling a crime story, or a government
accountability story, or a human interest story.
Wildlife has a broad definition.​ Fish, timber, and plants are also wildlife. Don’t forget
about reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates, and insects too.
Avoid the sympathy ceiling​: The audience can only withstand so many tragic stories
about animals being hurt or exploited. The elements of good wildlife reporting are the
same elements of any good story: conflict, character development, and a story arc.
Focusing on the villain as much, if not more, than the victim is one good way to avoid
hitting the ceiling.
Solutions-oriented​: Readers are going to want to know how they can help. Try to include
solutions in your story—tell the stories of people/groups that are responding to the
problem and how well their efforts are working.
Focus on the field​: It’s hard to convince an editor to let you travel. Instead, focus on
finding sources who are in the field, working first-hand on the issue. If you’re not sure
where to start, try contacting a global NGO and ask who their partners and contacts on
the ground are.
Tell readers why they should care​: High up in your story, make sure you’re clear about
why this should matter to your readers. It sounds obvious, but it’s all too easy to
overlook.
Paint scenes​: Even if you can’t go into the field for a story, gather photos, videos, and
details from sources who are there.

●

●

Walk the docks:​ Fishermen, biologists, Coast Guard officers and others who work at sea
are more knowledgeable their land-based counterparts. Talk to them directly. Don’t let
land-based interests claim to speak for them.
You are not a parrot:​ NGOs and nonprofits can be great resources. But their story is not
your story - they have their own story to tell. When they are involved in your work, even if
it’s just to suggest sources, make sure you know what they’re shilling. Read their 990s.
Understand the relationships between them and the people they refer you to. Know
which major philanthropies fund them and why. Talk to their opposition.

WILDLIFE STORY TOPICS COME IN A VARIETY OF FLAVORS
● Legal/illegal wildlife trade (​check out this page​ for information on the types of wildlife and
wildlife products that are traded, the reasons they’re traded, and the scale/value of trade)
● Live animal trade: exotic pets, zoos, aquariums
● Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing
● Food fish supply chain transparency
● Poaching
● Sport/trophy hunting and fishing
● Animal welfare (circuses, zoos, laboratories, breeders, etc.)
● Habitat destruction
● Selfies with exotic animals

HOW DO YOU MAKE THESE STORIES APPEALING TO PEOPLE WHO AREN’T BIG
ANIMAL LOVERS?
Pretty much every wildlife story is a human story. Ask yourself: Who are the stakeholders? Who
are the actors? What do they want? Why are they doing what they’re doing? Whose voices
have been missing from past media coverage?
A story about venomous pet snakes is really about the subculture of people who love keeping
dangerous animals. A story about ivory poachers may be a story about poverty, or it may be a
story about an armed militia group funding its activities, or it may be about a drug trafficking
gang that decided to diversify. A story about neglected animals at a roadside zoo is really about
the government’s failure to enforce the Animal Welfare Act. A story about the man in Zanesville,
Ohio, who released his dozens of exotic animals before killing himself is a (​true​) story about why
some states allow private citizens to own lions and tigers and bears in the first place. A story
about a place that lets you cuddle with tiger cubs could be a story about the tragedy waiting to
happen.

FINDING AND CHOOSING A STORY
● How does this problem affect my readers?

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Is it linked to other crimes? (corruption, smuggling, drugs/arms/human trafficking,
violence against people, animal abuse/neglect, money laundering, the potential to
spread invasive species or disease)
Even if it’s not illegal, does it seem exploitive or unethical? Could it become exploitive or
unethical if taken too far?
Is this species threatened with extinction?
How unique is this animal biologically and ecologically?
How much attention is this species already getting?
If it’s a wildlife trade story, who are the consumers?
What’s your unique angle on the story?
Is there a particular character who might drive the narrative?
Is it a story that might require a lot of travel?

PITCHING A WILDLIFE STORY
● Do enough reporting to be able to craft a lively pitch that will grab the editors’ attention.
● Include a rough lede that will draw them in, followed by a paragraph that summarizes
what the story is about.
● Illustrate how you plan to tackle the story and who you will interview.
● Mention if the story is time sensitive due to things like hunting or fishing seasons.
● If you’re aiming to travel for the reporting include a budget and how many days you’ll
need in the field.
● Include considerations for photography. Like special access to off-limit areas,
opportunities for portraits of the people you’re interviewing, field conditions, limitations,
and safety conditions. Mention if some people are not willing to be photographed.
● Highlight why you’re the perfect person to do this story.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
● Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES): International treaty signed by almost every country in the world. Regulates the
wildlife trade across international borders. Species are assigned to one of three
appendices, depending on how at-risk they are of being exploited in international trade.
Each appendix has different restrictions.
● Endangered Species Act​: This is the law that enacts CITES in the U.S. It also helps
protect and recover at-risk species.
● Lacey Act​: It makes it illegal to trade in any wildlife that was obtained illegally, anywhere.
If you take a bird illegally from a forest in Mexico and bring it to the U.S., where owning
that type of bird is typically legal, you’re violating the Lacey Act because you obtained
the bird illegally.
● Migratory Bird Treaty Act​: Makes it illegal to “take” (kill, harm, move, bother, etc.) any
native birds. You can get a permit to be exempt from this (i.e., a vineyard owner who has
birds eating his grapes can get a permit to kill them)

●
●

Marine Mammal Protection Act​: Pretty much what it sounds like.
END Wildlife Trafficking Act​: Makes it easier to prosecute wildlife crimes by allowing
some suspects to be charged under federal money laundering and racketeering statutes,
which tend to have stronger penalties than violations of other wildlife/environmental laws

GOVERNMENT SOURCES
● U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service​: Headquarters or your regional office. International wildlife
trade, endangered species, hunting/fishing, migratory birds, public lands.
● National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration​: Marine mammals, fish and fisheries
(NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service), reefs and sanctuaries (NOAA National
Ocean Service).
● Customs and Border Protection​: There aren’t very many FWS inspectors, so it’s CBP
that ends up catching a lot of the illegal wildlife trade across borders.
● DOJ’s Environment and Natural Resources Division​: Prosecutes most wildlife crimes.
● Department of the Treasury:​ Sometimes helps investigate wildlife crimes, especially if
there’s a money laundering angle (and there often is).
● Department of State​: Coordinates U.S.’s national strategy to combat wildlife trafficking
across all federal agencies.
● State fish and game agencies​: Hunting and fishing licenses/law enforcement,
management of local wildlife.

NGO SOURCES
● TRAFFIC​: Wildlife trade monitoring (born from WWF + IUCN). Has offices around the
world.
● International Union for Conservation of Nature​ (IUCN): Sets conservation statuses of
species via the ​Red List​. Organizes specialist groups around certain groups of animals
for conservation (e.g. pangolin specialist group, amphibian specialist group, etc.
Directory​.)
● Wildlife Conservation Society​: Conservation of wildlife and wild places. Has offices
around the world. Based at the Brooklyn Zoo.
● Zoological Society of London​: Wildlife and habitat conservation around the world. Based
at the London Zoo.
● Environmental Investigation Agency​: Nonprofit focusing on investigating wildlife, oceans,
and forest crime.
● WildAid​: San Francisco-based nonprofit working on reduction of demand for wildlife
products globally.
● International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)​: DC-based wildlife conservation and
welfare nonprofit.
● Humane Society International​: Animal protection around the world. Covers both wild and
domestic animals. Focused on welfare but also works on other wildlife conservation
issues.

●
●
●
●
●

Sierra Club​, both the national office and local offices.
Audubon​, both the national office and local offices.
American Bird Conservancy​: Nonprofit conservation organization focused on bird
species of the Americas.
Cornell Lab of Ornithology​: They know more about birds than anyone.
Center for Biological Diversity​: Nonprofit mainly focused using litigation and petitions to
protect endangered species.

ACADEMIC SOURCES
● Biologists (conservation biology, marine biology, fisheries biology, wildlife biology, etc.)
● Zoologists (ornithologists, ichthyologists, herpetologists, etc.)
● Ecologists
● Criminologists (Rutgers and Michigan State both have experts in wildlife criminology)
● Philosophers and ethicists focused on animals
● Always look for researchers in the field—usually PhD candidates

DATA AND DOCUMENTS
● CITES trade database​: It’s got a lot of issues, but it’s the best we have for tracking the
legal international wildlife trade
● LEMIS​: FWS’s management system for import/export records and for permits. Must file
FOIA request to access - you can request either the documents themselves or the
database entries.
○ Form 3-177​: Declaration of Importation or Exportation of Wildlife
○ Permits​: You may be interested in depredation permits under the MBTA; permits
issued to hunters wanting to bring home their trophies from abroad; incidental
take permits allowing a person/business to accidentally (“incidentally”) kill an
endangered species (like wind farms killing birds); permits to breed wild animals
in captivity; etc.
● Court records​: PACER for federal courts
● MS4 documents:​ Cities and counties maintain MS4 permits with the EPA in order to
discharge wastewater to waterways. These plans describe local water quality testing and
enforcement activities and can be roadmaps for requesting records and data related to
pollutant discharge and illicit dumping stories that affect wildlife.
● NOAA Enforcement records:​ The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has
its own law enforcement agency to enforce against illegal seafood poaching, dumping,
and other marine wildlife crimes. These prosecution records can be good story leads.

STORIES YOU CAN DO IN YOUR OWN BACKYARD
Who in your community kills protected birds?

●
●

File a FOIA with your region’s Fish and Wildlife Service office for depredation permits
issued under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act to people/companies in your area
Story examples: ​Shot and Gassed: Thousands of Protected Birds Killed Annually​ and
The Other Audubon: The One That Allows Golf Courses to Kill Birds​ (May 2015) Rachael Bale and Tom Knudson for Reveal from the Center for Investigative Reporting

Are any endangered species in your community allowed to be killed?
● File a FOIA with your region’s Fish and Wildlife Service office for incidental take permits
issued under the Endangered Species Act to people/businesses in your area
● Story example: ​Though threatened, grizzly bears can be killed to protect livestock
(January 2015, Reveal from CIR)
Are there scientific labs, breeders, or zoos in your area that aren’t taking care of their animals?
● File a FOIA with USDA APHIS for inspection reports and violations under the Animal
Welfare Act
● Note: These records used to all be available online without a FOIA, but USDA decided to
take it down in February 2017. Some are available online still, but not all—and the ones
that are online are typically heavily redacted. (More about the database removal ​here
and ​here​.)
● Story examples: ​Welcome to the Jungle​ (March 2016, Mother Jones), ​The Cruelest
Show on Earth​ (December 2011, Mother Jones), ​U.S. Research Lab Lets Livestock
Suffer in Quest for Profit​ (January 2015, ​New York Times​) (Warning: This one’s really
gruesome. It deals with domestic animals, not wildlife, but it’s a really good story.)
What wildlife/wildlife products are brought into your community legally/illegally?
● Request to shadow an FWS inspector at your airport or seaport or international border
crossing.
● File a FOIA with FWS for records of wildlife imports at your nearest port of entry. You
may want to narrow your request seized wildlife imports if you’re only interested in the
illegal shipments.
Is poaching a problem in your community?
● Talk to your local fish and game wardens. It’s not just elephants and rhinos that are
poached. Law enforcement ​recently busted​ a poaching ring operating in Oregon and
Washington. Sturgeon poaching is a big problem in the Great Lakes region and in
northern California (for caviar). Deer, sharks, black bears, and bighorn sheep are also
common North American targets.
Is the government killing wildlife in your community?
● See if USDA’s Wildlife Services killed coyotes, bears, beavers, or other native wildlife in
your area. Start with their ​annual report​ to narrow down which species in your state were
affected, then FOIA for related documents. During that process, was there collateral
damage (pets, non-target species)?

●

Story example: ​The killing agency: Wildlife Services' brutal methods leave a trail of
animal death​ (2008, ​Sacramento Bee​)

RELATED IRE TIPSHEETS
● Investigating habitat conservation plans (​3966​)
● The oceans: a rich source of investigative stories (​4237​)
● White Fish, Black Catches: Norwegian companies were leasing out old fishing ships to
Russians, who were using them for illegal fishing in the Nordic Seas (​2603​)
● Five tips for starting out on the law enforcement beat (​4190​)
● Resources on international organized crime (​1472​)

FIELD REPORTING TOOLKIT
● Encrypted word processing program for phone that syncs to laptop (so you don’t have to
take your laptop places where it could get ruined, like on a boat)
● Silicon floppy keyboard to go with phone and a phone stand
● TurboScan app to scan documents that are offered when on the road
● Camera to remember what things look like
● Quick-dry pants and shirts in neutral nature colors (greens, grays, browns)
● Headlamp
● Plastic poncho
● Portable cell phone battery bank
● Rite in the Rain notebooks

Investigative wildlife stories to check out for inspiration
STATE/LOCAL
● Why Would Someone Steal the World’s Rarest Water Lily?​ (The Guardian, 2014)
● CALIFORNIA:​ ​Poachers Load Up on California Coastal Succulents, Sell Them in Asia
for $50 Each​ (Capital Public Radio, 2018)
● FLORIDA:​ ​Agents Opened a Fake Alligator Farm to Catch Poachers​ ​(National
Geographic, 2017)
● FLORIDA:​ ​The Ringling Bros Elephant Sanctuary Is Hardly a Paradise​ (Vice, 2016)
● LOUISIANA:​ ​Will America’s Turtles Be Eaten to Extinction?​ ​(National Geographic, 2016)
● MAINE: ​Inside the Multimillion-Dollar World of Eel Trafficking​ (National Geographic,
2017)
● MAINE:​ ​Welcome to the Jungle: The Shocking Story of Another Animal Planet Reality
Show​ ​(Mother Jones, 2016)
● MASSACHUSETTS:​ ​The Deliciously Fishy Case of the ’Codfather’​ ​(Mother Jones, 2017)
● MISSOURI:​ ​How the Russian mob got into Missouri fish eggs​ ​(Toronto Star, 2014)
● NEVADA:​ ​America’s trapping boom relies on cruel tools​ ​(Reveal, 2016)

SOUTH DAKOTA:​ ​Eagles Are Being Killed for Black Market Body Parts​ ​(National
Geographic, 2017)
● WASHINGTON :​ ​Glamour Beasts: The dark side of elephant captivity​ ​(Seattle Times,
2012)
● THE WEST:​ ​The killing agency: Wildlife Services’ brutal methods leave a trail of animal
death​ and​ ​Federal Wildlife Services makes a killing in animal control business
(Sacramento Bee, 2012)
● WISCONSIN:​ ​Limits to exotic pets in Wisconsin loom but critics cite loopholes
(Wisconsin CIR, 2015)
NATIONAL
● The Fish Market: Inside the Big-Money Battle for the Ocean and Your Dinner Plate​ - Lee
Van der Voo (St. Martin’s Press, 2016)
● Thousands of tigers thought to be captive in American backyards​ ​(AP, 2012)
● No Animals Were Harmed (The Hollywood Reporter, 2013) - link temporarily down
INTERNATIONAL
● On the Trail of Jaguar Poachers​ (National Geographic, 2017)
● Critical Reefs Destroyed in Quest for World’s Biggest Clams​ (National Geographic,
2016)
●

