Learn from failure
Ziva Branstetter, ​senior editor, Reveal @zivabranstetter
Adam Playford, ​investigations editor, Tampa Bay Times @adamplayford
Tyler Dukes, ​investigative reporter, WRAL @mtdukes
Mistakes in investigative stories carry a high cost: loss of credibility for you and your news
organization, corrections that call the whole story into question and possibly legal action. The
vast majority of errors can be prevented with proper preparation and fact checking from the time
you begin planning your project, through publication and even after, when responding to critics
and pushback on social media.
Here are some of the most important processes you should have in place to avoid failure in your
investigation.

Fail #1: Lack of organization ​from the start, forcing you to scramble for basic
information such as dates, documents that are central to your work, names etc. In a
pinch, you “write around it” and make a mistake.
How to avoid it​: As Sy Hersh says, “do the chron” with every investigation. Make a
detailed timeline with links to the original sources for all key facts in your investigation.
Do not skimp on details. Build a paper trail that can corroborate your sourcing. ​(Pro tip:
Upload all important documents to ​DocumentCloud​ early, highlight the key passages
and link to your timeline. Set them to private until you’re ready to publish.​) As you are
writing, all of the important facts you need will be at your fingertips and you’ll know
where the facts came from. Also, this step will help you see patterns and connections
you’d miss otherwise.
Fail #3​: ​Not vetting important sources.​ After the story runs, you find out something
about a source you’ve relied upon that calls his or her credibility into question.
How to avoid it: ​Run all important sources in your investigations through a background
check, including criminal and civil cases, property records, corporations, campaign
contributions etc. Get public employees’ personnel records. (The more important the
source, the deeper you should go.) This step should occur ​before​ you greenlight a story,
so you don’t end up having to kill a story or cut someone out of your story later when
questions arise. If you find criminal history or other red flags, have a discussion with top

editors about whether and how that information would impact the story. Don’t make
these decisions on your own.
Fail #4: Data errors. ​You analyzed your data and came up with findings. But you aren’t
sure they’re right and can’t remember how you arrived at your conclusion.
How to avoid it: ​Along with your data, request data dictionaries that can explain fields
and complications. Create a data journal to track each and every step of your analysis
so you can quickly recreate it – this will help you summarize the methodology later. This
can be as simple as a text document. Save an original copy of your unedited data in a
separate folder so you quickly go back to the source. Share the results of your analysis
with your colleagues, editors and sources early and often to get gut checks. If you're
doing automated analysis on a large data set, select a sample to spot check by hand.
Use multiple tools and methods to run your analysis if possible. Publish your data and
methodology along with your story.
Fail #5: A small detail​ ​in your script is wrong,​ which requires a correction and harms
credibility of the story.
How to avoid it: ​Every verifiable fact in your script should be fact checked and
footnoted, linking to the source used to verify it. Print the text and highlight each fact,
checking it off when you've verified it. You can use the time-stamped transcripts of
recorded interviews (created with tools like ​oTranscribe​) to verify quotes and
paraphrases. If you change the script in the studio to make the story flow better, go
back and make sure you haven’t inserted a mistake by oversimplifying. The same is
true for drafts of print stories. Footnotes and links will help you and others who touch the
story fact check it all.
Fail #6:​ ​Errors in design elements.​ You got it right in the story but wrong in the
cutline, graphic or headline.
How to avoid it:​ Hold a design review where you & editors go over all planned
elements of the story before publication. Make sure key facts such as numbers, dates
and name spellings all line up. Often these errors happen when a story is held and
updated but the cutlines or graphics don’t get the same attention. Double-check the
B-roll, even if it seems innocuous.
Fail #7​: Inaccuracies in social media & promotional content. You got it right in the story
but wrong in the Tweet, Facebook post or promo.

How to avoid it: ​Your credibility and the credibility of your story and news organization
extends to social media streams and promotional content. Pre-publication review must
include all of these elements. That means writing Tweetstorms, Facebook posts and
promos in advance and subjecting them to the same scrutiny as your story. Don't allow
marketing for the story to over-promise or editorialize.
Fail #8:​ ​Ignoring critics’ questions​ or losing your cool when answering them. Nobody
likes dealing with orchestrated pushback on social media, especially from powerful
interests who you’ve just exposed, but it isn’t smart to hide.
How to avoid it: ​Monitor social media, email, DMs, voicemail and other streams closely
so that you can respond quickly to questions, criticism and any requests for corrections.
Review the concerns in detail and respond appropriately regarding your news
organization’s decision. For social media criticism, answer it neutrally and politely but
stand by your reporting, unless you were wrong and then you should say so quickly and
clearly. (​Pro tip: If the critic is more of a troll, consult your editors and organizations who
can help yo​u ​respond, including ​TrollBusters.​)
Fail #9:​ Lack of transparency. Someone has pointed out an error, so you just delete the
Tweet or update the story without noting the error.
How to avoid it​: We expect transparency from public officials and should practice it
ourselves if we want to earn and keep the trust of our audience. If you correct an error
in a story -- regardless of platform -- you should make it clear what you got wrong and
that it has been corrected. If your news organization does not have a policy about how
to respond to inaccuracies in its own social media posts, talk to your editors about what
you should do in such cases. Many news organizations require deletion of inaccurate
Tweets with an updated Tweet (if appropriate) giving correct information and noting the
previous error.

