IRE 2018: “Afflicting the comfortable”
(Thursday 6/14, 10:15 a.m.)

Speakers: Nancy Amons, Matt Hamilton, Nigel Jaquiss, Sammy Roth
Tipsheet by Sammy Roth: Exposing small-town corruption: What to do when
public records are your only friend
Small towns are often dominated by a handful of powerful people or business interests. They can
also lack a robust media presence, making them rife for corruption. But even when sources are
afraid to talk on the record about the rich and powerful people who run their communities, public
records and other public information can go a long way toward showing corruption.
You’ll be amazed what people do in public: When local power players have never had to
worry about being watched, they’ll do all manner of things in public you wouldn’t expect.
• Every state has some kind of open meetings law, which often means you can access
agendas, minutes and video for public meetings of government officials going back years.
• You’d think public officials would leave scandalous information off their legally required
financial disclosure forms, but sometimes it’ll all be right there on the forms.
• What people and companies reveal when they brag about themselves can also be
valuable. Press releases and company websites can provide a wealth of information.
You’ll be amazed what’s on the internet: Public records laws are a reporter’s best friend, but
sometimes the information you need could be hiding on the internet in the most random places.
• Legally required business filings can tell you who controls a corporation or limited
liability company, and where its offices are located.
• The websites Corporation Wiki and Bizapedia are incredibly useful for finding
connections between different business entities. For instance, you can use them to find all
businesses connected to a certain individual, or all businesses located at the same address.
• The Wayback Machine/Internet Archive (archive.org) can show you old versions of
websites, sometimes revealing information that has been taken off the internet.
• Court records from services like CourtLink and PACER can also be a boon. In addition to
looking up individual cases, with an institutional CourtLink account you can also search
for names at random just to see what turns up.
• Obituaries are a great way to figure out if people are related to each other. If you’re trying
to connect the dots on possible family connections, find a great-grandparent’s obituary
and look closely at “so and so was preceded in death by” and “so and so is survived by.”
• Social media is also good for uncovering family relations and friendships. Even when
people don’t list their relatives on Facebook, they’ll often reveal who they’re related to
— and who they’re friends with — in old Facebook posts, and on Twitter and Instagram.
• Just Googling the names of people, businesses and institutions you’re investigating can
yield a treasure trove of information. Use Boolean search operators generously (quotation
marks, ANDs, ORs, etc.). You never know what you’ll find buried in government
websites, forums, social media, or other places you never thought to look.

You’ll be amazed what documents you can get: Even if you can’t get those critical sources to
talk to you, you can often get what you need if you’re willing to fight for (and then read)
hundreds or thousands of pages of public records.
• When public money is awarded to private companies, bidding documents can tell you a
lot. There are all sorts of documents to ask for: requests for proposals, meeting sign-in
sheets, the bidders’ actual proposals, evaluations by the public agency, a list of members
of the committee that made those evaluations, etc. You may be able to figure out on your
own if there’s something fishy about how the contract was awarded.
• If you’re interested in a public contract with a particular company, don’t just ask for that
contract. Ask for all contracts between the public agency and the company. The request
might turn up related or otherwise relevant contracts you didn’t know about.
• County assessor’s and recorder’s officers are great resources for everything having to do
with land transactions. Even if they don’t tell you the actual sale price, you can
sometimes calculate it yourself by knowing how much tax was paid on the transaction.
• Ask for copies of checks — payments for permit applications and environmental studies,
for instance. It can be super revealing to know who’s actually paying for things.
• Even if some sources don’t want to go on the record, they can still point you toward
useful documents.
You’ll be amazed what people will tell you: Sometimes, you learn a lot just by letting the
subjects of your investigation talk. A few tips on that…
• When interviewing the subject, don’t be confrontational until you have to. Sometimes
people think they can talk their way out of any problem, and in their confidence, they’ll
tell you things that corroborate the allegations against them. That possibility fades away
if you’re not friendly out of the gate. There will be time for confrontation later.
• On a similar note, don’t assume you know everything there is to know. If you just let the
subject of your investigation talk, sometimes they’ll reveal whole new layers of possible
corruption or wrongdoing — but you need to really be listening, or you might miss it.
• It’s also important not to assume everyone connected to the alleged corruption or
wrongdoing is actually a bad actor. Sometimes people are unwitting participants or
innocent bystanders, and they could actually make great sources. But they’re less likely
to talk to you if you approach them with a confrontational attitude.
• When only a handful of sources are willing to go on record, it can be tempting to treat
everything they say as Gospel. But still be wary of any source with an axe to grind.
• Last but not least: Good journalism can create good sources. This might sound backward,
but if you’re having trouble getting people to go on the record, one strategy is to publish
what you know and let the reporting bring people out of the woodwork. People who were
afraid to talk to you before may be more willing to go on record once at least some of the
corruption is out in the open.

