Crooked cops and crime labs: scrutinizing the forensic sciences
Investigative Reporters & Editors conference
June 14, 2018
Ryan Gabrielson
Reporter, ProPublica
ryan.gabrielson@propublica.org
@ryangabrielson
Nine years ago, the National Academy of Sciences published a mammoth evaluation on the state of
forensic science, finding much cause for concern. "The simple reality is that the interpretation of
forensic evidence is not always based on scientific studies to determine its validity," the report
states. Crime labs and outside researchers have worked to address holes in the science and ensure
forensic evidence is reliable. But little has improved overall, and major scandals regularly cast doubt
on the field. This is a primer on the state of forensic disciplines, what records to pursue, and helpful
resources.
What's valid science (when done appropriately)?
• Biology: primarily DNA typing that analyzes specific genetic markers to determine the likelihood
that an individual is the source of unidentified sample. While the larger field is not in question,
certain crime lab practices are arguably less reliable, including analysis of mixed samples from
multiple people and "touch" DNA (skin cells).
• Chemistry: the identification of controlled substances in seized evidence, as well as toxicology
that tests for drug and alcohol metabolites in bodily fluids.
What's still unproven?
• Pattern interpretation: several fields that attempt to identify the source of evidence by comparing
features of a known item to the evidence item. This category of analysis often relies on subjective
judgements by human examiners and lacks empirical data on its probative value. Includes
fingerprints (bolstered by research suggesting low error rates), bloodstain splatter,
firearms/toolmarks (examines markings left on bullet casings during firing, or on objects after
struck by tools), footwear, and handwriting.
• Digital evidence: the measurement and identification of people and objects captured in electronic
media, including audio, video and still images. Another field investigates the source of changes in
digital files. Many of the digital evidence methodologies are subjective pattern interpretation.
• Anthropology: analysis of injuries in human remains.
• Crime scene: a collection of fields related to physical evidence collection and examinations where
a crime occurred. Includes identifying human remains in a disaster, fire and explosion analysis, and
detector dogs.

What's debunked (or seriously in doubt)?
• Comparative bullet-lead analysis: measured the chemical composition of bullets to determine if
they came from the same source. Bullets' chemical compositions vary significantly and cannot be
used to reliably match bullets from a crime scene to unused ammunition elsewhere.
• Bitemark identification: the analysis of bite injuries on human remains, ostensibly to match the
markings to the set of teeth (and criminal) that caused them. Both the measurements and
conclusions are entirely subjective, producing unreliable conclusions.
• Microscopic hair-fiber identification: the matching of hair found at a crime scene with an
individual by feature comparison. Several defendants convicted of violent crimes based on hairfiber evidence have been exonerated by later DNA analysis.
_____
Important records
• Quality assurance: equipment calibration records, reports on crime labs' routine re-analysis of
evidence, contamination and error logs, internal and accreditor audits, labs' written
correspondence with makers of instruments and analysis software.
• Competence: lab scientists' curriculum vitae (do biologists have master’s degrees?), proficiency
test results, transcripts of lab scientists' testimony in criminal cases (do their statements exceed the
scientific limits?).
• Best practices: labs' written policies, procedures, and training materials (to compare to national
standards in each discipline).
_____
Resources
American Academy of Forensic Sciences
https://www.aafs.org/
Center for Statistics and Applications in Forensic Evidence
https://forensicstats.org/
Texas Forensic Science Commission
http://www.txcourts.gov/fsc/
National Commission on Forensic Science (no longer operating)
https://www.justice.gov/archives/ncfs
Organization of Scientific Area Committees for Forensic Science
https://www.nist.gov/topics/forensic-science/organization-scientific-area-committees-osac

