Melissa Segura
BuzzFeed News
IRE 2018
Melissa.Segura@buzzfeed.com
Investigating Police Corruption: A Quick Start Guide
Few jobs in American society wield more power than police officers. That power
shouldn’t go unchecked. Below are a few basic steps to identify potential stories
in your own communities.
1. Tap into the community
a. Community members, particularly in disenfranchised areas of your
cities, know what’s happening. The trick is to listen. Many are used
to being ignored. Sometimes there are formal groups in cities
tracking police abuses. These groups may have materials for you at
the ready. In other places, these are informal associations. It might
be a matriarch of a block or a pastor in an underserved area who
can help you identify any red flags.
2. Complaint Procedures
a. Every municipality has its own system for disciplining its officers.
Make it your job to understand how the complaint process
functions in your community. Questions to ask include:
i. Are the complaints public records? (If not, there’s your first
story.)
ii. What’s the procedure for filing a complaint? Does it make
sense? Are there onerous burdens placed on complainants?
iii. Who is in charge of reviewing the complaints?
iv. What are the possible consequences facing officers?
v. How often are officers held accountable? Are there obvious
instances in which they escape appropriate accountability
measures?
b. Which officers have the most complaints?
c. Is there a particular unit that seems to rack up more complaints
than others?

3. Law Enforcement Certification Boards
a. Many states issue police certifications. In many states officers can’t
work without this certification.
b. Find out which officers have had their certifications revoked or
under review.
4. Lawsuits
a. Check PACER (most police abuse claims are filed in federal court)
but occasionally some complainants try their hands in state courts.
b. Look for the municipality and specific department as defendants.
They are usually sued along with the specific officers you might be
investigating.
c. FOIA settlement data from your city, too. Find out to whom and
why payouts may have been made, oftentimes, quietly.
5. Get to Know Your Departments Directives/Handbook
a. Many departments have their own officer requirements/handbooks
publicly available. Learn them inside out.
b. Many of these directives will tell you which forms officers are
required to fill out, etc. that will help you submit more pointed,
fruitful FOIAs.
c. Most importantly, the directives usually lay out disciplinary
procedures for officers. For example, if an officer is under federal
investigation, the directives outline what happens with that officer
when the investigation is ongoing. Some departments will assign
officers to a specific unit. You can then FOIA the roster of officers
in that particular unit.
6. Request Overtime Records
a. While not a perfect gauge, officers who have been accused of
massive misconduct are frequently those logging extra overtime
hours. Dig into the officers who seem to be closing a lot of cases,
particularly those who are clearing cases at an unusually fast clip.

