Schools Without Rules – an Orlando Sentinel investigation into the private schools
that take Florida school scholarships or vouchers.
Tips from reporters Leslie Postal, Beth Kassab and Annie Martin:

Reporting
Visiting schools (and lots of them) was a key to our stories and a reminder how
important basic, get-out-there-and-talk-to-people reporting is to most good
journalism. We visited 35 schools, usually unannounced, and requested a chat
with the principal and a tour of the facility. That was time consuming, yet every
visit, even when we were turned away, gave us another glimpse into the world of
private voucher schools.
--So leave the newsroom, and your computer, and go out and talk to your
subjects.
--Take cell phone photos of places you’ve visited (in our case school buildings and
their signs, even if we couldn’t get anything inside). This was helpful later when
we were writing, as they served as a visual reminder of what some places looked
like (a tiny office shoe-horned next to a bail bondsman, a beautiful suburban
campus, a store front in a rundown shopping center, a faded metal shell building,
etc) Though our visuals staff took the main photos and video, our cell phone
photos also became small visual elements for both print and online packages.
--Work in teams, if possible, especially when trying to get interviews or access to
people and places not necessarily welcoming. This was a luxury in our shrinking
newsroom, but we found that showing up in pairs meant we were taken more
seriously. It also meant we had two sets of eyes on everything and that one
person could focus on taking notes from conversation and the other could look
around more.
--Type up notes from visits/interviews as soon as possible after you return to the
newsroom.

--request obvious documents then use those to think more broadly and make
more requests for other records. For example, we started out asking if the Florida
Department of Education had done an investigation of a particular voucher
school, one where the owner had been arrested on Medicaid fraud charges. Once
we received that, and realized it included useful information (spelling out what
the school had done wrong) we asked for all investigations statewide for the past
five years. After reading those, we realized the state sometimes reached
settlement agreements with schools, so we asked for all of those recent
agreements. They included lots of details about what schools had done wrong
(from accepting voucher money for students not enrolled to failing to maintain a
building and holding classes in a hotel conference room).
--Realize you might not know everything government agency keeps, so keep your
eyes open for sources of information. We found a report from the DOE that made
a brief mention of complaints filed with the department about private voucher
schools. That prompted us to ask for the complaints. We got 77 back, and they
proved to be a gold-mine of information, as they included the written complaint
(often from a parent) with details about the issue, a letter from DOE to the school
and then documentation the school was required to send to DOE. The
documentation often included teachers’ names and qualifications and that gave
us a real look at who was teaching in these schools (many of them lacked college
degrees, for example). The complaints also gave us parents to contact and
interview.
--Sometimes complaining about records, or asking for more, isn’t the best move.
The complaints we received had parent names but in most cases their phone
numbers and emails were redacted. We did not think the department was right to
black out that information and asked for three complaints to be re-sent in full
form. The department responded by saying for privacy reasons, it should have
redacted all information, including names. Then it asked if it could re-send us the
77 documents with more details blacked out (Yeah, No on that). In the meantime,
we’d found the people we wanted anyway. But now when we request these
complaints, they have NO identifying information. This was not a battle we could

fight, unfortunately, so in hindsight, we would have been better off just accepting
what was sent the first time.
--Check out the people and institutions you plan on using in your story, searching
court records for criminal cases, bankruptcies and evictions, etc. Lexis-Nexus is
always a great place to start.
--Check out teachers in private schools by looking to see if they once taught in
public school. We found a good number who’d lost jobs in the public sector and
then been hired by private schools (porn on school computer bothered public
schools but not always the private ones). In Florida, public school teacher
discipline records are public and available on DOE website.
Staying Organized
- Use Google docs to create a central place for collecting data, documents
and notes. We kept excel files of enrollment data, fraud investigations,
complaints and more in our project folder.
- Keep notes from visits and interviews in this central area. We liked that any
of us could type up or school visit notes in that file – and review it as
needed once we started writing.
- Create charts to help condense/tabulate info in records you’ve collected.
We used charts to list schools that faced state investigation, sum up what
they’d been accused of and document what action the state had taken.
Managing Time and Editors

- In this era or shrinking newsrooms and increasing pressure to get lots of
stuff online quickly, it is not easy to do longer projects. Acknowledge it will
take longer than if you could dedicate yourself to it full time, then work on
it regularly as you can.

- Providing paper a steady stream of other stories from your beat will keep
editors happy. Maybe you don’t dive as deeply into beat stuff but you keep
your foot in, which isn’t a bad thing.
-

