Local Watchdog Showcase
Joey Cranney, Brett Murphy, Katie Shepherd
Oceans 6-8
10:15 a.m. to 11:15 a.m.
Learn new and old reporting tricks as the team from the Local Matters
newsletter highlights a recent selection of great local watchdog
journalism. Hear firsthand presentations by local reporters from
across the country on how to expose wrongdoing in your community.

Subscribe: bit.ly/2gpfiww
Archives: bit.ly/2wpElZH
Submit: localmatters@ire.org

Louisiana legislators earn big money from government
agencies — but some kept secret
By Rebekah Allen | The Advocate

Investigating public officials
Cross reference public sources to find things
people are hiding. I looked through
hundreds of vague financial disclosures to
see what legislators were reporting as
income.
To figure out what they weren't reporting, I
also reviewed their own biographies in
various places to see what they listed as their
jobs.
bit.ly/2HycBFZ

Building Relationships: An investigation into how Arizona
K-12 School districts address capital needs
By Carrie Jung | KJZZ

Investigating contracts
Money motivates everyone, so if businesses are
spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on
campaigns, there's a reason (and it isn't altruism,
no matter what they say)
Look at public procurement records and
cross-reference those with campaign finance
reports
bit.ly/2l8LF5i

Cracks where FIU bridge buckled may have signaled
‘imminent failure’
By Andres Viglucci, Nicholas Nehamas and Jenny Staletovich | Miami Herald

Investigating breaking news
Foster relationships. Be aggressive with FOIAs.
Don’t get discouraged by data dumps. That’s
where the treasure is.
Having not just one person, but a team, sift
through thousands of pages was invaluable. So
was keeping a detailed spreadsheet on all requests
made and their status.
hrld.us/2Idoj8M
Pedro Portal, Miami Herald

How an abnormal Louisiana law deprives, discriminates
and drives incarceration: Tilting the scales
By Jeff Adelson, Gordon Russell and John Simerman | The Advocate

Investigating criminal justice
We reviewed records on thousands of Louisiana
jury trials over a 6-year span and documented
verdict counts in nearly 1,000 trials. We built a
second database of 41,000 prospective jurors
called to serve for those trials, by race and
gender, and determined their fate during jury
selection.
Our analysis found that jurors reach a verdict
without consensus in 40 percent of trials and
that the law disadvantages black defendants.
bit.ly/2l04gAF

An excerpt from the Official Journal of the
Proceedings of the Constitutional
Convention of the State of Louisiana

Investigating
public spending
Don’t just get the check registers.
Get the credit card statements.
bit.ly/2MdX6Fe

Investigating LLCs
and real estate
Look for properties bought in
foreclosure. Records of bidding,
payments end up in court, including
documents and checks signed by
agents or managers who may
otherwise be obscured.
bit.ly/2fsLL6P

Rigged: Forced into debt. Worked past exhaustion.
Left with nothing.
By Brett Murphy | USA TODAY

Investigating employers
Look into bad bosses with worker
complaints: DOL data, state labor
commission complaints/hearings, OSHA
penalties, civil lawsuits. You want the
judgments, plus any exhibits the worker
filed.
Ask your boss for a Courtlink account,
comes with Nexis. Ask plaintiff lawyers for
depositions. Check social media, the new
water cooler.
Credit: Omar Ornelas, Desert Sun

https://usat.ly/2ry2wnV

Cozy land deals meant big money for Trump family
and friends
By Steve Reilly, Michael Sallah, Brett Murphy and Nick Penzenstadler | USA TODAY

Investigating lobbies
Tie the names behind businesses
— landowners, shell companies,
executives, etc. — to lawmakers through
lobbying records with the secretary of
state. OpenCorporates is good for
federal.
Get those names from articles of
incorporation, property deeds, building
inspections, lawsuits.

https://usat.ly/2sF9jus

Oregon failed to provide flu vaccinations to most of its
prison inmates. One woman died.
By Katie Shepherd | Willamette Week

Investigating prison healthcare
Before you start, set a “baseline”. What does
the prison say it should be doing? How does
that compare to standards elsewhere?
Check your findings against the baseline.
Use other public agencies to get to information
hidden behind bars. Your state health
department tracks outbreaks and diseases;
the 911 dispatch center records calls for
ambulances.

An Oregon prison told ICE where to find an inmate’s
family.
By Katie Shepherd | Willamette Week

How much are your local agencies
helping ICE?
Look beyond the raid. ICE is picking
people up every day and your local
officials are probably helping them.
Put in FOIA requests for
communications with your local law
enforcement agencies – police, sheriffs,
district attorneys, prisons and even
agencies that handle delinquent
juveniles.
Reverse the request and file it again
with state public records requests
asking for communications with ICE.

Danger: Learn at your own risk
By Barbara Laker, Wendy Ruderman, and Dylan Purcell | The Philadelphia Inquirer

Investigating public schools
Analyzed five years of district records,
conducted 120 interviews and enlisted
teachers for scientific testing.
Keep an open mind. We went into the
project thinking that we would focus
primarily on lead in paint and water. On
almost a whim, we expanded the testing
to asbestos fibers on surfaces.
bit.ly/2KvyDu6

Credit:
Jessica
Griffin, The
Inquirer (top)
and
Philadelphia
Federation of
Teachers
Health and
Welfare Fund

Etowah sheriff pockets $750k in jail food funds,
Buys $740k beach house
By Connor Sheets | AL.com

Investigating sheriffs
Pulled financial documents, ethics
commission reports, real estate records,
campaign finance records and other key
documents.
My tip would be that old-school
journalism techniques often yield the
best results.
Credit:Brian Kelly, AL.com (left) and Connor Sheets, AL.com, via Todd Entrekin for Sheriff

bit.ly/2kYPdah

Despite warnings, past Buffalo bishops returned abusive
clergy to parishes
By Jay Tokasz | The Buffalo News

Investigating churches
Through the limited court documents available
to us, plus interviews with several key sources
and a whole bunch of library research into
church directories, we were able to build a story
explaining how the Diocese of Buffalo kept
abuses secret.
Knock on doors to talk with sources, rather than
making a phone call. When a reporter knocked
on a priest’s door, he admitted to sex abuse and
helped explain the cover-up.
bit.ly/2JHMBvf

Credit: The Buffalo News

Florida’s medical marijuana program is attracting troubled
doctors: ‘It’s like the Wild Wild West’
By Corey G. Johnson | Tampa Bay Times

Investigating doctors
The Times analyzed Department of Health
data from April detailing medical board
discipline, $100,000-plus malpractice
cases and criminal incidents, then
reviewed hundreds of doctors’ files.
Online sites, like Yelp and GoFundme, can
be helpful in turning up sources with
medical complaints and insights.
bit.ly/2rjT3OD

Credit: Tylisa C. Johnson, Tampa Bay Times

‘One of the most secretive, dark states’: What is Kansas
trying to hide?
By Laura Bauer, Judy L. Thomas And Max Londberg | The Kansas City Star

Investigating transparency
The six-part Star series, the work of a team of
reporters, revealed how Kansas’ state
government had become one of the most
secretive in the nation.
For this series, we had a team of reporters who
have covered Kansas for years take a 30,000 foot
view of our own backyard to find the big picture.
So sometimes, it pays to take a step back and
piece it all together for readers.
Credit: Neil Nakahodo, The Star

bit.ly/2AB3hfT

Policing in Rural Alaska
By Kyle Hopkins
Anchorage Daily News
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ecFHXzHr7BM&feature=youtu.be

Subscribe: bit.ly/2gpfiww
Archives: bit.ly/2wpElZH
Submit: localmatters@ire.org

