One Journalist,
Multiple Hats
IRE Conference 2018

Jamie Grey @tvnewsjamie
Investigative Producer, Raycom Media

Who We Are

Jake Bleiberg @JZBleiberg
Portland Reporter, Bangor Daily News

Kristin Hussey @kristinhussey1
Freelance Journalist, Connecticut

How can you be a “one-reporter band” practically?
Pre-Write Stories
Use time during meetings, legislative sessions, court hearings, etc.

Type Notes as You Go
Use social media as your note-taking during breaking news

Be Your Own Photog/Videographer
Make your own mobile kit and ﬁnd ways to shoot quality interviews/undercover video

Publish and Update
Report what you have and go back for what you need

Shooting Standard Video on Mobile

Shooting Your Own Undercover

Be Your Own Videographer
Some Mobile Tools
Ring Light ($12): http://bit.ly/irelight
Cell Phone Mic ($13): http://bit.ly/irecellmic
Mini Cell Tripod ($9): http://bit.ly/ireminitripod
Full Extend Cell/iPad Tripod ($40): http://bit.ly/iretripod

Break the news.

And then update

How do you get on the same page as
your editor?
Weekly Update Emails
Schedule Casual Meetups
Get your Editor Invested
Bring your editor along on your
reporting journey to win time and
improve edits

What are some quick and dirty ways to
get a read on a beat you’re not up to
speed on?
Find Tipsheets and Other Media on the Topic
IRE Storypacks, podcasts, radio shows, local government “cheat sheets”

Find the “Recent Formers”
Recent election losers, former and retired oﬃcials

Read the Competition, and Your Newsroom’s Archives
Before you took this beat, politicians embarked on ambitious initiatives in City Hall. The school
district made controversial curriculum changes. What happened with those projects?

More quick and dirty ways to get up to
speed
FOIA FOIA FOIA
Learn your state’s freedom of information laws. Find record retention schedules - they
are a road map for an agency’s reports and databases. Start ﬁling your requests.

Municipal Bond Oﬀerings
Sign up for a free account at the MSRB’s EMMA https://emma.msrb.org
Oﬃcial Statement is loaded with details about your state, county, city, school district or
water authority.

Podcasts
Brush up while you drive! Most industries have ‘em; I’m a fan of NCSL’s pod.

How to be your own photographer?
“f/8 and be there”
The most important thing you can do to get good photos or video is to be ready to shoot
when the action happens.

Take Lots of Photos
Whether you’re a longtime pro or just picking up a camera, taking more photos means you’re
more likely to have good ones.

Know the Ethics
Diﬀerent mediums have diﬀerent rules, i.e. no ﬁlters on news photos. Make sure you know
them.

How do you gain your editor’s trust and
deliver on investigative reporting while
working alone? How do you win time?
Pitch Your Story Once You Have Something
Establish a record of delivery

Always be Gathering String
Keep a diary/notebook of story ideas and possible leads

Point Out Your “Wins”
Make sure to do follow-ups when your story makes a change - and enter awards

How do you personally manage your
workﬂow from idea to publication?
Keep a Notebook - or Evernote
List your story ideas and any other random thoughts

Stockpile Data
Keep crime, bridge, school, election and salary data on hand - it’ll help when there’s a breaker

Learn the tools you need, and use them until they no longer work for
you.
You don’t have to learn every new data viz or programming language. .

Stockpiling Data

What about when you are your own
copy editor or fact-checker?
Use a Fact Check Checklist
Do multiple sweeps for diﬀerent elements (names, numbers, math, etc.)

Check the “Color”
Details can get you into trouble

Use Unconventional Fact-Check Friends
Ask your accountant dad, kid’s math teacher, Facebook friends, etc. for help. You know a lot of
experts.

Check the details.
Assignment: Write about a new minor-league baseball team called
the Hartford Yard Goats.
● Talk to owners, fans, marketing dudes.
● Call MiLB a million times with q’s.
● Follow $$: Detailed spreadsheet of the city’s anticipated revenue
streams from the new baseball stadium.
● Gather every detail you can, including the mascot goats’ names
and ages. And their agent’s name.

“First pro
sports
team in
18 years.”
*Nope.

Reader
points out
your stupid
mistake.
Via a
tweeted
James
Franco gif.

CHECK:
● Name/Place
Spellings
● Numbers
and Math
● Attribution
of Quotes
and Claims
● Intent and
Context of
Quotes

One Way

How do you carve out areas of coverage
in a competitive environment?
Avoid the Turn-of-the-Screw Stories
Don’t go to every council meeting if you don’t have to

Ask Interview Subjects for Story Ideas
Details can get you into trouble

Find Who Your Competition Pissed Oﬀ
Read the Alt Weeklies, Blogs, Gossip on Facebook

What are some cool tools for when you
are short-handed (a.k.a. alone)?
Infogram
Simple, free infographics that are embeddable on websites and in social media

Knightlab Maps and Timelines
Awesome interactives that work with diﬀerent types of media/links/etc.

Google Fusion and ArcGIS Mapping
Create interactive maps to use for reporting and publication

Adobe Spark
Make cool social videos - you can even add your station/paper logos

Jamie Grey:
jgrey@raycommedia.com
@TVNewsJamie

Our Contact
Info

Jake Bleiberg:
jbleiberg@bangordailynews.com
@JZBleiberg
Kristin Hussey:
khussey1@gmail.com
@kristinhussey1

