IRE 2018 - Worker exploitation
Shoshana Walter, Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting, swalter@revealnews.org
Brett Murphy, USA Today, brett.murphy@usatoday.com
Peggy Lowe, Harvest Public Media, KCUR, lowep@kcur.org
People
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.

Start with victims. Collect narratives from people on the ground. Invite them to co-report.
Social media is the water cooler. Start a separate Facebook account to friend request
any and everyone you meet while reporting. That social media relationship gives you
cred and access to their larger networks.
Gatekeepers: lawyers, unions, community leaders, churches. Give presentations to build
trust. Word of mouth.
Experts: studies, academics, economists. Share your findings, documents, methodology
The companies: open up the conversation sooner rather than later. Full disclosure on
the reporting. Use their pushback to interrogate and bulletproof your work. You don’t
want them to be surprised by the content of your story, and you don’t want to be caught
off guard by their response.

Documents
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

Data

Civil court. Fair Labor Standards Act complaints. Ask your boss for a ​Courtlink​ account
(from Nexis), which covers superior/county court system. Ask lawyers for depositions,
what motions have the good exhibits, etc.
Labor complaints: Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division and DOL’s state
arms: California DLSE (Division of Labor Standards Enforcement) orders, audio
testimony, exhibits, contracts, logs, memos.
Others: Labor cases at National Labor Relations Board (great FOIA office). OSHA
inspections, federal and state arms. State lobbying disclosures.
Workers compensation court/commission. Find workers who are injured through workers
compensation filings. Learn the form numbers and what they mean. For example, one
form number could mean the claim was filed by an employer, others by the injured
worker. Who filed the claim? This is an important step in investigating fraud.
File records requests to find out what regulators knew and when. Request emails.
Request the documents underlying the inspections and investigations: notes,
correspondence, draft memos.
Deed records, birth records, divorce and marriage records. Having trouble tracking
someone down? Use these records to find relatives who are not necessarily reflected in
Whitepages and LexisNexis searches.

1.

2.

3.

Make your own: Philip Meyer approach for scope, a database from what you hear and
read, especially labor violations, accusations, etc. Use ​document cloud​ to scan your
records
When investigating private intersections with public sector, sometimes physically. They’ll
often use third parties for data collections. Those third parties are still beholden to public
records laws in most states.
Look for clearinghouses: ​Panjiva database​ and bills of lading, ​OpenSecrets​ lobbying
data.

Other tips
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Connect to what people know and care about. Take the time to determine which brands
and companies use exploited labor. ​Seafood from Slaves​.
As you go, build timelines. Write budget lines, nut grafs, findings, bullets, blowouts.
Pitch it to friends. What do you tell them first? What’s the most outrageous?
Don’t let regulators off the hook.
Layout the roadmap of your reporting for others (cops, lawyers) to pick up. After the story
comes out, send your top level findings to people with the power to take action.
Good story ideas come from a story: anecdote first, scale second (don’t have to structure
the actual story that way, but good for finding stories.) ​Insane. Invisible. In Danger

