How to land a book deal, write a manuscript and get people to read it...all while
keeping your day job!
Blake Ellis and Melanie Hicken, authors of A Deal with the Devil: The Dark and Twisted True Story of
one of the Biggest Cons in History
https://www.amazon.com/Deal-Devil-Twisted-Biggest-History/dp/1501163841/
@melhicken, melanie.hicken@cnn.com
@blakeellis3, blake.ellis@cnn.com
Writing the proposal
Advice from our literary agent, Eileen Cope:
"As a literary agent, typically what I look for when considering a book proposal based on investigative
journalism / narrative nonfiction is first and foremost a great story with a strong narrative arc. Tell me
something I know little about but want to know more. It’s equally important that the subject of the
investigation can be expanded from an article into a full-length book and that the story itself is in the
service of exposing a larger issue that appeals to readers."
What to include:
Sample chapter: "Show us a strong, distinctive voice. Something that stands out from the crowd. I
would stress that you pick as the sample chapter the most intriguing part of the story and really hooks
the agent in."
Chapter summaries: "I always compare a book proposal to an architect's plans for building a house. The
structure has to hold together and we need to see where you are placing the kitchen and the living and
the bedrooms. You don’t have to decorate these rooms — that detail comes in the actual writing of the
book — but publishers need to know what they are buying, what is the book. "
Authors Bio: "It helps to have some sort of a platform from which to build an audience. Whether it’s a
blog or a regular column, authors should always take time to build their case as why he or she is the
right person to write the book. Are they an authority on the subject. Is the book an expansion of a
published article that commanded hundreds of comments or thousands of readers."
Possible audience: I always suggest the writer takes the time to see what other books are out there
that would either compete with the book (assuming you can show how your book is different from
what’s already out there) or offer examples that compare to your book albeit it a different subject which
performed extremely well in the marketplace.
Landing the contract
Advice from Todd Hunter, our editor at Simon & Schuster's Atria:
The investigative books that I’ve worked on typically have a combination, if not all, of the following four
factors:
1) it reveals something which hadn’t been previously reported
2) it alters our thinking around a subject
3) there is a dramatic, narrative element to how the investigation unfolds and
4) there are enough people who care about the subject.

"True-crime investigations are particularly intriguing because the investigation becomes a window into
the dark corners of our human existence—whether it’s pedophilia, a religious cult, a scam on elderly
people, etc. These books work partly because of the shock value, but I like to think that they are also
appealing because they serve as a countermeasure to the crimes or sinister acts that are reported. And,
as a result, these books leave us with a feeling of hope, that there is some justice in our world."
**Once you get a contract, know what you're signing – we got help from the Author's
Guild. Your agent can and should advocate for you, though publishers may not budget on
certain provisions.**
Writing the book
-You don't have to take book leave. Do as much as you can of the research, reporting and outlining on
week nights/weekends, and then strategically pick blocks of time where we could be together to do the
actual writing)
-View each chapter as an article. This can make the writing much more manageable mentally. And you
can always go back and work on smoothing out the transitions and flow.
-Find someone to write the book with. If possible (for example if you're on a reporting team), it could
be helpful to have a coauthor so that you can divide and conquer!
-Don't be afraid to ask your agent or editor questions about the process. Most will assume you know
how it goes unless you ask.
-Get insurance if you're accusing people of wrongdoing. Start applying many months before the book is
scheduled to come out. The Author's Guild offers reduced prices for members.
-The story may keep going until the very, very end. For any nonfiction book, it's possible that new
developments can significantly change your book – and even the entire ending. Keep your editor and
agent apprised of all of these updates and don't be afraid to push to get something important into the
book at the last minute.
-The process is slow until it's very, very fast. We counted on having a lot of time to rethink chapters,
flow, order and fact check, but we didn't get much time to make changes
once the manuscript was submitted. And once there is an estimated page count you are very limited in
the changes you can make.
Getting people to read your book
-Get ready to be your own advocate. Your publisher will only do so much, so much
of the promotion is going to be in your hands.
-Pick your battles. Promotion of your book can be a full-time job on its own if you let it be – so it's
important to identify the specific audience(s) you want to target and create buckets of the most
important things to do. And you don't have to do everything before the book comes out.
-Work your contacts. Whether you're trying to get great endorsements (known as blurbs) for the back
of your book or trying to land a big review, don't be afraid to reach out to other media folks you know.
Our contacts helped us land blurbs from well-known journalists and a best-selling crime fiction writer.
-Join an authors' community. Binder groups on Facebook are amazing (if you're a woman). There are so
many different subgroups with helpful tips for people going through the very same stages as you.

