Steps,costs to publish a book
IRE ORLANDO CONFERENCE 2018

Mary Shanklin, Fifth Estate Media
ms@fifthestatemedia.net
407-921-9850

copyright
Once the manuscript is completed, file for copyright. The $80 process is not necessary
to protect your rights but helps in case of infringement and is needed to sell to libraries.
edit
Hire a copy editor familiar with the Chicago Manual of Style. Costs can be under $500,
depending on the size of the book. You may need a legal review as well.
format
Format pages, fonts, line spacing, chapter titles and numbers, footnotes, table of
contents using software such as Scrivener. It’s a superb organizing tool and priced
about $50.
incorporate
Consider incorporating as a LLC or a S-corp to launch the book under the name of a
publishing house, which helps with Amazon metadata, press releases and potential tax
savings and deductions. Cost may run $300.
isbn
Purchase ISBNs through BOWKER.COM and you will need different ISBN codes for
hardcover, softcover, e-book and audio book. Expect to spend about $300.
printer
Select a printer/distribution company that offers Print on Demand and distributes to
Amazon. CreateSpace and IngramSpark are market leaders. Be sure to retain
copyright.

covers
For covers, you can stylize a photo or hire an artist for $100-$300. Crowd-source
websites like 99 Designs cost about $300 and give you proposals from a number of
artists. The production companies have online templates for cover dimensions. You’ll
need an author headshot, bio and review blurbs for the back cover.
submit
Upload the edited manuscript with the printer and order review copies. Be prepared to
pay a revision fee of about $25 to resubmit with corrections that were noted in the print
review copy.
order
When the final version is ready, place the order. A 225-page book may cost about
$2,000 for 100 hardcovers and 200 softcovers. Costs bump up if book is larger than 5
inches by 8 inches.
promote
Write and distribute press releases; push out social media campaign; create and
advance-copy sale on Amazon; seek sales opportunities with university professors,
conferences, associations, local bookstores. Plan book signings and purchase a Square
Reader ($10) for credit card purchases.
e-book
Upload eBook versions. Kindle Direct gives better royalty terms if it has exclusive rights
for a limited time.

