FOI Jedi Moves
Psychological approaches to get public records
and increase public support for FOI
Investigative Reporters and Editors national conference
June 14, 2018, Orlando, Florida
David Cuillier, Ph.D.
University of Arizona School of Journalism
cuillier@email.arizona.edu

Prepare Your Own Mind
•
•
•

Get in document state of mind. Think of putting in an “order,” not “request”
Information rehearsal (think through ahead of time how it will go)
Build self-efficacy and confidence. Know that the presumption is
openness, the law is (usually) on your side, and you can loop back from
an initial denial.

Understanding Humans: Social Exchange Theory1
Applied in survey research2 for mail and phone surveys, as well as other
purposes. People will respond to you positively if they are motivated to do so
by three factors they consider in their mind:
1. Increase Rewards
• Show respect in a positive way
• Say “thank you”
• Provide tangible rewards (information might be useful for their own
work, or to help inter-agency data transfer)
• Say others are doing it (peer pressure; social validation)
2. Decrease Costs
• Avoid subordinating language. Don’t say they need to talk to you or
answer questions. Be subordinate (“Can I ask you a favor?”)
• Avoid embarrassing them
• Make it appear short and easy (set up record release schedule)
• Make it easier to say “yes” than “no””
3. Build Trust
• Get to know the record custodians.
• Backed by authority (“your boss said I could talk to you”)

1

Getting to “Yes” Through Principled Negotiation
Below are tips for getting sources to comply with orders, based on the
theories and application of “principled negotiation,” advocated by such
experts as William Ury, co-founder of the Harvard’s Program on Negotiation
and co-author of Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In.3
1. Argue Interests, Not Positions
Argue for your interest (I wish to analyze ambulance response times to
find trouble spots), not positions (I want your database). If the agency
understands why you want the i1. nformation they are more likely to be
cooperative. Of course, you are not obligated by law to explain that and
you might not want to tip them off. But in reality they can figure it out most
of the time so being up front is a good option. Then, they can argue their
interest (we don’t want to invade anyone’s privacy). You can work out a
solution when you understand interests. Positions cause sides to dig in.
2. Allow Face Saving
If you box an official into a corner too early they might feel like they have
to stick to their guns no matter the cost, especially if they denied the
information in front of their superiors and subordinates. Talking with the
person informally first, before they commit to an action, gives the person
more leeway to agree to your order. Or, suggest the legal department
examine the issue and let them make the decision – that will relieve the
official of the shame of changing his or her mind (e.g., “sorry folks, I had to
say yes because the attorneys said I had to release it.”)
3. Use People Skills
Allow officials to vent. Listen first, then repeat what you heard (whether
you agree with it or not). Use “I” statements, not “You” statements. Talk to
people informally side-by-side, not facing across a counter, creating
psychological “opposition.” Hone your EQ (Emotional Quotient).
4. Monitor Emotions
It’s important to be aware of the emotions at play on both sides. If you or
the custodian are getting upset, angry or defensive, acknowledge your
feelings of frustration, allow the other side to vent, and acknowledge their
frustration. If emotions are running too high, simply thank the person and
say you will think carefully about what was said, re-assess and loop back.
5. Apply Negotiation Jujitsu
Bend like the willow, don’t break like the oak. Invite criticism and advice for
how to analyze the information. If they say the record is a waste of time
then ask what record would be a better use of time. Use questions instead
of statements. Use silence after an unreasonable attack. Invent different
options and alternatives, and end conversations with a compliment.
2

The Six Elements of Influence (Robert Cialdini)4
Robert Cialdini stresses being ethical in the application of these principles. He
says that bunglers don’t understand the principles, smugglers know the
principles and use them for bad purposes (only for their own gain), and
sleuths apply the principles correctly and for the well-being of both parties.5
1. Reciprocation
• Rejection-then-retreat: Ask for a lot, then cut it in half. (“Can I have
all your data for the past 20 years? OK, how about 10 years?”)
2. Commitment and Consistency
• Ratcheting (low-balling, or “foot in the door”): Get a commitment for
something small, then open the door for getting “yes” on something
bigger. (“Can I see a blank vehicle accident form? How about one
filled out? Get a photocopy of that? Can I see what it looks like in
your computer? How about all data copied to my flash drive?”)
3. Social Proof (Peer Pressure)
• Focus on the importance of what they have to offer to society. That
it’s their duty as an American.
• Point out other agencies provided you the records and then they
are more likely to comply (particularly if neighboring agencies).6
4. Liking
• Physical attractiveness (halo effect). Dress well.
• Similarity. Find common interests.
• Compliments that are sincere.
• Appearing more sympathetic and explaining your purpose
increases compliance and speed in FOI requests.7
5. Authority
• Official letters are three times as effective than an informal ask.8
• Longer, detailed letters are more successful than short letters.9
• Letters from people with Ph.D.s result in better and faster
responses than those without doctorates.10
• Legalistic, threatening letters more effective than friendly or neutral
letters.11
• Titles have authority. Have publisher or attorney sign letter.
• Get people in government authority to back you up (provide public
record guide that is produced by your state attorney general).
6. Scarcity
• What you are offering is limited. Provide deadline and urgency.

3

Other Persuasion Tips
Coincidental Similarity
A person who shares a coincidence with you, particularly one perceived to
be rare, like a birthday or first name, is more likely to do what you want.12
Check desk photos or other cues to find rare similarities between you and
the person you are dealing with.
Speaking Speed
Speaking at a moderately good pace increases credibility, but not too fast.
Avoid Physically Squaring Off
When talking with someone, avoid standing or sitting directly across the
counter or table from the person. This creates subconscious “opposition”
and puts them in a combat-ready stance. Position yourself to the side.
Avoid Powerless Language
Work to avoid hedges, filler, hesitations and tag questions. Be prepared
going in.

4

Increasing Public Support for FOI
Different people view the press and freedom of information differently.
Understanding those differences, what clicks with some people, and what
turns people off can help you increase public support for press freedom and
FOI in how you frame your stories, editorials, or even in informal
conversations with sources, friends and family.
Who Tends to Support Press Freedom and FOI
Research indicates those who are older, more affluent, and more
educated tend to support FOI.13 When controlling for demographics,
support for FOI has been found to be correlated with political liberalism,
skepticism, and cynicism.14 Also, those who support journalists’ right to
access public records tend to be more engaged in civic affairs15 and
heavier users of the Internet.16
Who Tends NOT to Support Press Freedom and FOI
Research indicates that people who tend not to support FOI are more
fearful of privacy invasion in general.17 They also tend to be more
politically conservative (although research has not examined libertarian
conservatives, who might be more supportive of government
transparency). Non-supporters of the press in general include people who
consider themselves polite, self-disciplined, honoring parents, obedient,
devout, honest, helpful, responsible, ambitious, influential, wanting to
preserve their public image, authoritarian, healthy, and clean.
Support by Type of Record
People support records that have a public safety element, such as police
reports, sex offender registries, as well as a fiscal accountability element,
such as officials’ expense accounts. However, support for records that
could invade one’s personal privacy have much lower support, such as
divorce court files, property tax records, and officials’ work e-mail.18
Message Points that Increase Support
Open The Government released a study19 this month based on a survey
and focus groups to find out what resonates with the public when it comes
to FOI. Based on their findings and other previous research:
• Focus on practical benefits of FOI, such as rooting out corruption
and waste, making government work better, and protecting people.
• Focus less on principled arguments, such as protecting democracy
and ensuring people’s voices are heard. They don’t click with most.
• Avoid anything that has a whiff of personal privacy invasion.
• Know the audience. Liberals and the educated respond to FOI
messages differently than conservatives.
• Frame FOI as a citizen right, not a journalist right.
5

Endnotes
1

Exchange and Power in Social Life, Peter M. Blau, 1964, Transaction, 352 pages.
Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method, Don Dillman, 1978, John
Wiley: New York.
3
Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In, Roger Fisher and William
Ury, 1981, Penguin Books: New York, 200 pages.
4
Influence: Science and Persuasion, Robert B. Cialdini, 2001, Allyn and Bacon: Boston,
262 pages.
5
“Of Tricks and Tumors: Some Little-Recognized Costs of Dishonest Use of Effective
Social Influence,” Robert B. Cialdini, Psychology & Marketing, 1999, pages 91-99.
6
“Transparency by Conformity: A Field Experiment Evaluating Openness in Local
Governments,” James ben-Aaron, Matthew Denny, Bruce Desmarals and Hanna
Wallach, Public Administration Review, 2017 (January/February), pages 68-77.
7
“Law Enforcement Records Custodians’ Decision-Making Behaviors in Response to
Florida’s Public Records Law,” Michele Bush Kimball, Communication Law and Policy,
2003, pages 313-360.
8
“Transparency at the Parish Pump: A Field Experiment to Measure the Effectiveness of
Freedom of Information Requests in England,” Ben Worthy, Peter John and Matia
Vannoni, Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 2016, pages 1-16.
9
Columbia Journalism Review’s analysis of 33,000 FOIA letters can be found at
https://www.cjr.org/analysis/foia-request-how-to-study.php
10
“Who Wants to Know?” Assessing Discrimination in Transparency and Freedom of
Information Regimes,” Gregory Michener and Karina Rodrigues, paper presented at the
4th Global Conference on Transparency Studies, Switzerland, June 4-6, 2015.
11
“Honey v. Vinegar: Testing Compliance-Gaining Theories in the Context of Freedom
of Information Laws,” David Cuillier, Communication Law & Policy, 2010 (vol. 15), pages
203-229.
12
“What a Coincidence! The Effects of Incidental Similarity on Compliance,” Burger et
al., Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2004 (pages 35-43).
13
“Internet Information-Seeking and its Relation to Support for Access to Government
Records,” David Cuillier and Suzanne J. Piotrowski, Government Information Quarterly,
2009, pages 441-449.
14
“Suspicion and Secrecy: Political Attitudes and Their Relationship to Support for
Freedom of Information,” David Cuillier and Bruce Pinkleton, Communication Law &
Policy, 2011, pages 227-254.
15
“Access Attitudes: A Social Learning Approach to Examining Community Engagement
and Support for Press Access to Government Records,” David Cuillier, Journalism &
Mass Communication Quarterly, 2008, pages 551-578.
16
“Internet Information-Seeking and its Relation to Support for Access to Government
Records,” David Cuillier and Suzanne J. Piotrowski, Government Information Quarterly,
2009, pages 441-449.
17
“Public Support for Press Access Declines as Personal Privacy Concerns Increase,”
David Cuillier, Newspaper Research Journal, 2004, pages 95-103.
18
“Access Attitudes: A Social Learning Approach to Examining Community Engagement
and Support for Press Access to Government Records,” David Cuillier, Journalism &
Mass Communication Quarterly, 2008, pages 551-578.
19
2018 Open the Government Research Report, June 2018.
https://www.org/sites/default/files/OTG%20Research%20Report.pdf
2

6

