The I​ns and ​O​uts of
C​ounting ​I​mmigrants
IRE annual conference
Orlando, June 14-17, 2018
Paul Overberg
poverberg2@gmail.com
@poverberg
​ ou probably hadn’t logged many paydays before you figured out that no matter how big your paycheck, what
Y
really mattered was the net of your income and expenses. The same applies when you’re trying to get a sense of
immigration in your area. If you’re just counting new arrivals, you have no idea how many actually live there.
There are several broad-brush ways to count U.S. immigrants:
-- The Office of Immigration Statistics releases state- and metro-based annual ​totals​ for immigrants who are
becoming legal permanent residents, and separately for those becoming citizens. It also issues state-based totals for
temporary arrivals (mostly tourists and students).
-- The State Department issues monthly ​totals​ for refugees by state of settlement.
-- The Migration Policy Institute distills lots of Census data into current ​profiles​ of immigrants by state.
But immigrants move in and out of an area, both from abroad and elsewhere in the United States. This handout
outlines a way to track the net result for any area covered by the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey.
This will let you see how much churn lies beneath the total as it changes, and the role of inflows and outflows.
​ ote 1:​ In the United States, “immigrant” typically means someone who’s foreign-born arriving to live here.
N
“Migrant” typically means anyone moving within the United States. Here, we’re blending the two ideas by counting
people who are foreign-born as they move into the United States and also as they move around the country, even
years after their arrival.
​Note 2:​ ​You can use the technique outlined here to track the local net movement of people tallied by
many attributes.​ ACS includes a series of similar tables that show both inflows and outflows of people broken
down by sex, age, marital status, education, race, income, poverty status and homeownership.
​Note 3:​ This walkthrough uses American FactFinder, since that’s how most people look up Census data. If
you’re code-savvy, you can adapt it to use the Census Bureau’s API or census-specific libraries in R, Python or
other languages.
​Warmup: ​Open ​American FactFinder​. Click on “Advanced search” (and then “Show me all” if that’s what you
see next). On the ​search page​, type “B07007” into the left-hand search box. Ignore the indexed suggestions that
American FactFinder offers and click “Go.”

On the results list, you’ll see versions of table B07007 from the American Community Survey, the Census Bureau’s
annual household survey of 2.5 million households. Click on the link to the most recent 1-year version:

This is what it looks like for the United States for 2016:

This table offers the standard Census/ACS mover categories (with my shorthand in parentheses):
-- Same house (non-movers).
-- Moved within the same county (local movers).
-- Moved outside county but within state (regional movers).
-- Moved between states (interstate movers).
-- Moved from abroad (international movers).
Each category is broken down into native-born people and foreign-born people (immigrants). The latter in turn are
broken into two groups -- naturalized citizens and non-citizens. A couple quick points about this table:
-- This is the inflow side of the ledger. It tells you how many people moved into an area in the “previous year.”
We’ll get to the other side of the ledger -- the outflow -- in a minute.
-- Notice that a third of “movers from abroad” are ​not​ immigrants, but native-born. These folks may be
returning after being posted abroad by a business or the federal government. They can be faculty or students
who’ve been abroad for a semester or for several years, or tourists or retirees returning from an extended stay
abroad. Depending on your local population, this group may be larger or smaller. It’s important not to count or call
these people immigrants.
​ tep 1:​ After that introduction, I’m going to pick a smaller place to make this exercise more useful. I’m going to
S
choose Orange County, Florida, the center of the Orlando metropolitan area. Back at AFF’s main search page, clear
any selections in the box at top left so that it looks like this:
Using the blue “Geographies” link just below that, pick
“county” from the list of geographical types, then “Florida”
and “Orange County” from the dropdowns that result. Finally,

click “Add to selection” and close the geography overlay box.
​Note:​ You can choose any type of place, but ACS only produces annual data for places with at least 65,000
people. If you want to look at a smaller town or even a neighborhood, you’ll only find 5-year data available in the
next step.

Once again, type “b07007” (it’s not case-sensitive) into the left search box:

From the results list, once again I choose the 2016 1-year table:

This is what the result looks like:

You can download this table or capture it with a browser extension that reads table formatting. The goal is to get it
into your spreadsheet of choice.
Step 2. ​It’s pretty easy to imagine how the Census Bureau counted the people in that table, who represent the
inflow. They were living in Orange County when they filled out the ACS form. But to calculate the net flow of
immigrants for Orange County, we need ACS to track down all of the immigrants who moved in the last year.
Wherever they moved -- even if it was ​out of​ Orange County -- we need ACS to count them up in categories that
parallel those of table B07007.
Table B74007 does just that. Go back to American FactFinder’s Advanced Search and type “B07407” into the left
search box and again click “Go.” From the results, choose the 2016 1-year table:

Note the table’s title, and how it resembles but also differs from the previous one:
B07007 GEOGRAPHICAL MOBILITY IN THE PAST YEAR BY CITIZENSHIP STATUS​ FOR CURRENT RESIDENCE IN THE UNITED STATES
B07407 GEOGRAPHICAL MOBILITY IN THE PAST YEAR BY CITIZENSHIP STATUS ​FOR RESIDENCE 1 YEAR AGO IN THE UNITED
STATES

This kind of stuff can make your eyes cross when you’re wading through a long list of results in American
FactFinder, but understanding the subtle difference unlocks the secret. The first table counts up the inflow for
Orange County, the second, the outflow. In this case, some people who lived in Orange County a year ago have
moved on -- down the block, to another county in Florida or to another state. Wherever they moved, they filled in
an address in Orange County when asked, “Where did this person live 1 year ago?” The Census Bureau tallies them
into categories that parallel those in table B07007. All we have to do now is to subtract categories in B07407 from
B07007 to get net migration.
A couple caveats:
-- ​Moving abroad.​ The inflow table counts “Moved from abroad,” but there’s no parallel “Moved abroad” in
the outflow table. Why? That would require the Census Bureau to survey the whole world. It simply can’t estimate
this category in line with the rest of its ACS results. For most places in the United States, this category is pretty
small, but adjust your words and conclusions to fit local circumstances.

-- ​Geographical focus.​ When you’re focusing on a county, it’s easy to translate the categories in these tables
into sentences. It gets more complicated if you’re looking at a metro area. The categories are the same, but “Moved
to/from different county within same state” isn’t as helpful. It might be Osceola County, also part of the Orlando
metro area, or it might be Escambia County, nearly 500 miles away and even in a different time zone. The same
applies if you’re looking at metros and places within them when the metro’s center lies close to a state boundary,
like New York or Cincinnati or Portland, Oregon. There, even interstate moves can be quite local while “moved to
different county within same state” can be quite long. In general, the number of people who move falls off pretty
consistently with distance, so judge accordingly.
​Note: ​If you need to measure the actual flow of people between any two particular counties, check out the
Census Bureau’s ​County Flows Mapper​. It offers both overview maps and county-to-county statistics. Here’s the
overview for Orange County’s annual flows for 2011-15:

You can also download county-to-county migration ​files​. These show the annual flows between any two counties:
the flow in each direction and the net flow. With some grouping, you can calculate flows between groups of
counties, such as metros or custom regions that you care about. In addition to totals, these files break down each
county-to-county flow by age, race, education and relationship. However, not every crosstab is produced each year.
Focusing on immigration, ​data for 2009-13​ breaks down county-to-county flows by:
-- Ability to speak English.
-- Years since arrival in the United States.
-- Place of birth, including details for the largest sources of immigrants such as Mexico, China, India, the
Philippines, etc.
If you dig down this far, be sure first read the ​documentation​!

