On the beat: Data sets every government reporter should have
By: Claudia Vargas, reporter at the Philadelphia Inquirer. cvargas@phillynews.com; @InqCVargas

Payroll: A good payroll spreadsheet will come in handy with breaking news, enterprise and investigative
stories. Make sure to update the data at least annually. I usually get payroll after the end of every fiscal
year that way I have complete overtime data.
Payroll is more than just employee names and salaries. Just think about all the information you have to
file when starting a job. My go to request is:
Year; First name; Last name; Annual salary; YTD overtime; Class/job title; Department number;
Department name; Hire date; Race; Sex; Home zipcode
Those last four data points are great for narrowing down a person who has a common name or when
there are few employees with same or similar names. With zip codes, you can narrow down where a
person lives through a Nexis search.
Maybe you guys cover governments that are a little more lenient with information. We initially
requested full addresses, arguing it should be public record since city employees are required to live
within city limits, but city fought us on that arguing privacy. We ultimately settled on zip codes.
A great story we did with payroll last year was sorting all the police officers and seeing which ones had
moved out of the city. The police union had bargained to allow cops to move out of the city after five
years on the force. What we found was that since the policy went into effect, a sixth of the force had
moved out to the burbs, raising questions of police-community relations, the condition of city schools,
etc. http://www.philly.com/philly/news/politics/philly-police-officers-residency-policy-requiringcity-schools-20171006.html [philly.com]
You can also use payroll data to cross reference with political lists you may have, such as of ward leaders
and committee people, to see if there is political patronage at certain government agencies. We found
that to be the case with the Philadelphia Parking Authority.
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/politics/20161016_Will_PPA_continue_to_be_patronage_have
n_.html [philly.com]
Pensions: Aside from checking on how much taxpayers are continuing to pay for former politicians and
government employees, pension data is good to have as a way to find former employees for a story.
Usually former city employees can speak more freely about things going on or that went on in
government, people in charge, etc.
One thing we couldn’t get from payroll data is date of birth. With pensions, it was a little easier to argue
since former employees aren’t allowed to collect pensions until a certain age depending on the pension
plan. The city, per usual, fought us on it but ultimately settled on birth year and for retirees 90 and
older, the city just said “90 or older” since there aren’t that many.

The data we have, which I also recommend updating each year, includes: Plan code; first name; last
name; middle initial; birth year; city and state where check is sent (doesn’t necessarily mean they live
there of course but usually that is the case); benefits starts date; credited years; monthly payment; DROP
value (or any other pension bonus programs your government may have).
Settlements/verdicts/indemnities: It’s always fun to see how much government is spending to settle
lawsuits or jury verdicts. But settlement data can produce numerous other stories beyond the overall
number.
Who are the city’s reckless drivers and why are they still driving city vehicles? Or you might find out
about dangerous conditions at a particular rec center. Sometimes you may discover stories that feel
through the cracks such as former prisoners who were wrongfully convicted, quietly let out but then
sued the city for wrongful imprisonment.
The settlement data we request includes: case name (plaintiff name); docket number; date served;
settlement amount; department name; client activity/type of incident
Once you have the data, look up some of the cases. You will find stories within the cases, not necessarily
the data itself.

