CONSIDERATIONS FOR COVERAGE OF MASS SHOOTINGS
A compilation of resources and ideas
Research indicates and the FBI believes there is a “copycat” effect where dramatized events
serve to inspire someone who may be contemplating acting violently. The American
Foundation for Suicide Prevention provides guidance for reducing the copycat effect in
suicides. Many, but not all active shooters are suicidal. Recommendations for Reporting on
Suicide may help to reduce the copycat effect on all would-be shooters.

•
•

•

Don't sensationalize the names of the shooters in briefings — or in reporting about
Active Shooter Events.
It is journalistically routine to name the killer. It’s public record. And it is important to
use their names and likenesses to apprehend them and bring them to justice. But once
they are captured, it’s really no longer a part of the story, other than to create a call to
action for a like-minded killer to take his plans and thoughts and make them into deeds.
Sociologists and criminologists should study the criminal – but let’s not glorify the
shooter by giving him valuable airtime. Don’t share his manifestos, his letters, his
Facebook posts. Be above the sensationalism. Tell the real stories —the stories of the
victims, the heroes and the communities who come together to help the families heal.

Active shooter research data shows the increase in these events. By encouraging the media to
focus less on the suspects and more on the victims, it is hoped that future events can be
prevented.

— Compiled from ‘Don’t Name Them’

NO NOTORIETY CHALLENGE TO THE MEDIA
▪

Limit the name and likeness of the individual in reporting after initial
identification, except when the alleged assailant is still at large and in
doing so would aid in the assailant’s capture.

▪

Refuse to broadcast/publish self-serving statements, photos, videos
and/or manifestos made by the individual. Elevate the names and
likenesses of all victims killed and/or injured to send the message their
lives are more important than the killer’s actions.

▪

Recognize that the prospect of infamy could serve as a motivating factor
for other individuals to kill others and could inspire copycat
crimes. Keep this responsibility in mind when reporting.

▪

Agree to promote data and analysis from experts in mental health,
public safety, and other relevant professions to support further steps to
help eliminate the motivation behind mass murder. Recognize that the
individual’s name and likeness is irrelevant to media coverage of such
acts unless the alleged assailant is at large.

Four Lessons on School Shootings December 4, 2009
By Meg Moritz/reprinted with permission from The Dart Center for Journalism and Trauma

1. Don’t offer a single cause for a complex event
Reporters and editors need to realize that school shootings, workplace rampages and many other trauma
stories cannot be attributed to a single causal factor. But that is standard practice in much media coverage,
according to UCLA’s George F. Kneller Philosophy of Education Chair, Douglas Kellner. In coming to
terms with the why-did-this-happen question, reporters frequently fall back on simplistic explanations:
the out-of-control male with a gun, the crazy person who one day just comes unglued and so on. In school
shooting news narratives, young people are often scapegoats, with direct or implied calls for stronger
surveillance of youth.
Kellner suggested that stronger surveillance of schools would indeed be an appropriate response to such an
event, as would reporting that looked at multiple causes and situated events in the context of larger social
issues. Addressing these larger issues will require more resources in all areas of public life, he said,
including schools, workplaces and the military. Sadly, Kellner was speaking to the group on the day of the
Fort Hood shootings in Texas.

2. Images have more power than almost anything you write
The written text is about sequential argumentation. Visuals are about emotion and are associative, nonsequential and perceived as highly authentic. Even in this age of Photoshop, the idea that the camera does
not lie remains persuasive. Images also persist in memory much more powerfully than written texts. Do
you need to see the video of the World Trade Center collapsing to recall what those images look like?
Since the Columbine High School massacre in 1999, shooters have left behind an array of self-representing
materials, presumably to share with the world through the media coverage that surely will follow their
planned acts of violence. The Columbine killers, Dylan Klebold and Eric Harris, left diaries and videotapes
and the school’s surveillance cameras captured them in the act. Seung-Hui Cho prepared an elaborate
video of himself and mailed it to NBC News between his first murders in a Virginia Tech dormitory and
his later rampage in the classrooms. Cho referred to Klebold and Harris as inspirational figures in his life.
Shooters in Helsinki and in Germany have left similar self-representations. These images iconize the
killers and can inspire copycat crimes, according to Marion Muller, a professor of mass communications
who has been studying school shootings in Germany.

3. Don’t make heroes out of villains
What should journalists do with materials left behind by school shooters or, for that matter, by terrorists?
In the elite American press, newspaper editors typically opt to play down images of the perpetrators,
especially on their front pages. Tabloid papers do just the opposite. Television presents a more complicated
situation. NBC argued that it had an obligation to air the Cho tapes, which they dubbed his video
manifesto. But the Canadian Broadcasting Company took an altogether different tack, opting to show
none of it. The web adds yet another layer of concern, because once an image is aired, it will be copied,
posted and distributed globally, sometimes in a matter of minutes. While there is no formula for making
decisions about these kinds of materials, there should be a guiding principle: Don’t make heroes of the
villains.

4. Listen to your readers and viewers
Even 10 years ago at Columbine it was clear that parents, school officials and students had messages they
wanted the news media to hear. In today’s interactive environment, we see whole communities coming
together to influence news coverage. Some citizens want to “anonymize” school shooters and have urged
bans on their images, videos, photos and even names. The idea being that tabloid photos in which the
shooters are shown with guns in macho poses and online tributes to killers lead to hero worship and
encourage imitation.
Today’s news circulates globally, so the question of where to draw the line between journalistic
responsibility to document and inform and the responsibility to show restraint involves another
dimension: Is the journalist’s real responsibility to the local community or is it farther reaching? The
answer largely depends on how a news organization defines itself. But the bottom line is that journalists
cannot ignore the voices of their core readers and viewers.

