The Freelance Investigation
Hilary Niles, Mc Nelly Torres, Cat Ferguson, Samantha Sunne
IRE 2018
Orlando, Florida

Creating a Freelance Newsroom
Make a workspace that works for you (not against you)
Get a desk.
Ignore ergonomics at your peril.
Set up a good filing system. The floor is a bad filing system.
Stock your supply closet. Anything you really use, find it a permanent home.
Make it pleasant! Plants, art, whatever.
Ignore ergonomics at your peril.
Find your people
Look for listservs, local journalism groups, go to Meetups, etc.
Miserable and lonely? Try to find a coworking space (if you’re less miserable, you’ll be
more productive).
Leave the house and talk to one non-work person every day.
Don’t be afraid to ask friends for help, work or otherwise.
Find a mentor - or two
Keep in touch with people you meet at conferences, editors you liked working with, old
professors.
Reach out to people you don’t know, but respect their time.
One person doesn’t need to do everything.
Get them on the phone.
Find your resources
Keep a list of free or cheap databases (see tipsheet).
U S E T H E L I B R A R Y. Public ones, law libraries, etc.
Libraries have researchers!
Make friends with P.I.’s, lawyers, and students with access to journals/school libraries.
Make joint accounts with other freelancers.

Give yourself permission to take breaks
Stretch every 30 minutes. Leave your desk for lunch.
Don’t go from bed to work to bed.
You don’t have to change out of PJs, but do please brush your teeth.
Take vacations, nights, and weekends.
Say no (especially to editors).
It’s not lazy. It’s healthy. Don’t burn out.

Building Relationships with Editors
How to get editors to trust you with investigative work: Don’t start with investigative work.
Demonstrate you can deliver clean copy on time.
Create a chance to show sound news judgement, ability to source.
Learn their strengths and process to find out if you work well together.
Get to know their news judgment and willingness to stand behind you.
Stories to cultivate grounds for trust
Don’t tread on staff reporters’ beats.
When big news breaks, pivot.
Start reporting your way into the topic of your investigation. This builds knowledge,
sources, leads.
Trust but verify contracts as well as facts
Read
Understand
Negotiate (rights, indemnity)
Get professional advice
Insurance

Working with Grants
There are many journalism grants available that could help you fund an investigative project,
such as:the Fund for Investigative Journalism and other specialized grants focusing to specific
areas like the Education Writers Association, Society of Environmental Journalists and the
Center for Health Journalism, to mention a few.
Best practices to help you obtain that funding you need:

-Don’t overlook anything:​ Spend time reading the application requirements. You know the
small print. Don’t be afraid to ask questions to the organization. There’s always an email
address and most likely a name. That would help you to build a rapport.
-Do your research:​ Propose something you are passionate about and know the topic. That
proposal needs to show that you have spent the time doing some serious research.
-Word limit:​ Don’t go over the word limit. Some judges won’t even consider your proposal if you
pass that limit and in some organizations that proposal will never see the light of day.
-Think beyond the story:​ Plan ahead so you can write more than one story.
-Have a distribution plan​: Most grant applications required a letter from an organization
making the commitment of publishing.
-Write, write, write: ​Write the proposal the way you would write a story.
-Budget: ​Make a realistic budget. These funds are to cover expenses and you need to show
how the money will be spent.
-Show what you got: ​Be humble. Show why they should fund your project? Because you got
experience doing X,Y and Z.
Stories to read:
https://pulitzercenter.org/tips-writing-successful-pulitzer-center-grant-proposal
http://jsk.stanford.edu/news-notes/2015/15-tips-on-how-to-prepare-a-grant-proposal-for-a-journa
lism-project/
http://businessjournalism.org/2017/12/6-grants-can-fund-reporting-project/
Journalism grants:
Fund for Investigative Journalism: ​http://fij.org/
Pulitzer Center: ​https://pulitzercenter.org/grants
National Institute Investigative Fund: ​http://www.theinvestigativefund.org
The McGraw Center for Business Journalism:
http://www.mcgrawcenter.org/the-harold-w-mcgraw-jr-business-journalism-fellowships/

Deciding Your Workflow
How do you pursue an investigation without doing too much unpaid work,
or striking out when it comes to editors?
One way is to go only two Tier 2, and pause there. Don't continue to Tier 3 without a contract, or
at the very least, clear interest from an editor:

How do you pitch a story without giving it away?
Option 1: Give a short, specific summary of what you have.

Example: "I have data that shows the New York Police Department has arrested 1,345 people
for putting their feet up on the subway since 2010."
Do:
Be specific enough that you know you know what you're talking about
Be vague enough that they can't replicate your research
Make sure it's original
Don't:
Give them the actual data or documents
Give away the source, if at all possible
Option 2: Ask the editor to sign a simple NDA

