Higher Ed Data & Story
Tipsheet for IRE18
By
Dan Bauman, Kim Clark, Adam Harris, Maria Perez

Pitch to editors: Stories about higher ed affordability
and access are hot!

“Financial aid” gets more SEO than many pop stars

“Student loans” gets more search than Steph Curry (mostly)

Student loans story example

How to find your debt dropout factories
College Scorecard Data (HUGE, complicated database. Requires some study of the data dictionary)
Repayment rates cut by years since start, completion status, median debt load for institution, demographics
such as completers, transfers, withdrawers, Pell users, income, first-gen, gender.
Also useful:
Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) (Requires some training.)
Variables: #, % and $ for student loans for freshmen and undergraduates
Federal Student Aid Data Center: (easily downloadable spreadsheet)
Default rates
Borrowing #, $ for student and parent loans (Click on Loan Volume for the time period you’re interested in)

More great student loan stories
The U.S. Makes It Easy for Parents to Get College Loans—Repaying Them Is Another Story
Yale Suing Former Students Shows Crisis in Loans to Poor
New Jersey’s Student Loan Program is ‘State-Sanctioned Loan-Sharking’
Colleges Flush With Cash Saddle Poorest Students With Debt
This Is the Blue-Collar Student Debt Trap Trucking beckons to thousands of Americans with higher wages
and the freedom of the open road. But some training programs come with chains.
Is Student Debt Big Enough to Hold Back the Economy? What the Research Says

Credit: Susan Dynarski

Student loan context - general trends & history
NY Federal Reserve
The Institute on College Access And Success annual reports on student debt.
FSA has national composites, segmented in all sorts of ways.
National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (See, for example, Quickstats tool)
Susan Dynarski’s presentation on Student Loan Myths for EWA

Student loan default story ideas & sources
In 2015, the National Consumer Law Center found 22 states where one could lose their professional or
driver's’ license for not paying student loans. Depending on open records law in your state, those
revocations could be public records.
Schools will sue students to recoup money. Do a search of your state or county’s online court docket
(fingers crossed!) to find them. PACER can be hit or miss.
Also: see state Attorney General, FTC and regulatory agencies
Servicing issues: CFPB (download data and reports ASAP while they are still public!)

Student loan data tips - quick stats on individual colleges
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) College Navigator. (Easy to use.)
Variables: Federal & “other” student loans for freshmen. Federal only for all undergrads.
3-year default rates on federal student loans.
College Scorecard Variables: Loan repayment rates

Socioeconomic diversity on campus

Socio-economic diversity - general trends
National Student Clearinghouse reports
Digest of Education Statistics (US Dept. of Ed)

Socio-economic diversity - how to compare colleges
Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) (Requires some training.)
Variables: Enrollment by race, gender & Pell eligibility by level (freshmen and/or all
undergrads) over the past decade.
Graduation rates by race, gender & Pell status
Equality of Opportunity Project Big database of data showing the socioeconomic mobility by income
quintiles of freshmen who started in the 1990s.

Socioeconomic diversity - data on individual colleges
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) College Navigator. (Easy to use.)
Variables: totals by race for all undergraduates.
Common Data Set: (Easy to use. But not all colleges posts this publicly.)
Variables: racial breakdown for freshmen and all undergrads - which can flag
changes/trends.
Collegeresults.org:
Variables: Graduation rates for colleges & similar schools by race & gender.

Undocumented immigrants & DACA in Higher Ed

Undocumented & DACA students tips (1)

●
●
●

Undocumented & DACA students tips (2)
●
●
○
●
●

Undocumented & DACA students tips (3)
● The advocacy group TheDream.US, which gives scholarships to
DACA eligible students, has numbers on their applicants.
●

●
●

College affordability

College affordability tips - trends & history
College Board Trends in Pricing and Trends in Aid

College affordability - comparing colleges
Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) (Requires some training.)
Net price by income level. If the net price for the 2 lowest income groups is < Fed. student loan
+ work study award ($8k-$10k) then the college is unaffordable for that group.
Fee-based: Peterson’s (ACCESS) Wintergreen Orchard House & US News all compile Common
Data Set + some proprietary questions
Breakdowns of types of scholarships (athletic, arts, academic)
% of need met, % whose need is fully met. (Note many colleges don’t answer or give
self-serving answers. Factcheck with the net price by income data.)

College affordability - stats on individual colleges
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) College Navigator. (Easy to use.)
“Sticker” prices
“Net” prices - average and by income groupings (Hint: if net price for families earning <$30k/yr
= >$10k, the college is not meeting need & is unaffordable.)
% receiving federal grants (use this to back out % paying full “sticker” price)
Common Data Set (obtainable from the college, or check Collegedata.com) (Easy to use)
#s and $s of all kinds of scholarships (sports, arts, etc.)
% need met, % of students whose need was fully met
Coming this fall: Updated Tuition Tracker from EWA, Hechinger & Dallas Morning News
Money.com estimated net price of a degree

Alumni outcomes - trends & history
Georgetown Center for Education and the Workforce lots of reports that break
down outcomes by major, race, etc.
U.S. Department of Labor earnings & employment rates by education level

Alumni outcomes - comparing colleges
College Scorecard Data (HUGE, complicated database. Requires some study of the data dictionary): Repayment
rates cut by years since start, demographics
Equality of Opportunity Project Big database of data showing the socioeconomic mobility by income
quintiles of freshmen who started in the 1990s.

State databases (require some study and practice) Several states such as Colorado, Florida,
Tennessee Texas & Virginia post earnings by college AND PROGRAM (i.e. major)

Alumni outcomes tips - individual colleges
College Scorecard: Earnings & employment of Title IV recipients 7 years after start.
State databases: Several states such as Colorado, Florida, Tennessee Texas & Virginia post earnings by
college AND PROGRAM (i.e. major).
Payscale College Salary Report : self-reported earnings, job type.
Long-term socioeconomic mobility: NY Times tool backed by Equality of Opportunity Project data
Linkedin Premium search: (Free premium accounts available to reporters who participate in 1-hour training
annually.) You can look up the Linkedin profiles of alumni of each college.

Questions?
Dan Bauman - DanBauman77@Gmail.com
Kim Clark - KClark@EWA.Org
Adam Harris - aharris@theatlantic.com
Maria Perez - Maria.Perez@Naplesnews.com

