Tip Sheet: Covering (and Uncovering) Hate
Resources from ProPublica's Rachel Glickhouse on covering hate:
● We created a​ ​reporting recipe​ that lets reporters see what data we have from police
departments that you can compare to the FBI's numbers. We also have suggestions for
how to send your own FOIAs to police.
● We wrote about​ ​white supremacist flyering and why it's important to be cautious​ when
covering this particular type of incident.
● We investigated the​ ​training police receive on hate crimes​. We have training materials
we can share with interested reporters.
● Explore which large law enforcement agencies​ are reporting zero hate crimes.
● See what ​kind of patterns​ we found covering hate crimes last year.
● Read the FBI's hate crime ​training manual​.
Tips for investigating hate crimes:
● Read incident reports carefully and keep a look out for slurs. Just because the police
haven't marked it or aren't investigating it as a hate crime doesn't mean that it isn't one.
● Be skeptical and talk to as many people as possible who were involved. Some of these
cases are more clear-cut, but others are very messy.
● Look at what people are saying on social media about the incident and who live near the
area. This could provide new leads and even connect with more sources.
● Ask the police for their hate crime data.
● Get familiar with your​ ​state hate crime law​.
● Establish relationships with diverse communities. More than half of victims don't report to
police, in part because of trust issues.
Questions to ask when investigating hate crimes:
● Why do the victim(s) and/or witnesses believe it is a hate crime?
● If an individual wasn't targeted, what's the reaction of the community? (It can still be a
hate crime without a clear individual targeted)
● Are the police planning to investigate the incident as a hate crime? Why or why not?
● Do prosecutors plan to pursue a hate crime charge? Why or why not?
● If the crime is under federal investigation, why did local authorities turn it over to the FBI?
● Do police have a two-tier system for determining hate crime charges?
● Do police get trained in hate crime investigations? If so, what does that look like?
● How do police track hate crimes in their system?
Do's and don'ts for reporting on hate groups:
● Don't elevate their message, and don't glamorize them. Don't republish their flyers, and
be careful about how you cover flyering in general. This also means being careful about
how you frame their hate speech. Don't be an amplifier.

●
●

●

●
●

Don't cover them just for the sake of it. Decide if this is worth your time. What's the news
value? How are these guys affecting your community?
Do your research and talk to experts before you jump in. It's vital to understand how
diverse white supremacy has become and why it's become politically powerful.
Atomwaffen and the KKK and Richard Spencer and Chris Cantwell all have different
abhorrent views. This beat is not for beginners.
Do understand the difference between hate crimes and hate groups. White supremacists
that are members of or connected to hate groups do commit hate crimes and terrorist
attacks (which tend to get a lot of media coverage) but many hate crimes are committed
by "regular" people.
Do understand the terminology and make sure your audience understands it, too.
(Alt-right, for example, is a term that white supremacists invented.)
Do look for other angles. What factors are at play that make these groups/individuals
existence possible? Or make them appealing? Who funded/organized white supremacist
speaking engagements, and why?

Tips from Reveal’s Aaron Sankin on covering hate:
1. Understand the history. ​The media’s intense interest in covering white supremacists may be
new, but the study of the movement isn’t. Pete Simi and Robert Futrell’s book ​American

Swastika ​is a great primer on hate groups. Whitney Phillips’s ​Why We Can’t Have Nice Things
is essential to understanding the online troll culture many of these groups have adopted.

2. Keep yourself safe online. ​Reporters covering this world are frequently subjected to waves
of online harassment. It’s impossible to completely prevent. If you’re about to kick a hornet’s

nest, lock down your Facebook account. Making all your posts accessible only to friends can
limit the harassment directed your loved ones, who are likely unprepared for it.
Troll-busters.com is a great resource for reporters being subjected to harassment. You can also
take steps to remove yourself from online “people search” sites, which can prevent doxxing.
Here’s where you can request removals of your personal data:
●
●
●
●
●

http://www.peoplefinders.com/manage
https://www.intelius.com/optout
http://www.whitepages.com/suppression_requests
https://www.spokeo.com/optout
https://www.beenverified.com/f/optout/search

3. Be skeptical. ​Hate groups have long histories of lying to inflate their stature and importance.
Online troll communities similarly love messing with journalists simply for the lulz. Don’t print

anything that originates from someone in the white supremacist or alt-right ecosystem without

double-checking it first. This is especially important in breaking news situations, like mass
shootings, ​where misformation can spread like wildfire​.
4. Think critically about what to amplify. ​Just because a racist meme is circulating around
4chan or a white supremacist figurehead tweeted something awful, that doesn’t mean it’s

necessarily worth adding oxygen to a fire that could die down on its own. A good rule-of-thumb
is to see if something is having a real effect outside of its immediate hate-filled community. If it
is, go for it. If not, think long and hard about what value you’re adding.
5.​ ​Find a way in that makes sense for you. ​This beat is becoming increasingly crowded.

Before you dive in, think about what skills you bring to the table. Do you understand online
communities? Are you good at bringing sensitivity and understanding to interviews with victims?
Do you feel comfortable walking into a white supremacist conference and announcing
you’re a journalist? Identify those skills and let them guide your reporting.
6. Figure out what makes a hate group a hate group.​ Civil rights nonprofits like the Southern
Poverty Law Center have been making these designations for years, but just saying the SPLC
has labeled something a hate group can be tricky, especially for groups with strong ties to
mainstream institutions. Use the SPLC as a resource for your reporting, but also spell out the
SPLC’s reasoning, and even add some of your own. Give specific examples of why it makes
sense to accuse a group of trafficking in hate. Doing that legwork can only make your own
reporting stronger.
7. Keep yourself safe offline.​ If possible, always try to meet the white supremacists you’re
interviewing in a public place or, at least, have other people on your side present. My reporting
partner Will Carless always carries pepper spray to these interviews, which he has thankfully
never had to use, because these people can be unpredictable.
8. Start interviews with a spoonful of sugar.​ No matter how abhorrent you find these people's
views, it's useful trying to befriend them somewhat in order to get what they want to say on
record, then challenge them later. These guys, and they’re usually guys, tend to get angry the
moment you start to push back. Get the standard-issue stuff on the record before challenging
their rhetoric. Pushing back is important, but get them to trust you first.
9. Take care of yourself. ​Covering this beat day after day can be emotionally draining. Talk to
your editor, your family, and your friends about what you’re experiencing. Seek help from

professional organizations or licensed therapists. Take a break if it’s having a detrimental effect
on your emotional health. Don’t be afraid to ask for help.
10. Give people hope​. I write a weekly newsletter about the hate movement called the Hate
Report. We like to conclude the newsletter with a positive story about a local community
supporting victims or a public figure speaking out against hate. It’s a great way to keep readers
engaged by giving them occasional respites among all the doom and gloom.
Tips from Tennessean’s Natalie Allison on developing sources:
Start by making contacts with experts on these issues. Reach out to the SPLC, the ADL, a
researcher at a university nearby (or anywhere) who specializes in these people and their
activities. I did all of those things, and those are all resources that have not only provided quotes
and context for stories on events and groups active in our coverage area, but are important to
have for background information, to help check out rumors, and to give a heads up on activity
going on you’ll likely miss as a reporter trying to cover another beat, too.
Then reach out to the leaders of hate groups that are active in the area. You have to have
relationships with or at least the ability to contact those people to find out their plans and what
they’re up to.
Don’t take a white supremacist for his word. They lie a lot, and even when they’re not lying, a lot
of times their plans seem to fall through. I don’t think a rally or event I’ve attended that has been
organized by a hate group has ever started on time or even at the place they said it would.
Set up a system that works for you to easily monitor social media postings of white
supremacists and hate group leaders in your area. Maybe that’s creating a private list on Twitter
or something more complex, but you’ll need a way to be able to keep up with what they’re
discussing, planning, fighting about, whatever without having to manually check dozens of blogs
and accounts.
Top 5 Ways to Develop Sources and Cover Hate:
(1) Be willing to listen to the lunatics.
Much of my reporting over the past three decades has centered on white supremacy and
the lunatic fringe. The truth is that if you want to truly cover them, you have to spend a lot of
time with them and, more importantly, you have to listen to them. An occasional head-nodding
won't cut it. As crazy as it sounds, you have to be interested in them. Find out what sports team
they follow, find out what kind of food they like. White supremacists are far from all alike.
My best source in covering these civil rights cold cases was a white supremacist who
leaked me incriminating letters written by the assassin of Medgar Evers. One of my best
sources in writing about the anti-abortion front was someone I thought would commit violence
one day. He introduced me to Paul Hill, who later killed Dr. Gunn in Florida. When that

happened, it wasn't necessary to collect a lot of background because I'd already interviewed
Hill, who started his anti-abortion efforts in Jackson, Miss.
We spend too much time prejudging our sources instead of seeing them as conduits of
information. Just because someone is nuts, just because he has no credibility, just because he
has a personality so offensive that you feel a need to shower later doesn't mean that person
can't be a valuable source. He may be crazy enough to get you those sealed documents you've
been coveting for months.
(2) Be willing to talk early and often with targets of your reporting.
Some of my best stories have some from the mouths of targets of investigation. For
instance, when I went and interviewed Bobby Cherry in 1999, one of the last living suspects in
the 1963 Birmingham church bombing, he told me he was watching wrestling on TV that night. I
had our librarian check the TV schedule for Sept. 15, 1963, in the ​Birmingham News​, and she
discovered there was no wrestling, so naturally I called him back, and here is the first part of the
story I wrote.
For 35 years, Bobby Frank Cherry has been an FBI suspect in the 1963 Birmingham church
bombing that killed four girls.
For 35 years, he has gone uncharged, and his alibi has gone unchallenged. The 69-year-old
retired truck driver maintains he was home the night the bomb was planted because he was
watching wrestling on TV — and shares a sworn affidavit to prove it.
There’s at least one problem with that alibi. There was no televised wrestling for Cherry to
watch.
Instead, the programs that took place at 10 that night were Route 66 on WAPI-Channel 13 and
Films of the Fifties on WBRC-Channel 6, according to schedules in the Sept. 14, 1963,
Birmingham News.
Asked about television schedules that poke holes in his alibi, Cherry responded, “There was no
damn Films of the Fifties on. Son of a bitch, something’s wrong. Wrestling was on.”
(3) Be willing to dial the wrong number.
Once I was searching for one of two policemen in Greenwood, Miss., who gave Byron
De La Beckwith an alibi in Medgar Evers’ assassination. No one seemed to know where the
policeman was these days. Finally, I picked up the Greenwood phone directory and saw there
were several Cresswells listed in the directory. I picked one that looked promising and dialed. "Is
Hollis Cresswell there?" I asked in my most polite Southern accent.
"No," the man replied, "you want my cousin. He's living over there near Maben. I got his
number."
Hollis Cresswell ended up giving me the only interview he ever gave -- to the media or to
the authorities.

And that story showed Cresswell’s inconsistencies in his alibi claim, helping lead to
Beckwith’s indictment.
(4) Be willing to harass.
Yes, harass. Rather than shoving a camera in someone’s face, I prefer what I call "polite
harassment."
Polite harassment is a continual, perpetual persistence that shows you're not going to
give up until you get what you want.
An example: I had to get a quote one day from a lawyer. I called that morning and
reached his secretary, who was very polite. I explained to her the entire situation and why I
needed the quote. In short, she began to turn from his boss into my ally. I called every hour,
asking for him. By the time I called at mid-afternoon, she said, "Hold on a minute. I'm going to
get him on the phone right now."
He gave me the quote.
(5) Be willing to pursue a story, even when you're sick of it.
What I thought when I first got into journalism was that I could write one great story, and
everyone would see the errors of their ways. What I have found in reality is that I had to keep
writing that story, perhaps each time in a different way. I first wrote about the possible reopening
of the Mississippi Burning case in 1989. 16 years later, I saw a jury convict Edgar Ray Killen of
orchestrating the killings of the three civil rights workers: James Chaney, Andy Goodman and
Mickey Schwerner. I never gave up.
— Jerry Mitchell, ​Clarion Ledger

