GOING UNDERCOVER
THE TIP SHEET
Questions to ask before you go undercover:
Just because you can, should you?
What do you want to capture on camera?
What’s the setting?
Will you be in a public area?
Is it legal?
Is it ​ethical?
List of states and their recording laws:
https://www.mwl-law.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/LAWS-ON-RECORDING-CONVERS
ATIONS-CHART.pdf​ (updated in MAY 2018).
When not to go undercover:
If story can be effective without undercover video
Story causes harm to someone else who is not involved
No time to show context of video and no time to explain why you’re going undercover
Purpose of a consumer undercover investigation:
1.) What wrongdoing do you want to show?
2.) Show viewers what and how to watch out for it
3.) Gotcha moments

How to prepare
1.) Test cameras (how long will batteries last/make sure sound works on each camera)
2.) Run through scenarios
3.) What could go wrong
4.) If the undercover gets exposed/caught what is the plan

Equipment needed for undercover
1.) Good reliable cameras that provide quality video and audio
2.) Think about your setup, is there a need for static shots too
3.) Test cameras is the position they are going to be used so you know exactly how they shoot.
(This is very important if the camera is a button camera that someone is wearing.

Cambridge Analytica Exposed - Channel 4 News (UK)
Tip sheet on Undercover filming
Source: Job Rabkin, Investigations Editor, Channel 4 News
job.rabkin@itn.co.uk
In March 2017, Channel 4 News broadcast a series of reports on Cambridge Analytica, the result of a
four month undercover investigation.
The reports exposed how the company hired by Donald Trump’s campaign offered dirty tricks and
potentially illegal methods to prospective clients across the world as a way of swinging elections.
In the filming the company also appeared to admit to campaign finance violations in the US and other
offences which are now subject to investigations by the FBI, the SEC and the FEC.
The project was part of a broader investigation by Channel 4 News carried out in association with the
Observer and the New York Times which exposed how Cambridge had harvested the Facebook data of
tens of millions of US citizens.
Within 24 hours of broadcast, the CEO Alexander Nix was suspended and the company later filed for
bankruptcy.
Watch the entire channel 4 news series here:
https://www.channel4.com/news/data-democracy-and-dirty-tricks-cambridge-analytica-uncovered-inve
stigation-expose

How we went about it

Stage 1: justification
Why do you need to go undercover?
Test your arguments for an undercover. Why do you need to go undercover? Why is it in the public
interest? What are the risks involved? Are they justified?
Compile the evidence of wrongdoing
Don’t go on a “fishing expedition”. You have to know there is wrongdoing based on real evidence.
What has been reported publicly? What have you learned from sources or documents you have
obtained? Do these provide reasonable grounds for further investigation? Will you be able to defend
your decisions if you are challenged?
What is the plan?
Undercover filming is fraught with risks. How are you going to do this safely and successfully? How are
you going to protect your undercover in the event you are caught? How are you going to avoid
accusations of leading questions and entrapment?
Stage 2: post approval
How are you going to execute it? Prep, prep, prep
●
●
●
●

How are you going to approach them?
What is your story?
What outcome do you want to achieve?
Where and how are you going to film them?

This was the most ambitious undercover our team had ever carried out.
We approached the company as clients – and held four separate meetings with them over a period of
months.
Each meeting took days of prep: where was it going to happen, how it was going to happen, how we
were going to film it, and what we were going to say.
Every scenario was role played. And everything we wanted to say was checked with our legal team to
ensure we didn’t fall into any traps.
This put huge pressure on our undercover reporter. He had to pull all this off - meetings that would last
two hours or more - asking questions without being suspicious - getting the information without
sounding like a journalists and without leading questions.
Be flexible

Our first two meetings took place in hotel meeting rooms. The hotels we chose were upscale - adding to
the impression that our reporter had money and funds behind him.
the advantage was that we could control the environment for sound, and cameras. We placed multiple
devices - at one meeting we had six different cameras inside.
IF YOU CAN: Get a camera operator filming outside in a special vehicle to get arrivals and departures.
This hugely helps to establish the operation.
PLUS PLUS: two of our team carrying out reconnaissance to track their arrival and alert the cameras so
we could capture those shots.
Don’t be scared of changing the plan
The meeting rooms were good - but the formal environment was not delivering the kind of frank
conversations we were hoping for.
So we decided to hold the third meeting in a much more open and public place - over a meal so that it
was more relaxed. And this time just one on one.
This presented a new challenge, because we couldn’t rig the room in the same way. It was impossible to
guarantee what table you would get in a restaurant. But on two occasions we managed to pull it off.
Stage 3 Editing: Be Fair!
●
●
●
●

DON’T take comments out of context or twist what was said
Make sure you include their caveats even if it weakens story
Put all the quotes to them in full
Give them enough time to respond

Stage 4: Broadcast
●
●
●
●

Boost the story - is there a second piece or a series in it?
Get your show to sell your story as hard as you can. This is your journalism!
How can your station get the story covered by other outlets
Don’t give up on the story - keep reporting any developments! Viewers/ readers want to know
what happened

