Uncovering national security stories in your community
Jaimi Dowdell, Reuters
Jaimi.dowdell@tr.com, @JaimiDowdell
IRE 2018

Holes in national security can be found far away from what many might see as the traditional national
security scene. Last year, The Boston Globe published Secrets in the Sky, a series that exposed serious
gaps in how the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) handles US aircraft, pilots, mechanics and more.
These gaps can create national security risks and have been abused by drug traffickers, corrupt
politicians, other bad actors and even those with ties to terrorism.
We didn’t set out to uncover a story about national security and the FAA. Rather, we began with a few
simple curiosities and data abnormalities. Instead of Washington DC, our initial work led us to a small
town in Texas. Without an airport, the town had more airplanes registered to it than Los Angeles,
Chicago or New York. From there we gathered information from a myriad of sources that allowed us to
uncover examples and spool together pieces that when assembled showed an alarming picture.
Here’s a link to the first part of the series: http://apps.bostonglobe.com/spotlight/secrets-in-thesky/series/part-one/ and a video summarizing the story:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?reload=9&v=ctDMB_kswps
While each story is different, here are some thoughts that might help you spot potential story ideas or
follow up on ones you already have:
1) Hiding in plain sight – Bad actors have found ways to hide under the cover of American business
practices that are commonplace and legal. National security gaps can be created when these
practices are abused to provide secrecy or cover for illicit activity. Nonprofits, shell companies,
and even local businesses can be used in this way. Because of this, always pull relevant
documents when you are investigating—or even simply reporting on –an entity or a person.
Look for abnormalities, lack of information or things that just seem “off”. Take this information
and use it as a starting point for more research to see what might be going on.
Here are some documents and searches:
-Form 990s for nonprofits (check out IRE tipsheets on how to read a form 990 if you need help)
-Business filings
-Court records
-Professional licenses
- Search names of businesses, organizations and people in Google (and other search engines).
Look at business websites. What information do they offer? What do they claim to do? Do not
limit your results to a specific language. Run searches to find sites that link to the business
website or sites that that business links to.
1

- Pull up addresses on Google maps and check out the street view. Look for abnormalities. Is a
business operating out of a single-family residence? Or does its address go to a store that offers
mailboxes in a strip mall?
2) Data digging* – Analyzing data can be a great way to spot abnormalities that can lead to story
ideas. Look at the data as a whole but also make sure that you check every column. Use “group
by” queries with SQL in a database manager or pivot tables in Excel to create a unique list of
information contained in a column along with the number of times that information appears in
the data. Sort the list alphabetically as well as by the total count.
Be present while you are looking at your results. You should have an idea of what you think the
results should look like. If something surprises you or doesn’t seem right, first check to make
sure you haven’t made a mistake or there isn’t a problem with the data. If that all checks out
then slice out the records with the information that surprised you and scrutinize them. See if
those records have anything in common with each other. This process may seem tedious, but in
addition to getting to know your data, it will allow you to see things in the data that you might
have otherwise missed. Take notes and be sure to conduct additional reporting on your findings.

3) Uncovering regulatory loopholes and missteps – Look at relevant regulations and practices. You
have to read the laws governing an area to get a sense of how it is regulated. Look for ways the
regulations aren’t being followed.
Determine how government agencies are handling the information they collect. Are they vetting
information? Do they work with the information they collect or do they act mainly as a filing
cabinet?
See if a government agency has been called out in the past for poor national security practices.
Do the issues still exist or has the agency made improvements?
4) Working backward – It is sometimes easier to start with a specific example and see if it connects
to a bigger picture. What may appear to be isolated incidents can hint at a larger trend or a
greater problem. This can help expose potential gaps in national security. Here are some places
you can look for examples:
-News clips
-Sanction and debarment lists
-Criminal indictments and complaints
-Government reports and investigations
-Transcripts of hearings/testimony
5) Making the connections – Keep detailed notes of the information you find and create a system
for filing your documents so you can find them later. Pay attention to addresses, names and
where they link up and/or overlap. Don’t rely on one document to tell you everything you need
to know. Cast a wide net, gather as much information as you can and weave it all together.
Timelines and spreadsheets* can be incredibly helpful. Include footnotes with links for easy
retrieval of documents and source information
2

6) Here are some sites I’ve found particularly helpful:
-OpenCorporates – search business registries
-InternetArchive – Use the WayBack Machine to look up historic versions of websites. You may
be surprised what you find.
-Office of Foreign Assets Control - US Department of Treasury Specially Designated Nationals
and Blocked Persons list.
-US Bureau of Industry and Securities denied persons list and index of documents
-Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registry and airmen inquiry lookups
-FlightAware – you can sometimes find an aircraft’s registration history in addition to most
recent tracked flight.
-Guidestar for form 990s (free), CitizenAudit which allows a full-text search of 990s ($$) and
ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer
-PACER

*If you don’t know how to work with data, get training. At a minimum, get experience with spreadsheets. I promise you
won’t regret it.

3

