2018 IRE CONFERENCE
60 Broadcast Stories in 60 Minutes
GOVERNMENT / POLITICS

State Fails Unpaid Workers (R)
KARE – Minneapolis / St. Paul
AJ Lagoe looked in to a man’s problem with getting his unpaid wages paid
by his former employer and found weak laws, an understaffed oversight
agency, and thousands of other workers owed back wages with no help. If
you get a similar complaint about unpaid wages check with your state
workforce agency for complaints and enforcement actions. Is the agency
doing its job? Is backpay getting paid to employees? You can get data
showing all unpaid wage claims and whether or not your state is forcing
employers to pay up. See which companies are the biggest culprits.
http://www.kare11.com/article/news/kare-11-investigates-minnesota-failsripped-off-workers/89-491893860
Unspent Bonds (J)
KXAN – Austin
Kylie McGivern and David Barer looked in to unused bond money and bond
projects in Austin. They found more than $140Million in unused money that
voters approved as far back as 18 years ago to be used for needed city
projects. This is certainly worth checking out in your city or cities within your
viewing area.
http://www.kxan.com/news/investigations/neighbors-see-wastedopportunities-as-austin-bond-projects-languish/1151802954

Federal Contract Failures (R)
WWBT-Richmond
I worked with photojournalist/producer Andy Miller on this one and found at
least 125 companies across the country that owe more than 40-million in
unpaid taxes still being awarded large contracts from the federal
government. Yep-- they’re delinquent on taxes-- and they are still being
paid money to do work for the feds. There are companies in your state
doing this. It’s a no brainer-- taxpayers aren’t happy and the government is
breaking its own law. To do this we requested data on companies that are
delinquent on taxes from the IRS and cross referenced it with the
Government’s own federal contract tracking website.
http://www.nbc12.com/story/36738786/federal-contracts-going-tohundreds-of-companies-that-owe-taxes

Incorrect speed limits cost drivers thousands (J)
KHOU – Houston
Jeremy Rogalski looked in to speeding ticket hot spots and found stretches
of roads where drivers get the most tickets actually had lower speed limits
posted than they should have, according to city ordinance. He found drivers
from the citations data for interviews and talked to an attorney about the
legality of these tickets. So, check your city’s municipal citations data for
hot spots and compare the speed limit posted in those areas to what your
city ordinances provide.
http://www.khou.com/news/investigations/speed-limit-problems-acrosshouston-costing-drivers-thousands/487258305

Tracking Down Delinquent Property Owners (R)
WCPO Cincinnati

Craig Cheatham requested data on delinquent property owners in a county
in Ohio and found out it’s owed more than 50 million dollars in unpaid
taxes. Craig tracked down some of the owners of these homes-- one of
them a 3 million dollar estate that was about to be foreclosed on. He also
did a really good job of showing where that money was supposed to go-SCHOOLS! You could easily replicate this in your market and point out
people or companies who are not paying their fair share.
https://www.wcpo.com/news/insider/i-team-hamilton-county-propertyowners-owe-millions-in-delinquent-taxes

Zombie Campaign Spending (J)
WTSP / Tampa Bay Times - Tampa Bay
Noah Pransky at WFTS teamed up with the Tampa Bay Times to analyze
campaign finance data and found more than 100 former members of
Congress and candidates still spending campaign funds long after their
political careers ended. It’s against the law for current or former office
holders and candidates to use campaign funds for personal use. But Noah
found them paying themselves, paying salaries to family members, buying
vacations, etc. WFAA and KHOU did similar stories in Texas. You can too.
Check FEC data and campaign finance reports to see if former lawmakers
and candidates in your state have been using their campaign cash.
http://www.zombiecampaigns.com/

Accidents Caused By Government Workers Costing Taxpayers
Millions (R)
WUSA -Washington, D.C.

Eric Flack used a great tip from IRE 2017 and sent an open records
request to DC’s Office of Risk Management. It’s the office that watches for
risky behavior from DC employees. He found out DC has paid out $4.3
million in accident settlements over the last five years. He then went and
tracked down some of the employees who’d been involved in multiple
crashes and were still on the job. In you state-- ask for all the insurance
claims filed by your city government. It’s a gold mine of stories.
http://www.wusa9.com/article/news/investigations/accidents-caused-by-dcgovernment-workers-cost-taxpayers-millions/65-515037533

Government Immunity (J)
WKRC - Cincinnati
Most states probably have sovereign immunity laws protecting government
agencies from liability in various situations. Duane Pohlman from WKRC
investigated how often cities claim immunity when their police or
emergency vehicles crash and injure people and destroy property. So,
while you’re requesting information on accident liability claims paid out,
check for cases where the agency claimed immunity and see what
happened to the victims.
http://local12.com/news/local/city-immunity-law-could-be-changing

State Paying Out Millions in Sexual Harassment Claims (R)
WINK- Tallahassee
While we’re talking about suing the government...a Timely story here.
Lauren Sweeney found out Florida has paid out $11 million to more than
300 state workers who say they were sexually harassed while at work.

After examining her records request she also discovered the Department of
Corrections paid out the most money-- $5 million. What’s happened in your
state?
http://www.winknews.com/2018/02/26/florida-paid-11-million-sexualharassment-claims/

Questionable Credit Card Spending (R)
WAFB- Baton Rouge
ALWAYS a goodie! Pull the credit card records of any state, city or county
official! Through a public records request, Kiran Chawla spent several
months pouring over of credit card statements, receipts, and other financial
records tucked away in City Hall for travel expenses. Her reporting lead to
the Mayor being indicted. After he was gone the questionable spending
continued. So pull the city or county issued credit card spending data and
receipts in your area! You NEVER know what you’re going to find.
http://www.wafb.com/clip/14035511/new-roads-new-problemsquestionable-credit-card-spending-continues-without-myer

CRIME
Selling Girls – Sex traffickers targeting American children (J)
KHOU – Houston / WXIA – Atlanta
This series on child sex trafficking starts with an explainer of how sex
trafficking works. The stories first focus on the victims, then the traffickers,

and then the buyers. It all wraps up by informing viewers how to spot it in
their communities and what they can do to help. Whether or not you do a
series of this scale, you can do a story in your community by finding
trafficking survivors through advocacy groups and telling their stories. Talk
to police about the scope of the problem in your communities. Look at court
records to see how sex trafficking cases are being prosecuted. We
localized the story at KVUE in Austin and every one of you should too in
your cities. This issue can’t get enough exposure.
http://www.khou.com/news/investigations/selling-girls/sex-traffickers-aretargeting-american-children/481048470
Federal Program for Low Income Youths Plagued by Violence (R)
CIRCA- Washington, D.C.
Joce Sterman looked into GAO (Government Accountability) and OIG
(Office of Inspector General) reports about Job Corps programs/sites
across the US. She FOIA’d specific crime stats and found an astounding
number of assaults, drug related incidents and sexual assaults happening
inside these programs for at-risk youth. Also, there are A LOT of crazy fight
videos on YouTube. There are centers in nearly every state, paid for with
taxpayer money. You can easily pull the stats for your local programs.
https://www.circa.com/story/2017/07/26/security/job-corps-trainingprogram-for-youth-plagued-by-thousands-of-violent-and-criminal-incidents

Guns and Lies (J)
KING – Seattle
From Chris Ingalls at KING in Seattle. Domestic abusers served with a
protection orders are required by law to “surrender” any guns they own. It’s
up to each state to enforce this law. But court data showed nearly half of
people arrested for domestic violence in Seattle - and had protective orders
- either did not turn over their guns or sign a declaration they didn’t have

one. Check court data and case files for domestic violence cases and see if
there are weapons surrender orders. You can also check court records for
new cases filed against domestic abusers and see if weapons were
involved.
http://www.king5.com/news/local/investigations/guns-and-lies-a-day-incourt-with-domestic-abusers/457738082

Inmate Love Letters (R)
WTVJ- Miami
If there’s a high profile crime suspect who’s been incarcerated, check with
the public defender’s office to view the mail they’ve received. Dan Krauth
found accused mass murderer Nikolas Cruz was getting mail from all over
the world. Dan also requested the log of visitors and deposits made to his
account with the Sheriff’s Department to see who’s sending him money.
It’s a great way to take a big story and keep it going:
https://www.nbcmiami.com/news/local/Something-Attracted-Me-to-YouAccused-Parkland-Gunman-Receiving-Love-Letters-Fan-Mail478234283.html

Low bond for murder suspect (J)
KYTX – Tyler, TX
This is an example of why you should always background check people
making news and check for pending criminal cases against them. Were
they out on a low bond when they committed the new crime? In this story
from KYTX in Tyler a man suspected of killing a state trooper had recently
been released on a low bond after assaulting a different police officer. But
the judge says he didn’t know about the suspects’ prior history before

issuing a low bond. So keep this in mind and also check court data for any
trends of low bonds for violent offenders.
http://www.cbs19.tv/news/crime/judge-explains-low-bond-for-troopermurder-suspect/495020245

Prostitution Hot Spots (R)
WMC- Memphis
Sasha Jones pulled police arrest data on people buying, selling or
attempting to buy SEX! What she found, 529 arrests in a year. She went to
the neighborhoods where the MOST activity was taking place and
interviewed residents about what they saw. The station also built an
interactive database that reveals the hot spots to viewers-- many of them
close to schools. An easy one to check out in your area-- and it’s quite a
talker.
http://www.wmcactionnews5.com/story/36090415/memphis-prostitutionarrests

A Plea for Justice (J)
WEWS – Cleveland
Sarah Buduson and the News 5 On Your Side Team reviewed 3 years’
worth of court data and and found that in more than 600 rape cases the
average sentence was just over 5 years of jail time, most of them resulting
from plea bargains. But nearly half of the convictions resulted in sentences
of less than 3 years in jail. Some rapists just got probation and never
served a day in jail. This is another great example of what you can find in
court data. You might find in some cases the victims weren’t even
contacted about plea bargains.

https://www.news5cleveland.com/longform/a-plea-for-justice-cuyahogacounty-rapists-spend-on-average-just-53-years-behind-bars

Hospital Thefts (R)
KNBC - Los Angeles
Joel Grover and the I-team heard from a viewer who had credit cards and
cash stolen while visiting her daughter in the hospital when the two went for
a walk. So they checked police records for theft reports at the hospital and
compared the numbers to other hospitals in the area. They also looked into
security measures at hospitals. Obviously hospitals are not on lockdown
and it's pretty easy for anyone to take things from people’s rooms when
they’re left unattended. Another good story to look into in your market!
https://www.nbclosangeles.com/investigations/Are-Your-Valuables-Safe-inthe-Hospital-474642763.html

PUBLIC SAFETY
Broken Fire Hydrants (J)
KSDK – St. Louis
This story highlights a fire that spread to several houses because
firefighters were dealing with problem fire hydrants. The KSDK i-team
requested fire hydrant inspection records from local cities and found where
fire hydrants weren’t working, putting people and firefighters at risk in the
event of fire. You can get the same data from your local agencies and see
where hydrants aren’t working. You can also check for reports of nonworking hydrants to see if any have gone extended periods without being
fixed or if any were a problem during a fire.

http://www.ksdk.com/article/news/local/5-on-your-side/will-your-firehydrant-work-when-you-need-it/63-493519665

Infrastructure Upkeep - Sidewalks (R)
WRIC- Richmond, Virginia
Kerri O’Brien had a great idea. Sidewalks in Richmond are in poor shape-bet they are in areas of your city too. And it’s one of those pieces of
infrastructure that gets citizens complaining! She pulled all of the
complaints against the city and also checked into lawsuits filed over
accidents involving sidewalks! The visuals of neglected sidewalks are great
and then finding people who’s sued over it-- makes for quite a little story.
http://www.wric.com/news/8-investigates/8news-investigates-neglectedcity-sidewalks-and-the-cost-totaxpayers_20180326070103948/1078052617

Dangerous by design (J)
KVUE – Austin
Austin has a lot of auto-ped accidents and t it’s because of poor
infrastructure planning. We obtained police data showing all of them going
back 5 years. We identified the stretches of roads where most auto/ped
crashes happen. Getting the accident reports helped us find victims. The
911 calls and dispatch recordings also helped drive the story. We found a
national study that ranks cities for pedestrian safety. Austin was up there
above larger cities. We also found Austin has some 2,500 miles of streets
with no sidewalks and pedestrian bridges hard to come by. You can apply
the same process in your market to look for auto/ped hot spots. Check the
study and see how your city compares to others across the country.

http://www.kvue.com/news/investigations/defenders/austin-pedestriansafety-dangerous-by-design/493677714
Lifesavers Locked Away: (R)
WWBT- Rachel DePompa
I actually saw Rick and Tisha pull this off in DC and looked into the same
issue in Richmond. More than 300,000 people collapse each year in a
public place from a heart attack. What if the one device that could help
save your life is locked away or in a room next door and no one knows it?
It's a troubling trend across Richmond. We visited high profile buildings in
the downtown looking for AED’s...automated external defibrillator. These
are devices that anyone can use to help save a life. We centered the story
around a man who was brought back from the brink of death at a 10K-because an AED was in the trunk of a firefighter’s car. This story ended up
becoming a series of stories. You could easily replicate it in your market.
http://www.nbc12.com/story/33765048/lifesaving-devices-locked-awaysurvivor-says-make-them-more-visible
Risky Rides – Overworked Ambulance Drivers (J)
WKYC - Cleveland
Phil Trexler showed how private ambulance companies in Ohio don’t have
regulated work hours. He talked to private ambulance company drivers who
claim they work up to 52 hours straight with no law against it. In this story
he highlights cases where tired drivers got in to wrecks. So, find out what’s the law in your state and what agency regulates ambulances? Do
they report hours worked? Have there been any accidents? Talk to drivers
and see what their work hours are like. Compare them to the requirements
of public EMS services. For that matter check out the hours your public
EMS employees are having to work.
http://www.wkyc.com/article/news/investigations/risky-rides-ambulancedrivers-critical-of-52-hour-work-day/415687650

Narcan Costing Taxpayers (R)
WTVJ- Miami
More Narcan is being used than ever before to save the lives of people
who overdose on Heroin and it’s costing taxpayers. Dan Krauth requested
the expense logs for the product from his local fire departments to see how
much they’ve spent every year on the drug for the past three years. Do the
same and chances are, you’ll see a huge increase in taxpayer dollars spent
like he did in Miami. Once he received the expense reports, he did the
story in one day, by doing a ride along with a paramedic and going
downtown and talking to addicts who have had the drug used on them
multiple times.
https://www.nbcmiami.com/on-air/as-seen-on/Use-of-Narcan-Increases-toSave-Lives-of-Users_Miami-454604743.html
Medically Unfit To Drive (J)
WFTS- Tampa
Getting driver records can be difficult in some states, like in Texas, but
Katie LaGrone found Florida failing to revoke the licenses of drivers
deemed medically unfit to drive... things like epilepsy or dementia. Katie
wrapped her story around a young driver who had a seizure behind the
wheel and drove his car into a pond with his girlfriend. Katie dug up state
inspector general reports blasting the state and pulled numbers showing
how common these crashes are in Florida. If you can get the records in
your state check this out.
https://www.abcactionnews.com/homepage-showcase/is-floridakeeping-medically-unfit-drivers-off-the-road

HUD Passes Section 8 Complexes In Disrepair (R)

WTVR- Richmond
Melissa Hipolit documented HUD giving passing grades to section 8
housing complexes that are in complete disrepair. She also documented
this happening in cities across the country. She says to FOIA the complex's
HUD inspection score and compare it with what local county and/or city
inspectors document at these housing units. You’ll be astounded at how
much a federal agency is NOT doing to ensure proper housing for people.
You could also find out from HUD how much taxpayer money is being
spent to subsidize rent at the property.
http://wtvr.com/2017/07/18/cbs-6-investigation-finds-hud-passes-section-8complexes-in-disrepair/
http://wtvr.com/2017/06/05/over-7-5m-federal-cash-goes-to-unsafeunhealthy-local-housing/

LAW ENFORCEMENT
The Drug Whisperer (J)
WXIA – Atlanta
Congrats to Brendan Keefe on this IRE award winner about DUI arrests
made after drug recognition evaluations by police officers. In these arrests
people were stone cold sober but these trained drug recognition experts
swore these drivers were high on drugs. The drivers didn’t have prior
criminal records or any reason to make the officers suspect drugs. Blood
tests eventually proved the drivers innocent and the officers wrong. Most
police departments have DRE trained officers. Brendan got the dashcam
videos which really helped drive the story. You can check this out in your
market. Request the data and reports of DRE arrests made by officers. See
how many of them stood up in court and how many were dismissed.
http://www.11alive.com/article/news/investigations/the-drug-whispererdrivers-arrested-while-stone-cold-sober/85-437061710

Disabled parking violations jump dramatically (R)
WRC – Washington D.C.
Scott McFarlane and Rick Yarborough took a look at handicapped parking
violations data and found it nearly doubled in D.C. from 2016 to 2017. They
went to some of the hot spots to get video and caught people blatantly
violating the law and taking up disabled parking spots while showing how
difficult it is for the disabled to find available parking. This is easy data to
get from your municipal courts and easy to personalize with a disabled
driver.
https://www.nbcwashington.com/investigations/Parking-Violations-PeopleWith-Disabilities-Dramatically-Increased-in-2017-469589033.html
It’s not their spot (J)
KGW - Portland
The KGW investigators obtained similar data and looked at who the most
consistent and notable culprits are. They found delivery drivers from Fed
Ex, UPS, Jimmy Johns being cited...even government owned vehicles.
They too went to the locations and caught drivers in the act. Again, easy
data to obtain from your police departments or municipal courts.
https://www.kgw.com/article/news/investigations/it-is-not-their-spotinvestigation-finds-delivery-trucks-parked-in-disabled-spaces/283522253387
Officers Disciplined with Body Camera Footage: (R)
WMAR Baltimore
Brian Kuebler got the first look inside his city’s body worn camera program
and how they scrub videos and discipline their own. He takes viewers
inside the program that watches EVERY police body cam video and he
shows viewers what police are looking for in the clips. He also FOIA’d
infractions caught by this unit and the punishments leveled against officers

since the program began. His investigation was spurred by a scandal
where officers were caught planting evidence. You should delve into your
police body camera program. How many departments have cameras? How
many are in use? Who polices the videos? Can you get them? How
transparent is your city/county program? Are police officers being
disciplined from the videos?
https://www.abc2news.com/news/region/baltimore-city/inside-look-at-thebaltimore-police-department-s-body-worn-camera-unit

Not your typical speed trap story (J)
KYTX - Tyler, TX
Taeler De Haes checked out an alleged speed trap after seeing a facebook
post spreading. But she didn’t stop with simply reporting the rapid change
in speed limits coming into the small Texas town of Brownsboro and seeing
the number of people getting ticketed. She dug in to the budget of this town
and found it actually budgets close to half of its revenue to come from
traffic tickets. Texas law allows cities with a population of less than 5,000 to
take in up to 30% of its revenue from traffic fines. Anything more has to go
to the state. That wasn’t happening. So, if you know of a small town speed
trap check city’s budget and traffic fine revenues versus what your state
law allows for revenue from traffic fines in cities that size.
http://www.cbs19.tv/article/news/investigations/cbs19-investigates/cbs19investigates-brownsboro-accused-of-speed-trap/501-524295559
Do DUI Checkpoints Really Work? (R)
WJHL- Johnson City, TN
Nate Morabito requested the activity reports for all DUI checkpoints in his 6
county region and found of the more than 3,300 drivers checked at the
police stops, only seven people charged with DUI. less than 0.2%. He

followed up and found statewide numbers showing only 157 DUI arrests
from 28,000 stops. DUI checkpoints are usually grant-funded, so statewide
stats should be available. The activity reports list all of the minor traffic
violations and crimes people were arrested for, when and where the
checkpoints were held and how many people were stopped. While it may
be a deterrent, it’s also an easy way to get people on other charges. What’s
happening in your state?
http://www.wjhl.com/news/thousands-stopped-just-seven-arrested-for-duiat-checkpoints_20171201031930476/871462571
Untrained and "In Crisis" (J)
WPTV - West Palm Beach
This story by Sam Smink was sparked by an officer involved shooting,
where the mentally ill suspect was shot within 45 seconds of police arriving.
Sam wondered about the officers’ training. Florida, like most states, offers
Crisis Intervention Training for officers to help them deal with mentally ill
suspects, but Sam showed how the state doesn't require them to take
CIT. Sam compiled a database of officer involved shootings and mentally
ill suspects and found that in her 5 county viewing area not one of the
officers involved had this training. Some police departments didn't offer any
mental health training for any of their officers. Something definitely worth
checking in to in your market.
https://www.wptv.com/news/local-news/investigations/should-floridalaw-enforcement-officers-be-required-to-take-crisis-interventiontrainingAre Low Violent Crime Stats Too Good To Be True? (R)
KNXV- Arizona
David Biscobing and Shawn Martin took a hard look at one city’s claim it
was the safest in Arizona. (pay attention-- here’s your step by step) They
zeroed in on crime stats for the town of Buckeye, population 70,000. It only
reported 8 aggravated assaults. Similar sized cities, they found, had

reported between 102 to 222 aggravated assaults. So David and his team
looked at whether the department was manipulating the numbers by
reclassifying some aggravated assaults as simple assaults. After combing
through court records they found all sorts of violent cases that were not
being counted in the numbers. Are police “fudging” the stats in your area?
https://www.abc15.com/news/local-news/investigations/are-buckeyeslow-violent-crime-stats-too-good-to-be-true
Police Selling Guns (J)
WKRC - Cincinatti
Duane Pohlman, investigated the police selling guns confiscated from
criminals. In Kentucky, the law mandates they be sold at auction. In Ohio, a
court needs to approve the sales. It varies by city and state how police
dispose of their own used guns and weapons confiscated in crimes. Ask
what police agencies in your area do and if they don’t destroy confiscated
weapons you’re likely on your way to a great story.
http://local12.com/news/investigates/what-happens-to-weapons-seized-bypolice

EDUCATION / SCHOOLS
Schools Keeping Secrets - Cost of Contracts (R)
WEWS - Cleveland
Another from my girl Sarah and her team...they put together a three-part
series uncovering how much schools spend on legal fees to settle teacher
contract disputes. The team selected 15 random school districts in
Northeast Ohio and requested invoices for their legal fees. But several
districts refused to comply. So, Sarah and her team not only reported how
schools spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to negotiate contracts and
disputes, they also reported the districts’ lack of transparency and failures
to comply with public records laws.
https://www.news5cleveland.com/longform/neo-schools-spend-hundredsof-thousands-of-dollars-on-lawyers-to-negotiate-teachers-contracts
Crisis in the Classroom (J)
WTHR - Indianapolis
While looking in to Indiana’s statewide teacher shortage Bob Segall spoke
to several aspiring teachers who finished college but failed certification
exams. Bob also found veteran teachers having trouble with new testing
standards. He checked state data and found passing rates as low as 19%,
bringing the validity and reliability of new testing standards in to question.
Check with your state and get teacher testing data and see 1) how many
teachers are on probationary certifications 2) how many times teachers are
having to take the tests before they pass 3) see if experts agree whether
the teacher tests are a reliable gauge of someone’s ability to teach.
https://www.wthr.com/article/crisis-in-the-classroom-no-resolution-forcontroversy-surrounding-indiana-teacher-tests
Hidden School Bus Danger: (R)

WBTV- Charlotte
Nick Ochsner found a hidden danger lurking on thousands of school buses
across North and South Carolina. He found problems with heater hoses on
Thomas rear engine school buses bursting and spraying hot antifreeze into
school buses for two years. His questions were triggered by an incident in
May 2015 that left a Middle School student with burns across much of her
lower body. There are documented problems with these buses. Are they on
the roads and have they been fixed in your community?
http://www.wbtv.com/story/35332888/hidden-danger-on-school-bus-injuresdozens-of-students-across-the-country
Number School Days vs Graduation Rates (J)
KGW - Portland
Chris Willis at KGW compared the number of required school days in
Oregon to other states and explored whether the fewer days required
affects graduation rates. Apparently Oregon has among the lowest of both.
You can find out whether your state has more, less, or an equal amount of
school days as other states and it could be interesting to compare
graduation rates and explore the reasons behind the numbers.
https://www.kgw.com/article/news/investigations/oregon-has-one-ofshortest-school-years-lowest-graduation-rates-in-us/283-560012138

CONSUMER
Post Irma Power Bills High Despite Long Term Outages: (R)
WTVJ- Miami

This is a smart idea after a big storm. Dan Krauth requested the public
complaints made about his local electric company. In Florida, it’s the Public
Service Commission. He received the complaints in two days. The
complaints could show patterns like he found, after Hurricane Irma hit.
People were without power for more than 10 days after IRMA, and yet their
power bills were exactly the same as they were the same time frame a year
ago. After a major outage see if people’s bills really do go down.
https://www.nbcmiami.com/investigations/Some-FPL-Customers-SayPost-Irma-Bills-Higher-Than-Expected-456488533.html
No Relief - Student Loan Relief Fraud (J)
KVUE – Austin
Student loan debt is a $1.3Trillion problem nationwide... People struggling
with student loans, whether a 20-something fresh out of college or a single
parent in their 30’s or 40’s who went back and got their masters, can be the
most vulnerable to companies promising to help manage student loan debt,
lower payments, or even wipe out the debt. The Federal Trade Commission
has a list of companies it’s suing to help get money returned to people who
bought-in to student loan relief scams. See if any are operating in your
state. You can find victims by requesting consumer complaint data from
the FTC and/or your state attorney general’s office.
http://www.kvue.com/article/news/investigations/defenders/no-relief-36student-loan-debt-relief-companies-accused-of-deceiving-consumers/269513314728
Heated Seats Causing Fires (R)
WSB-TV Atlanta.
Jim Strickland is a master at consumer pieces. But- this is just one example
of the quirky but relevant stories he finds hidden in complaint records filed
with the feds. Everyone loves a heated seated in a vehicle! Jim found a guy

whose car caught fire because of the heated seat. He listens when viewers
write in or call-- but he also goes a step further and discovers this and
many other car defects are causing serious problems around the nation for
other motorists. Start pulling complaint records now, especially when a
viewers calls you up to tell you something is wrong with their vehicle.
https://www.wsbtv.com/news/local/cobb-county-man-says-seatwarmer-caused-fire-totaled-his-car/722097667

Pedicab Crimes (J)
WABC – New York, NY
Danielle Leigh found pedicab operators price gouging customers and not
following city laws. This is easy to look for in your city if you understand
your city’s pedicab ordinances…if your city has any. If it doesn’t then you’re
likely to find price gouging. If it does have ordinances then look for
pedicabs not properly displaying prices, company information, etc. Also,
Take some rides and see if the drivers are obeying traffic laws. Check for
complaints, see if companies have been cited by the city, and look
personal injury suits against the companies too.
http://abc7ny.com/society/pedicab-riders-shocked-by-bills-topping-$200$400-even-$600/2968749/

ENVIRONMENT / HEALTH
Poor Health/Safety Inspection Scores in Public Schools (R)
WCNC – Charlotte
Bill McGinty checked out school inspections in a particular school district
and found lots of health and safety issues. He first acquired the data then

the reports from inspections where schools scored poorly. Check with your
school districts and see which entity does the health and safety
inspections. There could be several involved depending on the location of
the schools.
http://www.wcnc.com/news/investigations/investigators/whats-being-doneto-fix-poor-health-scores-at-cms-schools/489019634

Pool Inspection Problems (J)
WVEC- Norfolk
Getting in to summer is always a good time to check public pool inspection
histories. Laura Geller asked the Virginia Department of Health for all the
records of inspections done in her area last year. The findings were gross.
So, always check inspections to see what’s happening at your community
pools, how often inspections occur, and if problems are fixed.
http://www.13newsnow.com/article/news/local/13news-now-investigatespool-problems/442272090

License to Pill (R)
WVUE- New Orleans
Lee Zurik and his team at Raycom’s National Investigative Unit pulled
several years of medicare data and focused on the doctors writing
enormous amounts of prescriptions for opioids. His team zeroed in on the
top 1,000 prescribers based on the number of prescriptions they had
written. The numbers across the country were shocking. But, the team
found doctor after doctor (not all of them pain doctors) writing huge
numbers of opioids to patients . He visited locations, trying to talk to the
doctors and even had video of the long lines of people with out of state tags

trying to get into these pill mills. You could pull the data and take a look at
the top prescribing doctors in your city or state.
http://raycom.pgtb.me/7wQM5z

The dirty truth about Texas waterways (J)
KVUE – Austin
This story began when a local public water utility requested a permit from
the state to dump nearly 1-million gallons of wastewater effluent from a
treatment plant in to a popular creek not only used for recreation, but also
flows in to an Austin aquifer system. So Erica Proffer looked in to how
much wastewater from treatment plants is allowed to be dumped into
waterways across Texas. She also obtained data showing more than 1,100
wastewater discharge permit violations reported to the state’s
environmental agency. So, look for wastewater discharge permits and
permit violations in your area and across your state, and talk to people in
closeby communities.
http://www.kvue.com/news/investigations/defenders/the-dirty-truth-abouttexas-water/342366238

Schools Failing To Test For Cancer-Causing Radon (R)
KARE Minneapolis
AJ Lagoe at it again. He pulled inspections and found that despite state
and federal recommendations, only 53 of 331 school districts in Minnesota
report they have tested classrooms for radon since 2012. Radon is the
colorless and odorless gas.. A known carcinogen that’s blamed for more
than 20,000 lung cancer deaths every year. If you live in Colorado,
Connecticut, DC, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, Rhode
Island, Virginia or West Virginia-- listen up. Your state requires this testing.

So what are the results? Are schools following the law? Not in one of these
states? WHY doesn’t your state test?
https://www.kare11.com/article/news/investigations/kare-11-investigatesmn-schools-fail-to-test-for-cancer-causing-radon/89-549587510

TRANSPORTATION
Towing Trouble (J)
WTSP – Tampa
Noah found towing companies ripping people off.. The companies had
improper signage in areas where towing companies operate, over-charging
people with all kinds of add-on fees and charging more than they’re allowed
for storage. He also found a history of problems with some of these
companies. There are sure to be towing troubles in any of your markets.
Don’t dismiss viewer complaints about towing companies. Make sure tow
companies are following state and local rules. Always check their

compliance histories with the state and local authorities...and check for
lawsuits.
http://www.wtsp.com/news/investigations/towing-troubles/10investigatesbusts-bad-tow-trucks-getting-refunds-for-viewers-1/488534978
Serious Violations Put Ambulances In Park (R)
WHDH - Boston
Steve Tellier pulled his state’s ambulance inspection records and found
dozens of ambulances in Massachusetts in need of emergency care
themselves. After combing through hundreds of pages of inspections
reports he found ambulances with significant corrosion, body damage,
brake pads worn to the metal. Inside their were missing supplies, non
working air conditioning for patients, expired meds and life-saving
equipment not working. Easy to replicate this in your market, just one
simple FOIA Friday request.
https://whdh.com/7-investigates/7news-investigates-serious-violations-putdozens-of-mass-ambulances-in-park/

Empty buses costing taxpayers (J)
WCNC - Charlotte
Mark Boyle at WCNC found near empty buses costing taxpayers hundreds
of thousands a year. He requested average ridership for city bus routes
and average annual cost to run those routes. He looked at the 5 routes with
lowest ridership...he took rides on the buses to show them empty. His story
resulted in the elimination of those routes. Easy to do the same in any
community with public transportation.
https://www.wcnc.com/mobile/article/news/investigations/investigators/thedefenders-near-empty-buses-costing-charlotte-taxpayers/275-552327229

Speeding Discount Transit Buses (R)
WABC – New York, NY
After 3 people died because of a speeding discount transit bus Jim Hoffer
decided to check to see how safe drivers of New York area bus companies
are on the road. They followed charter buses and used a radar gun to catch
buses speeding and showed them weaving in and out of traffic. They also
found a company using another company’s permit, which is illegal. So,
keep an eye out for speeding buses and see if the company is properly
permitted and also remember to check their safety history with the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
http://abc7ny.com/traffic/7-on-your-side-goes-undercover-to-catchspeeding-buses/2570585/

Highway Safety Secrets (J)
KXAN – Austin
When I was at KXAN I came across lawsuits alleging the road surface
conditions were the cause of deadly accidents. Brian Collister and I wanted
to look further in to the contributing factors of fatal wrecks on Central Texas
Highways…but TxDOT wouldn’t release it’s road safety data, citing
“confidential highway safety information.” But we got it from an attorney
who got it through discovery. We also got crash data from the state and
highway surface score data. We pointed out the roads with the worst
scores and showed whether or not they were prioritized for repairs. You
can do the same with state and city data, depending on who maintains
which raids you’re looking at. Compare the roads with worst surface scores
to those with most crashes.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VO-GHsbYw6Y/

UNDERCOVER
Bank teller window pads may be easily tampered with by crooks (R)
WSB-TV Atlanta
Jim Strickland is at it again!... this time he goes undercover based off a tip
and exposes that the keypads at the bank teller window could tell
information about you to the next person in line. Jim sent a security expert,
wearing a hidden camera, into 7 banks in Atlanta. In 6 of the banks this
security expert was able to “man-handle” the machines no questions
asked. Meaning-- he could have put a skimmer on them. Watch the video-really startling how no one stopped this guy. He was literally picking up the
card readers, turning them upside down-- no one stopped him INSIDE a
bank.
https://www.wsbtv.com/news/2-investigates/2-investigates-tellerwindow-pads-may-be-giving-away-your-bank-information/739878972
Illegal Apartments (J)

WABC – New York, NY
Here’s a story possibility in any city with affordable housing issues. Danielle
Leigh obtained 311 complaint data and building inspection data and found
housing compliance violations going up. She also looked for questionable
craigslist ads for low rent apartments. She then went undercover and found
apartments that were illegally converted from attics and basements with
shoddy plumbing and electricity. Sadly, the poor people living in these
illegal apartments get evicted by the building inspectors. See if it’s
happening in your city.
http://abc7ny.com/home/rent-at-your-own-risk-7-on-your-sideinvestigates-illegal-apartments/3048201/
Voiceless Victims (R)
WECT- Wilmington, NC
Shout-out! Investigative reporter Casey Roman pulled off a 6 part docuseries. She really brought viewers inside the world of animal shelters. She
followed around animal control and really takes you inside what’s
happening dispelling myths and rumors. It could be done in another market
and may spur more long form documentary journalism.
http://www.wect.com/category/322064/voiceless-victims

Microbladers operating without proper licenses (J)
WRC – Washington D.C.
Microblading is a new cosmetic procedure growing in popularity
everywhere. It’s basically tattooing for eyebrows. Jodie Fleischer, Rick
Yarborough and the WRC i-team found unlicensed salons doing it and
some doing the procedure in non-sterile environments. They found the
rules and regulations vary by state and get this, the state can’t inspect
unlicensed salons because they can only regulate licensed salons. So, look

for complaints about these salons/spas or any other types of salons. Get a
list of licensed spas and check that against spas you find on google or
social media. See what state licenses are required and what regulatory
authority your state has.
https://www.nbcwashington.com/investigations/News4-I-Team-FindsMicrobladers-Operating-Without-Required-License-Little-Enforcement465565313.html

Illegal Ammunition sales to minors (R)
WDAF- Kansas City
Abey Eden went undercover with a 16 year old to see if he could buy
powerful rounds of ammunition. Federal law states you have to be 18 years
old to buy ammunition for rifles or shotguns and 21 for handguns. There’s
no law that requires stores to verify a buyers age. The teen was stopped a
few times, but WAS able to buy high-powered ammunition from several
stores. The station even showed the teen trying to buy cigarettes at a
convenience store-- he was stopped by clerks. While the national
conversation is focused on school shootings-- watching a 16 year walk into
a business and purchases ammunition was powerful.
http://fox4kc.com/2018/04/30/fox4-investigates-how-easy-is-it-for-minorsto-buy-gun-ammunition-despite-it-being-illegal/
Risky Food Handling/Transporting (J)
KNTV - SF Bay Area
Vicky Nguyen, Kevin Nious and the NBC Bay Area team found restaurants
buying meat and keeping it in hot trucks and vans for hours. They went to
restaurant food supply stores and watched for people loading meats in to
trucks and vans and followed them. When they got back to their restaurants
Vicky walked over with a temperature gun to show the meat was well

above safe holding temperature. She interviewed the people on the spot to
get their immediate explanations. They also obtained food sickness
complaints from the health department to see if the restaurants had any
cases on file and checked the restaurants inspection histories. Vicky says
they put this together within a few weeks.But the more time you have the
more you’ll likely find.
https://www.nbcbayarea.com/investigations/Undercover-InvestigationReveals-Risky-Food-Handling-Practices-at-Bay-Area-Restaurants483393641.html
Uber and Lyft Drivers Willing To Break Car Seat Laws (R)
WXYZ- Detroit
Simon Shaykhet put 6 Uber and Lyft drivers to the test. Using a hidden
camera and mom with a two year old willing to ask for a ride without a car
seat. 5 out of 6 drivers tried to take the family on a ride with their toddler
sitting on a lap. In Michigan the law is clear: Children younger than 8 or
shorter than 4’9 have to be in a child safety seat. The law is most likely
similar in your state. Simon showed his findings to Michigan State Police.
The mother and son never actually took the rides so the station did not
actually break any laws or put the child in danger. Really eye-opening
though how many drivers were willing to ignore the car seat law-- and how
many parents need to know to bring a car seat.
https://www.wxyz.com/news/local-news/investigations/hiddencamera-investigation-shows-uber-lyft-drivers-willing-to-break-law

