IRE | DIGITAL TOOLS
June 14, 2018
Samantha​ Sunne
​
, Tools for Reporters
​
newsletter
​
+ Ren LaForme
​
, digital tools reporter, Poynter
1. Happy Scribe
○ Automatically transcribe audio interviews done with a mic/phone recorder app
○ Pro:​ Less feature-rich but also cheaper than ​Trint​, which we also recommend
○ Con:​ Interviews recorded via phone call or web conferencing won’t transcribe well
○ Price:​ 10 cents per minute transcribed
2. Tetra
○ Record phone interviews and receive an automatic transcription via email
○ Pro:​ One of the only ways to get a clear transcription with a remote speaker
○ Pro: ​Has a feature to inform the interviewee that you’re recording, saving you from any
legal liability of forgetting to do so
○ Con:​ Can’t use your own phone number
○ Price: ​Free for now while in beta mode
3. Descript
○ Upload single- or multi-track audio files and Descript transcribes them. Then edit the text
to edit the audio without fiddling with waveforms.
○ Pro: ​Magic?
○ Pro: ​Exports to major audio editing tools to keep the process going
○ Con:​ Mac only, at least for the moment
○ Price: ​15 cents per minute with free version (30 minutes free) or 7 cents per minute with
$10/month full version
4. Klaxon
○ Automatically track changes on any website
○ Pro:​ Easy to use once it’s set up.
○ Con:​ Not very easy to set up.
○ Price: ​Free
○ Alternative:​ ​ChangeDetection.com
i.
Recently announced it's moving to visualping.io, which will be paid
5. Hunter.io
○ Find email addresses for hard-to-track people
○ Can also verify an email is real before sending
○ Pro: ​Super easy to use
○ Con:​ You have to sign in
○ Price: ​Free for 100 searches/month
6. Privacy Badger
○ Blocks trackers from following you around the internet
○ Pro: ​No annoying auto-play video ads or aggressive information trackers
○ Con:​ Breaks some features on some sites
○ Price: ​Free
7. ExpertiseFinder​ & ​Help A Reporter
○ Find sources on any subject
○ Pro: ​Find anyone, from the mainstream to the obscure

○
○
○

Con:​ Limited to the people who appear on those sites
Price:​ Free
Alternatives:
i.
https://www.publicinsightnetwork.org/
ii.
https://sourcelist.org/
iii.
https://diversesources.org/
8. Headliner
○ Make audio shareable and visual for social
○ Pro:​ Ridiculously easy to use
○ Con: ​Don’t use the automatic feature, it loads up problematic stock images
○ Price: ​Free
9. RevEye​ & ​Google Reverse Image Search
○ Verify photos with a reverse image search
○ Pro:​ Super easy ways to check the veracity of images or find out what it's an image of
○ Con: ​Limited only to what these engines find. If it’s not there, it doesn’t necessarily mean
the image is legit.
○ Price: ​Free
10. InVID​ & ​YouTube Dataviewer
○ Background YouTube videos and find metadata on videos
○ Pro: ​Similar to RevEye and Google Reverse, but for video; Tons of options for finding
hidden data on videos
○ Con: ​Similar issues with the latter; Only works on YouTube
○ Price: ​Free
11. Internet Archive
○ View webpages that have been taken down or changed
○ Pro: ​You can also use it to save your own work or pages you want saved
○ Con: ​Not every site is guaranteed to be archived
○ Price: ​Free
○ Chrome extension:
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/wayback-machine/fpnmgdkabkmnadcjpehmlll
kndpkmiak
○ Another fun one: ​Politwoops​ saves deleted tweets from politicians
12. DocumentCloud
○ A huge set of tools for documents: annotate, share, embed, search, analyze
○ Pro​: Has many lesser-known features that are very advanced
○ Con​: Free accounts will start having limitations next year (2019)
○ Price​: Free
13. Gestimer
○ Set a reminder right from the Mac menu bar
○ Pro:​ Extremely simple - just pull down an icon from the menu bar
○ Con: ​Mac only; Can't set a timer more than 5.5 hours into the future
○ Price: ​$3.99
14. FOIA trackers
○ iFOIA
i.
Use a pre-prepared legal guide to write state or federal FOIAs
ii.
Pro:​ Written by actual media attorneys, so is very good at incorporating the law
iii.
Con: ​Interface can be clunky and confusing
iv.
Price: ​Free

○

MuckRock
i.
Make a FOIA letter with automatic recipients and shared templates
ii.
Pro:​ Can see FOIA requests other people have made and compare notes
iii.
Con: ​Everyone else can see your FOIA unless you subscribe to a premium
service
iv.
Price: ​Free, or Premium service up to $100/month
15. OpenCorporates
○ Background a private company
○ Pro:​ The largest repository of data on companies in the world
○ Con: ​Not comprehensive; Crowdsourced
○ Price: ​Free
16. Charity Navigator
○ Look up financial info on a charity or nonprofit
○ Pro:​ Also evaluates finances and ethics of larger charities
○ Con: ​Takes a while for 990s to appear
○ Price: ​Free
○ Alternative:​ ProPublica's ​Nonprofit Explorer
17. GovTrack
○ Track bills going through the U.S. Congress
○ Pro:​ Assigns a number to the bill's likelihood of passing
○ Con: ​May not be entirely nonpartisan
○ Price: ​Free
18. Sqoop
○ Search SEC filings, court dockets, patents and press releases
○ Pro:​ Can search by location; Set alerts
○ Con: ​Now has an option for brands to place ads in your results
○ Price: ​Free for journalists; $99/month otherwise
19. Tabula
○ Scrape data out of PDFs
○ Pro:​ Easy to click and drag; can automatically scrape tables from multiple pages
○ Con: ​Doesn't work on PDFs that were images (like a photo of a piece of paper); Need to
download Java to run on Windows
○ Price: ​Free
20. CometDocs
○ Convert PDFs to more useful file types, like Excel or Doc
○ Pro:​ The most consistently successful PDF converter
○ Con: ​Converting to Excel occasionally messes up the data
○ Price​: Free for IRE members; $10/month for non-members
○ Alternative​: s​ mallpdf
21. WhoIs
○ Find out who a website is registered to
○ Pro:​ Also useful simply to dig up someone's email address
○ Con: ​People often use third parties, like GoDaddy
○ Price​: Free
22. ViewDNS
○ Find all the domain names registered to a certain person
○ Pro:​ Tons of options for researching websites and IPs
○ Con: ​Lots of people use third party registrars, like GoDaddy

○ Price​: Free
23. Evernote
○ Keep track of sprawling investigations, save articles and search text
○ Pro​: Also the best scanner I've ever found
○ Con​: There are simply so many features you'll need to design your own way to use it
○ Price​: Free for basic; $70/year for premium
○ Alternative​: O
​ neNote​ if you prefer Microsoft Office, or ​Google Keep​ if you prefer G Suite
24. IntelTechniques
○ Search a ton of sites to background a person or a topic
○ Pro​: Works better than Facebook Graph Search or other on-site search tools
○ Con​: Need to sign in to the sites for most of them to work; Limited to what people make
public
○ Price​: Free
And:
Try This​!​ newsletter by Ren LaForme
Tools for Reporters​ newsletter by Samantha Sunne

