Reporting on the public’s access to
public records
By Hilary Niles for IRE, June 2018

Perhaps the most common mistake journalists make with public records has nothing to
do with their own requests. It’s forgetting that other members of the public need access to
government information, too.
Whether attorneys, businesses, activists, researchers or citizens working on their own
behalf, countless constituencies avail themselves every day of this fundamental right. Yet
journalists’ conception of Freedom of Information too often stops where our use of it as a
professional tool ends.
Journalists also often get squeamish about reporting on public records laws, feeling that
it’s too much “inside baseball” or too much about our own process for it to be either
appropriate or interesting.
This tipsheet will help you correct those mistakes. As journalism professor and FOI
expert David Cuillier says about access to public records: “We have to cover it, just like we
would any other fundamental part of our society. It's part of our responsibility.”
Rest assured, there’s no magic to it. Reporters can develop a specialty of reporting on
the open government beat just like any other. Here are some tips* to get you started:

Stay current
● Read your state and the federal FOI and open meetings laws every year,
word-for-word, and keep them bookmarked on your internet browser.
● Set up a Google alert​ for stories about your state (or city) that mention public
records.
● Follow court cases​ involving public records laws.

● Find out if your state maintains logs or statistics on public records requests.
Study them to find out who’s exercising this right, what they’re looking for, and how
agencies are doing with compliance. Some agencies even proactively publish online
every request they receive.
● Keep up with scholarly research ​on the topic. This will help you keep apprised of
new trends and insights, and build your credibility with sources. It will also help you
identify experts to call on as sources in your reporting.
● Subscribe to your nearest open government coalition’s email list. ​There’s one
in almost every state. Check the National Freedom of Information Coalition to find
the one closest to you.

Identify stakeholders
● Think of stakeholders in two groups: ​people who are already interested in public
information and public data, and people who may be interested in particular
information or data if you point out its relevance to them.
● Many constituencies are inherently interested in public records: ​defense
attorneys, government watchdog groups, campaign finance reform advocates,
“government minders” from the nonprofit sector, community-level public service
folks, unions, academics and researchers.
● Attend legislative proceedings ​about potential changes to open government to
find other sources.
● Understand that businesses sit on both sides of the stakeholder coin. ​As a
constituency, businesses are among the most voluminous requesters of public
information. Yet some of the most intractable exemptions from disclosure are
written at the behest of the business community.
● Find the pro-transparency people within government ​— often data geeks with
low profiles. There are more of these folks than you may think.

Story ideas
● Remember that the core tenet of public records laws is not just access to
information, but equal access. ​What fees are agencies charging, and who can (or
can’t) surmount that hurdle? How are minorities treated when they seek access to
public records or open meetings as citizens? Compare this to the reception
businesses and lawyers receive. Equal access to democracy is an important social
justice issue.
● The missing data story:​ Sometimes data don’t exist, or information is withheld.
Sometimes pointing that out is the best story. (Tip: Poll your colleagues to find out
what questions they are not getting answers to.)
● Watch your open government laws for changes. ​Know that many times,
exemptions are written into unrelated legislation, for example economic
development or agricultural bills.
● Think beyond simply writing or producing stories about public records. ​Can
your newsroom host a hack-a-thon to turn loose citizens and developers on a public
data set? Instead of trying to anticipate how your audience would like to use the
data, let them tell you themselves with an interactive event like this. It requires
more work but has the added benefit of cultivating more audience engagement and,
potentially, understanding and loyalty.
● Develop evergreen news websites or news apps, ​where public data can be kept
updated and processed into a usable format for the public. (For inspiration, visit
ProPublica’s many news apps, or the Texas Tribune website.)
● Keep a “tickler” file ​of potential stories you’re following. Mark your calendar with
the dates of when a records response is due, or when a court decision is expected.

Concepts for the beat
● Don’t frame it as a “press issue” ​when you do write about yourself or another
member of the press being denied access to government. Remember that there’s no

such thing as “the press” legally. We are merely members of the public who happen
to avail ourselves of public records laws. When we are kicked out of a meeting or
denied access to records, it’s the public whose rights the government is limiting.
● Provide context for whatever conflict you’re writing about. ​For example, do
other states —especially neighboring states — handle their records the same way?
(Helpful resources to answer these questions are the Reporters Committee on
Freedom of the Press, and the State Secrets database compiled by Miranda Spivack
for the Center for Investigative Journalism. NOTE: If you find an error in any of these
resources, let the authors know! State-level laws are incredibly difficult to track and
compare, so on-the-ground perspectives really help keep these resources current
and accurate.)
● For more context, ​remember that access to information is internationally
recognized as a fundamental human right by the United Nations’ Universal
Declaration on Human Rights (1948) and subsequent International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (1966).
● For still more context, ​be sure to consider, and ask your sources, whether a
particular violation is unusual, or reflective of a more systemic problem.
● Acknowledge and be proud of any personal or professional interest in access
to government.​ According to the SPJ Code of Ethics, journalists should “(s)eek to
ensure that the public’s business is conducted in the open, and that public records
are open to all.” There’s no conflict of interest in your reporting on this. It is an
ethical interest.
● Check your assumptions: ​Violations of public records or open meetings laws are
not always nefarious. Public officials often are not properly trained, and usually err
on the side of withholding information because they face harsher consequences for
improper disclosure.
● Be realistic: ​It can be hard for small, rural towns with limited resources to conform
with laws designed to rein in sprawling bureaucracies. Likewise, it’s hard for
legislators to craft laws that apply effectively to that whole spectrum.

● Understand that reporting on open government is time intensive. ​One lead will
often require five more phone calls to figure out the actual story. These are not
quick-turn stories.
● Make your reporting relatable ​to audiences by telling the human stories of why
access to government information makes a difference in their lives. This applies just
as much to explanatory reporting or exploring the gray area in public records laws
and administration as it does to exposing blatant violations of both the letter and
the spirit of the laws.

Finally, as with all reporting: Remember that patience and persistence pay off. As you
develop sources and start to publish stories about this topic, both experts and the public at
large will recognize your interest. At that point, stories will start to come to you.

But when that happens, it will also entail some members of the public seeing you as a
resource. People will call or email to ask for advice with their own quests for public
records. Embrace that role. You can’t offer legal advice; but as a journalist, it’s part of your
responsibility to promote government transparency and facilitate a healthy democracy.
* All tips were gleaned from interviews with: D
​ ave Cuillier​, director of the University of
Arizona School of Journalism; ​Mike Donoghue​, executive director of the Vermont Press
Association and vice-president of the New England First Amendment Coalition; K
​ athy Kiely,​
Press Freedom Fellow for the National Press Club Journalism Institute and journalism lecturer
at the University of New Hampshire; ​Andrew Seaman​, chair of the Society of Professional
Journalists’ Ethics Committee; ​Shannon Shaw Duty​, editor of the tribal newspaper Osage
News and chair of the Native American Journalists Association’s Free Press Committee;
Miranda Spivack,​ Eugene S. Pulliam Distinguished Visiting Professor of Journalism at
DePauw University; ​Lee Van Der Voo​, freelance journalist and author of the now-retired
column Redacted, published by the Oregon-based website Investigate West; and ​Todd
Wallack,​ an investigative reporter with the Boston Globe’s Spotlight team.

