116 East 16th Street, 8th Floor

New York, NY 10003

Tip Sheet — Esther Kaplan, editor, The Investigative Fund
What kinds of stories do you commission?
We seek out reporting on important stories with the potential for social impact. We like to see reporting
plans that are ambitious but realistic, with the potential to expose institutional failures or abuses. If you
already have important sources or documents in hand, that will strengthen your proposal. If your
previous work indicates you’d have the capacity and knowledge base to tackle the story, that helps too.
What makes a story "investigative"?
By investigative we mean enterprise reporting — digging up stories other reporters haven't found yet or
significantly advancing stories that have been covered, but not in depth. Our application calls for
reporters to do a brief analysis of the originality of the story proposal — what has been reported
previously on the topic and how your approach would substantially advance upon what is known. Failing
to take into account important previous reporting is not a good idea.
Who may pitch us?
Anyone can send us a pitch anytime, but it’s best if you have some substantial feature reporting
experience, whether for print, broadcast, or online. We review proposals at our monthly editorial
meeting, and our decision-making process is designed to be informal and supportive. If a project has
potential but we have questions about your track record, your reporting plan or your budget request,
we'll contact you to ask for revisions.
Besides covering reporting costs, what role do you play?
We serve as supervising editors throughout the investigative process — from project concept to story
development to field reporting to placement in a media outlet to editing of drafts. We provide research
assistance and access to expensive databases such as Nexis and Accurint. We also provide fact checking
and legal vetting, as needed. When our stories appear, we assist with publicity work and outreach to
communities of interest to increase each story's impact.
What does the reporter have to promise in return?
We require that you do the reporting outlined in your proposal, stay in regular communication about the
status of your reporting and any reporting roadblocks, submit a draft for editorial review in advance of
submitting to the partner outlet, and facilitate joint oversight with the partner outlet. Any substantive
editorial changes in direction, or a change in the partner outlet, must be made in consultation with our
editors. The Investigative Fund must be credited as a reporting partner upon publication or broadcast.
Do you only commission stories for print?
We commission investigative reporting in any medium — print, online, or broadcast. All of our stories
are published or broadcast in partnership with a media outlet.
How big are your story budgets?
Our support is not designed to replace fees at that host outlet; we expect each outlet to pay our
reporters its standard story fee. On our end, typical budgets for first-time Investigative Fund reporters
range from $3,500 to $10,000 and are based on the submission of a detailed reporting plan and a
budget that estimates reporting time and direct costs associated with the investigative project. Once

we’ve worked successfully with a reporter we consider larger budgets, or sometimes contract reporters
with multistory fellowships.
How do your partnerships work? Do I have to have an assignment to query you?
All of our projects are published in partnership with a print, digital, or broadcast outlet. Reporters often
already have interest from an assigning editor when they query us, but that’s not required; we work
closely with our reporters on story placement and have well-developed partner relationships.
Do you assign stories that won't run in The Nation?
Yes. In fact, the vast majority of Investigative Fund stories appear in other outlets.
I am a reporter based outside of the United States. May I apply?
Yes, absolutely. But our shop produces stories that speak to a U.S. audience and appear in a U.S. media
outlet. A strong applicant will have previously reported feature stories for U.S. outlets.
Beyond The Investigative Fund, where else can I get support for freelance reporting?
Here’s a partial list of alternatives:
Alicia Patterson Foundation (6-month and 12-month fellowships)
www.aliciapatterson.org
Economic Hardship Reporting Project
http://economichardship.org/
Food and Environment Reporting Network
https://thefern.org/report-for-us/
Freelance Investigative Reporters & Editors
http://projectword.org/FIREguidelines
Fund for Investigative Journalism
www.fij.org
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation (health reporting)
http://www.kff.org/mediafellows/
McGraw Fellowship for Business Journalism
http://www.mcgrawcenter.org/the-harold-w-mcgraw-jr-business-journalism-fellowships/
Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting (international reporting)
pulitzercenter.org
University of California – Berkeley, Investigative Reporting Program (annual fellowships)
http://investigativereportingprogram.com/fellowships/
theinvestigativefund.org
queries@theinvestigativefund.org

