How does the McGraw Fellowship work?
We provide grants of up to $5,000 a month for three months. There are no residency requirements
– McGraw Fellows work from their own offices. We accept new applications twice a year; our next
deadlines are June 30th and December 15th. We also consider time-sensitive proposals at any time.
And you don’t have to be a business journalist to apply; our Fellows have a variety of backgrounds.
Who can apply?
Applicants must have at least five years’ experience as a professional journalist. Both freelance
and staff journalists can apply. All media – print, audio, video and digital – will be considered.
What kinds of stories do you support?
We take a broad view on what constitutes a business or economic story. In short, if something or
someone impacts the economy, it’s an economic story. Along with core business issues such as the
challenges of globalization or the debate over what to do about rising inequality, many good
business stories arise from covering other beats such as sports, technology, health care or the
environment. We’re particularly interested in investigative pieces that expose hidden problems or
wrongdoing and enterprise stories that provide strong context and analysis to important issues.
What does the stipend cover?
The stipend is intended to cover travel and research expenses incurred in reporting the stories. In
the case of freelance journalists, a portion can also go to assist with the Fellow’s living expenses.
What role does the McGraw Center play?
In addition to financial support, the McGraw Center provides editorial guidance. We work closely
with Fellows to develop and refine their ideas during the reporting phase, help place the stories
with outlets, and edit drafts. Fellows also have access to the CUNY Graduate School of Journalism
Research Center, which has links to Factiva, Nexis Uni and many other data bases and sources.
Can international journalists apply?
Yes. We’ll consider proposals with a strong U.S. angle from both foreign and American journalists,
as long as the work is published in English in a U.S.-based media outlet.

For more information, go to www.mcgrawcenter.com or contact
Jane.Sasseen@journalism.cuny.edu

