Freelance Investigative Reporters and Editors (FIRE), formerly Project Word, is a program to help freelance
investigative journalists from diverse backgrounds to produce investigations in the public interest. FIRE achieves this mainly
by providing direct reporting services for individual investigative freelancers.
These services are collectively referred to as our Virtual Newsroom. FIRE offers the Virtual Newsroom in collaboration with
the national nonprofit Investigative Reporters and Editors (IRE), which acts as FIRE's fiscal sponsor and contributes research
and training services to the program.
FIRE operates as a nonprofit project of IRE, but raises its own funding. It has relied on contributions from individual donors,
support from the Ford Foundation, and a current two-year grant from the Jonathan Logan Family Foundation.
FIRE operates with complete editorial independence from its funding sources. We do not publish, broadcast, or release
stories in any way—nor assign or initiate stories. The program selects proposals from investigative freelancers, helping their
work appear in various media outlets.
FIRE grew out of the identified needs of freelancers. In 2015, Project Word, as FIRE was then called, released a national
survey, Untold Stories, that found that freelance journalists faced critical challenges when pursuing investigative work.
Based on the survey’s findings, which included solutions recommended by freelancers, FIRE crafted two services for
investigative freelancer journalists: an Editorial Consultancy and a Virtual Newsroom. The latter provides grants as well.
Beyond those direct services, FIRE has three overarching objectives:
•
•
•

To engage the philanthropic community in an effort to ensure that more grants be made available to freelancers in
the future, and in greater amounts, especially stipends to compensate reporting time.
To encourage a transparent exchange between outlets, freelancers, funders, and leaders within the freelance
journalism field to resolve some of the field’s most pressing issues, including indemnification and libel insurance.
To provide a forum for freelance investigative reporters themselves to mitigate the isolation of their work;
communicate and exchange intelligence with one another; and promote the highest standards in the field.

With the new grant from the Jonathan Logan Family Foundation, we are addressing these longer-term goals in 2018 and
2019—as well as the hands-on services of the Virtual Newsroom and Editorial Consultancy.
For the Virtual Newsroom or Editorial Consultancy, applicants must meet two basic criteria, per FIRE Guidelines page:

1) Freelance Investigative Reporters
FIRE exclusively serves freelance investigative journalists—those who are not formally or materially attached to any
newsroom, news site, or outlet. If you are affiliated with an outlet, you are eligible for FIRE services only if the story you are
working on will be placed outside your affiliated outlet.

2) Investigative Stories
A number of organizations already support feature stories and projects, but FIRE strictly supports investigative reporting. We
do not accept or fund proposals for non-investigative features. By definition, investigative reporting uncovers information in
the public interest, usually information that someone is trying to hide. The following three questions should help you
determine whether your proposal is investigative:
•
•
•

Are you doing original reporting, using public records or difficult-to-obtain sources?
Has your reporting turned up anything that might suggest potential damage to the public good in ways that hadn't
been known or understood before?
Have you found evidence that, if sufficiently corroborated, would reveal systemic injustice or damage to the public
good—or corruption, deceit, or abuse by someone in power or a position of authority, who would not want your
story disclosed publicly?

If you can answer yes to all these questions, your reporting proposal is probably investigative—and thus eligible for FIRE
support.

