​Interviewing Tips

​Cheryl W. Thompson
Investigative Correspondent
National Public Radio - NPR
2019
1. Always come to an interview prepared with written questions. You want to focus on
your subject, not think about what question to ask next.
2. Ask “yes” or “no” questions ONLY if you want a “yes” or “no” answer. Otherwise, make
your questions open ended to encourage conversation.
3. Take good notes. Write down the date and time of the interview, where it occurred, etc.
Never rely solely on an audio or video device, cell phone, etc. Transcribe your notes as
soon as the interview is over. Waiting too long could result in you forgetting what was
said in what context.
4. If your subject avoids answering a question, ask it again until you’re satisfied with the
answer.
5. Save the tough questions for later in the interview. You don’t want your subject to shut
you down early.
6. Keep the interview on the record. Don’t let your subjects—particularly public
figures—talk off the record unless there’s a really good reason. Even then, you call the
shots so that you can control the interview.
7. If you must go off the record, make sure you and your subject are clear on the ground
rules. Does “off the record” mean that you can’t use the information or that you can use
it if you get confirmation from someone else? Does “only on background” mean that
you can use the information and attribute it to a source?
8. Try to establish a rapport with your subject to put them at ease. Find a common
denominator. Where did they go to school? What city/state are they from?
9. Never interrupt your subject while they’re talking. Wait at least five seconds after they
pause before asking another question; they may be in the middle of a thought and you
want them to finish. They may say something profound. Pinch yourself on the hand for a
few seconds as a reminder to stay quiet. No one likes awkward silence; it may prompt
your subject to say something else.
10. Try to conduct your interview in person. It’s easy for someone to hang up on you; it’s
harder for them to walk away.

