TIMELESS TIPS
Jim Steele

NEVER ASSUME. Don’t assume what documents may (or may not) be
available to you. Don’t assume who will talk to you. And don’t assume what you think
you already know is accurate. “Never assume” was the first rule I was taught by my first
city editor. He meant it largely that even in the case of the most common names you can’t
assume how they are spelled, but it applies to almost everything we do. It is a rule that I
learn and relearn every day in this business.
ALWAYS GO TO ORIGINAL SOURCES. If possible always review
personally the documents in a court case, regulatory proceeding, or some other official
filing. Don’t rely on the reporting of others to tell you what is in those files. Plus you will
see things they didn’t that will enrich your story. The amount of information you will find
in any major court case or other filing that is publicly available but never becomes
publicly known is staggering.
READ BEFORE INTERVIEWING. Always school yourself in the background
of a subject before interviewing if there is time. Not only do you have more familiarity
with your topic, but you have a better idea of whether the person you later interview
knows what he/she is talking about.
BE WARY OF EXPERTS. Sometimes the most ostensibly knowledgeable
persons don’t know what they are talking about or intentionally mislead journalists to
safeguard their own agendas. No matter how well regarded an expert may be, check out
their facts.
BE SKEPTICAL, NOT CYNICAL. Don’t be taken in by conventional wisdom,
no matter how widespread and accepted as fact it may be. Be especially skeptical of
grand claims by politicians, government officials and some corporate officials who seek
to embellish their own image at the expense of truth.
WRITE EARLY AND OFTEN. With major projects – either long stories or
series – start writing early. Don’t worry about the lead if you’re not sure what it is. But
rough out sections you know will be in your story. You will see what you are missing and
it will also help your conceptualize more of the story. Plus it’s great for your mental
health to get something down in print.

