FINDING, NURTURING, AND PROTECTING SOURCES
Mary Hargrove

SEXUAL ASSAULT VICTIMS

FINDING SEXUAL ASSAULT VICTIMS
1. Review newspaper and broadcast archives locally and nationally.
2. Check county civil and criminal cases, including federal court for sex
trafficking cases.
3. It is best to have a referral. Talk with prosecutors and police sexual assault
investigators. Tell them the reason for your story. Ask them if they will
contact survivors and pass on your email or phone number.
4. Visit with advocacy groups. Ask them to contact survivors who are willing
to talk.
5. Interview Sexual Assault Nurse Examiners. (SANE). These are specially
trained nurses who perform the extensive rape kit exams.
6. Contact legislators who have authored sexual assault legislation. Often
rape survivors help draft these bills.

WHEN INTERVIEWING, POLICE, PROSECUTORS, ADVOCATES, AND NURSES WHO
WORK WITH SEXUAL ASSAULT VICTIMS ASK THEM TO DESCRIBE THEIR JOBS
AND HOW THEY GOT INTO SUCH GRUELING WORK. THEN ASK:
“What case sticks with you the most?” This elicits a strong and poignant response
and at least one specific case. Treat them with the same care you do the victims.
Dealing with the graphic details of hundreds of sex-assault cases is traumatic for
them, too.

1

CONTACTING SEXUAL ASSAULT VICTIMS

1. Offer to interview them in person, by email, on the phone.
2. If they meet with you, let them pick the location – their home, a restaurant,
a friend’s house – somewhere they feel comfortable.
3. If the victim is nervous, suggest she or he bring someone with them to the
interview, especially if they are younger.
4. Tell them you will call them back after the story is written and read back
their quotes and information. That builds trust. Too many stories have
inaccurate information including whether they were raped or sexually
assaulted. Also charges may be dropped or added so check court files
continually if it is a long-running story.
5. Know the difference between sexual assault and rape definitions. They vary
from state to state. Also know the statute of limitations and the penalties.
6. Research the victim’s case before you contact her or him. That will help you
assess how to phrase your questions. Don’t assume facts previously
published are correct.
7. If you have reported on sexual assaults previously, tell the person what you
have written. Refer them to earlier stories.

THE INTERVIEW
1. Record it. Transcribe within 24 hours so you can determine what points
you need to follow up. You will hear things you might have missed
because these are emotional interviews. Then call the person and thank
her/him for their time. They often think of something later that they
want to add.

2

2. Begin the interview discussing a part of their background that is “safe” so
they can talk easily before you get into the difficult questions. E.G.
Where are you from originally? Tell me about your school, your job. Do
you have any pets, children, grandchildren? (Yes, you may end up
interviewing rape victims in their 60s, 70s and 80s or 4, 5 and 6 year olds).
3. Talk with the police and prosecutors first to find out details and tips on
how to approach this victim. Look for particularly sensitive areas such as
families and friends not believing them. It’s called Victim Blaming. If
drinking was involved, survivors often believe they are at fault and are
embarrassed.
4. Ask open-ended questions. NEVER put them on the defensive by
saying, “Why did you wait so long to report?” Instead ask, “Was there
something that made you feel it was a better time to come forward?”
“When you reported it, what did you do to prepare yourself?” Or
“What did you do the day after you reported it?” “How did you feel?”
5. Personal notes by the victim can help shape the narrative. “Did you
keep a diary?” “Did you post on Facebook?” “Would you share
excerpts with me?” The in-the-moment reflections and posts are
powerful and can help you see how the survivor has changed since the
process began.
6. The emotional impact is essential to your story. “When you saw him in
court, how did you react?” “How was your life before you filed
charges?” “Did it change afterwards?”
7. Let the victim participate by offering advice for sexual assault victims.
“What would you tell others who are going through the process?”
Victims generally want to help others avoid trauma. This encourages
them to expand on how their cases were handled.

3

PROTECTING SOURCES AND VICTIMS WITHIN AN
INSTITUTION
1. Make records requests for all sexual assault incident reports over the past
two years. If a worker or victim’s family has tipped you off to a specific
case, that will cover them and provide you with other cases. It can also flag
you to repeat offenders.
2. Talk to former employees who can provide names, dates and details of
incidents that may have been covered up or not reported. Get the former
employee names from news clips, incident reports, current employees, or
outsiders such as inspectors, doctors or social workers you trust who
regularly visit the facility.
3. On visiting days, give your name to family members or support groups. In
the case of juveniles who will be released soon, wait until they are away
from the facility so they will not be threatened or abused for talking while
still inside.
4. Get names of responders as well as victims from ambulance runs, police
calls and county and state inspections at the facilities.

Note: On incidents that should have been reported and weren’t, find out
who else knew about this attack? Ask them if they will give you their contact
information or have them call you. That protects the individual.

4

SEXUAL ASSAULT STATISTICS

STATE ANNUAL CRIME STATISTIC REPORTS. Go back at least 5 years to compare
the data in your own state to see which cities and counties have increased or
decreased reports.
Each state’s website is set up differently. E.G. Google:
Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation (OSBI) annual crime statistics
Oregon state crime statistics
Florida: http://www.fdle.state.fl.us
Note: If the number of rapes in a city or county has decreased over time
that could be good or bad. It may mean that police and prosecutors are
actively investigating. OR it may mean that they are dismissing timeconsuming cases such as “he said-she said” because they don’t want to do
the work, they aren’t trained or they don’t have the staff or money to pursue
them.

2. THE FBI UNIFORM CRIME REPORT
https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2016
This is a state-by-state listing on various crimes, including rape and murder.
Click on the year and the options on crime categories, regions and cities will
appear.
NOTE: In 2013, rape definitions were revised in the UCR. Men were included
for the first time as were some sexually related crimes. So if you use earlier
statistics, be aware why they may vary.

5

Do not compare statistics state by state. Definitions of sexual assault and rape
differ from state to state.
3. CLERY ACT FOR COLLEGES. The Clery Act requires all colleges and
universities that receive federal financial aid to report crimes on campus.
It was updated in 2013 to require separate data on rape and domestic
violence. The new data is released annually by Oct. 1 and covers the last
three years.
4. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS
E.G. IN 2016 The Civil Right office had 350 open civil investigations involving 253
colleges.
NOTE: The Trump administration is revising the standards to offer more
protection for those accused of rape.

ADVOCACY GROUPS
Numerous national rape and sexual assault-related advocacy groups release data
and research studies. However, too many of the statistics are outdated or have
different reference points.
Some include children of all ages mixed in with adult data. Others include just
teenagers and adults. Still others have no children. You need to check what ages
are included, depending on who you are writing about.
Other studies are based on a minimal phone survey. Read the research to
determine how data was collected, how old it is, and if it reflects the person or
group you are writing about.
I recommend research and data by END VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
INTERNATIONAL.
6

Mary Hargrove and Kassie McClung wrote the 5-part series
Shadow Land: How Rape Stays Hidden in Oklahoma in December 2017
To read it, go to readfrontier.org and look in the archives.
Contact: mhargrove5@cox.net

7

