TIPS on story structure and writing for investigations that engage readers
Leslie Eaton/Investigative editor/The Dallas Morning News
leaton@dallasnews.com/@lesliepeaton
Figure out WHAT’S THE POINT? This might be your nut graf, or the thought/emotion you want
readers to take away (in our line of work, that’s usually outrage). Write your point on a sticky
note and put it on your screen. Everything you put in your story should tie back to this point.
This will keep you from writing, “Here’s another random thing I learned about my topic.” Which
is an invitation for readers to tune out.
What if you have TWO POINTS? Like, this terrible injustice is happening and officials are
covering it up? Consider splitting it into two stories.
Think about the BRAN MUFFIN. That’s the nuts and bolts most readers will skim, or use as an
excuse to stop reading: How Medicaid works. The difference between a jail and a prison.
Accounting principles for pension funds (or for anything). Can you explain it through graphics?
Put it in a sidebar? Do an explainer video?
Is there a narrative hidden in your story? Or a MYSTERY? The surest way to keep readers is to
make them want to find out what comes next. Consider leading them through your investigative
process. Or tease with a question you don’t answer until the end.
Try to tell your story in CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER. Do not jump around in time. If you start
with a thrilling scene, readers will usually accept ONE leap back in time. But no more.
Avoid hopping back and forth between sources, especially experts or anyone who’s not the focus
of the piece. Put each person’s material in ONE PLACE. You might find you need more voices!
When I find myself flailing with a story, I turn to the standard structure I picked up at The Wall
Street Journal. Obviously every piece is different, but it’s a starting place. Much is cribbed from
an memo written by the great Mitch Pacelle, a longtime editor on Page 1 of the Journal.
Including this excellent advice:
“The first 6 to 8 paragraphs are in many ways the most important. If you get those right, the rest
of the writing will come more easily. Think of the story structure as coat hanger, with the hook
being the first half-dozen paragraphs. If the hook is messed up, the story won’t work.”
LEDE: can be an anecdote but for most publications it needs to be fast -- no more than three or
four grafs. Surprises are excellent. The idea is that your lede should reach up off the phone

screen, grab people by the ears and make them read your story. So avoid rambling scene-setters.
If you have a great or startling finding, consider beginning with that -- make your nut your lede.
NUTGRAF If you can’t summarize it in a sentence, you need to rethink.
Sometimes the nut is followed by a couple of bolstering (and very fast) examples, which you are
just ticking off and will return to below. Or your findings, aka BULLET POINTS. Often
followed by a powerful quote.
SO WHAT, aka SCOPE AND SWEEP: Here’s why it matters. Here’s why readers should care.
Here’s how it fits into bigger trends in politics, society, your community. “Across the state and
across the nation the same crazy thing is happening…”
TBS: Someone disagrees, or responds, or you acknowledge that Mr. X’s mother loves him. Or
that the data is incomplete. Doing this makes your stories stronger.
REPLY: Your strongest response to the TBS argument (Mr. X is still a revolting toad).
BEGIN YOUR CHRONOLOGY HERE.
If you can’t tell a story over time, but have several different examples -- six voters around your
area, five different communities with sewer problems, three small businesses in crisis -- try to
make each one make a DISTINCT POINT. Keep in mind that most readers hate repetition and
have short attention spans.
CONCLUSION/KICKER, which ideally goes back to the lede. Sometimes a quote -- but not
always. If you have told a tale, you may want to fleck at what could happen in the near future.
Some final thoughts from Mitch: “Don’t show bias by giving the last word to one side or the
other on a controversial subject. Don’t introduce a new talking head for that last quote. Don’t
introduce a new aspect or angle on the topic.”
Some final thoughts from me: Edit out the passive voice by searching for is, are, was, were;
search ly to find adverbs and strengthen the verbs instead. Slay jargon.
Most important, CUT YOUR STORY!! For readers, shorter is almost always better. Do it
yourself, so your editor won’t have to. If you get stuck, look at every third graf, or every third
sentence. Can it go?

