Self­editing: The final steps to getting published or broadcast
Amy Fiscus, national security editor, The New York Times
amy.fiscus@nytimes.com, @amyfiscus
Spell check
1. Yes, this gets its own category. And extra bolding.
Proofreading
1. Proofread on paper or in a preview screen. The idea is just to look at the story in a
different way — even just a new font changes how your brain is looking at the story.
2. Read your stuff out loud. Even if it embarrasses you. Or if you can, have someone else
read it out loud to you.
3. Read once just to look for errors, particularly small ones. Readers hate them the most,
right up there with blind sources. They signify a larger lack of attention to detail, and if
readers can’t trust you to get a name right, how can they trust you on any other facts?
(This is also why spell checking is so important.) Look for:
a. Millions/billions errors
b. All proper names — not just people’s names, but titles, organizations, etc.
c. Double check any number
d. Any time you see two numbers, do something to them. Make sure the math
works.
4. Step away from your work, even if for just a walk around the newsroom. If you have five
minutes, take it. Ten, take it. You’ll shake up your brain a bit and you’ll be surprised at
how often you come back to your work with a fresh idea, no matter how much time
you’ve spent with the story.
5. Is your story a joy to read, as it should be, instead of a chore? Ask yourself a series of
questions:
a. Did I get to the point quickly enough? (Hint: You almost always haven’t.)
b. Are my quotes too long? Do they spend time explaining facts, which are better
paraphrased, rather than showcasing the source’s point or original thought or
memorable exclamation?
c. Is my story too long? Do I really need all those sections? Is there a point where a
reader is going to click elsewhere, or set down the paper? Do I have the right mix
of news, context and background, or not enough of one or too much of another?
Think of it as a souffle: Stories have to have the right ingredients or they will fall.
d. Read once solely to make sure every sentence relates to the theme.
Trimming
1. Edit once to cut 10 percent of the words, ideally without losing any content. The act of
reading every sentence to look for something to cut also puts you in a different frame of
mind and can inject a fresh perspective.
2. Kill your darlings. I mean it. Even editors have to abide by this one.

3. Rewrite if needed, don’t just cut words or phrases. Take the few minutes to turn that
16­word sentence into an 11­word one with a little rewriting, rather than just cutting an
adjective or two.
Fact checking
1. Checklists! Print one out and keep it posted at your desk. Andy’s Wisconsin Center for
Investigative Journalism has a great one, as does NPR.
Deadline
1. Hit your deadline. Give your editor and everyone who comes after you in the process the
time to do their jobs to the best of their ability. They have already extended you the same
courtesy.
2. Try to leave room for unexpected last­minute challenges like a source calling with new
facts that change your story, or a senior editor asking for a different direction.

