IRE annual conference, Orlando — June 15, 2018
Storytelling Track: Self-editing moves you can start today
Andy Hall, executive director, Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism,
ahall@wisconsinwatch.org

Tell us a story: Tips for pitching
Know the audience. ​The Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism, for example, produces
stories about government integrity and quality of life in Wisconsin, written for a statewide
audience. Broad topics include the economy, education, environment, justice system and health.
We report on systems that are not working, and on potential solutions.
What’s the story?​ A story is not a topic, like “the toxicity of fire retardants.” A story can be
expressed as a declarative sentence: “Wisconsin furniture manufacturers are soaking couches in
toxic chemicals without telling people.” A topic requires inspiration; a pitch requires reporting.
Speak with humans.​ The trouble with investigative work, of course, is that you don’t know
what you’re going to find until you do the work, and if you’re a freelancer, you don’t get paid for
anything until somebody approves the story. But you still have to do enough reporting
beforehand to be able to say what you think the lede is or might be. That reporting usually can’t
be done entirely on the internet.
Why should we care?​ Use all the same tools you’d use in a story — stats, quotes, vivid
descriptions. Who is affected?
What sources will you need?​ For proof, context, color. Are they possible, probable or already
in the bag? If you’re pitching audio or video, are they good talkers?
What are the unknowns?​ Does the story hinge on getting one cagey guy with no address to talk
on the record? Might we have to sue an agency for key documents? Does the story require data
analysis? How much work will you have to do before you’ll know for sure whether you have a
story?
How much work will this be?​ What’s your expected turnaround time, length? Any
sidebars/extra features? Multimedia? Editors will want to know how much your story will cost
them and when they will be able to publish it.

Do you have the skills?​ What kind of help will you need? For a story that is worth doing, we
need to know what those gaps are.
What’s been done on this subject?​ Lots of people pitch juicy, well-thought-out stories that
others have already done. Where did your idea come from? How does your story advance the
state of knowledge in this area? What’s the likelihood you’ll get scooped before you finish?
Don’t be boring.​ Really, this should be rule No. 1. Your pitch is a chance to show off your
writing as well as your thinking skills. What’s interesting about this story? Surprising?
More resources.​ Radio people often work with lots of freelancers and are nice and explicit about
what they want. The lessons transfer to other media well. Marketplace submissions and pitches
https://www.marketplace.org/submissions-and-pitches​. Fact-checking guidelines from the
Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism
https://docs.google.com/document/d/14scpOwr7ZepIAv14V6ilbFAzXX-yeywSWTmvvMuWH5
g/edit​ and — to make sure you haven’t forgotten something — Story release checklist from the
Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1AVzbEALIdtuIg6rRbW47cN_XRhXBM20KXMN
6egsiTTE/edit?usp=sharing

