The Rolling Investigation
Mark Mazzetti, ​Washington​ ​investigative correspondent, New York Times @MarkMazzettiNYT
Jeremy Rogalski, ​investigative reporter, KHOU-TV @jrogalskiKHOU
Ziva Branstetter, ​senior editor, Reveal @zivabranstetter
The rolling investigation is a classic form of investigative reporting. While it’s important to be
nimble and follow the story where it takes you, preparation and coordination is still essential to
creating rolling investigations with impact. Here are top tips for how to stay in front of the rolling
investigation.

In general ...
Hoard at your own risk​: The key to big, sprawling investigations is to share information
relentlessly. Use safe channels to communicate. A piece of information that isn’t shared among
a team could be the competition’s next big scoop.
When you hit a dry hole, stop drilling​: Be ruthless about cutting off areas of reporting that are
producing nothing. Be flexible about shifting resources to potentially more productive areas.
(But, see Tip #5)
Past Isn’t Necessarily Prologue: ​There is no one template for how an investigation should
play out. Be wary of any attempts to predict where things will go based on what’s happened in
the past. History is a good guide, but it can also badly distort strategy for an investigation.
Competition Can Be Your Friend:​ It’s always bad to get beaten by a competitor, but the worst
response is to dismiss the competition’s reporting as hyped or irrelevant. Go through all stories
and mine them for new leads. There can be a small detail at the bottom of a competitor’s story
that could become your next big story.
Remember Tip #2? Don’t Follow it off a Cliff: ​Make sure you occasionally go back to the
areas that you once deemed “dry holes.” New information may emerge over time that becomes
the missing piece on an angle of investigation you once dismissed.
Hold on to the scraps: ​Make sure that what ends up cut out of a story is saved in other places.
What seem like insignificant leftovers today could become the beginnings of a blockbuster.
Plant a flag:​ One reason to go with what you have now vs. waiting — provided it’s bulletproof,
vetted and meets editorial standards — is to stake a claim to a story or part of the story. The

more you follow up and stay on the story, the more you brand yourself as the reporter that
sources should go to with additional information.
Make sure to recap: ​Don’t assume people have read all parts of your investigation. Write a
“key points” box or insert that summarizes your findings so far.
Push impact:​ Call lawmakers, public officials, targets, advocates and anyone else who might
be moved to take action due to your findings. Make sure they see your work and ask whether
they plan any action in response. Write and regularly update an impact blog if your investigation
sparks impact on multiple fronts.
Calendar your follows:​ Be sure to mark key upcoming events, including court hearings,
anniversaries and any other dates that are relevant for potential follow ups.

Types of rolling investigations
Breaking news:
Immediately file open records requests, get them “cooking in the oven.”
Identify other data sources online for quick turns (i.e. open data portals, court data, regulatory
inspection reports, policies, procedures, etc.)
Develop/expand your newsroom’s data library as a go-to tool. (i.e. data dump of five years of
county criminal records, city building inspection violations, health department inspection
database, etc.)
To use a baseball metaphor-swing for the fences to hit the “home run,” but be satisfied with
hitting quick singles. Singles score runs. Runs win games.
Create resources for your team: timelines, source lists, organized and shareable folders etc.
Non-Breaking News:
Consider building a “campaign” about your investigation. Brand it. Make it memorable, but not
hokey. There are reasons why NFL players wearing pink and the ice bucket challenge were a
success.
Identify stakeholders and social influences early and get them on board. They can be your PR
machine.

Be strategic about your launch date. It can be as simple as City Council meets Wednesday,
we’ll break the story at 6pm and 10pm the night before. Now you have a built-in follow up when
everyone is talking about it.
Write a “prequel” or survey story that casts a wide net over the issue and then circle back to the
issues you’ve raised.
Tell your audience what you know and what you don’t know. Tell them what information you
need. Create multiple channels for people to reach you.

