Josh Hinkle
KXAN-TV (NBC Austin)
512-934-3894 (m)
Josh.Hinkle@kxan.com
PANEL: Tapping Your Community to Enhance Your Investigation
TOPIC: Billing Complaint Stories
Crowdsourcing stories can be very effective in proving to your community that you’re
here to help. When viewers can take part in the process, there might be more interest in
the project and definitely an expectation of results. Pre-planning and organization are
key! During our “TxTag Troubles” project, here are some of the points we considered:
•
•
•
•

•

•

•
•

•

Monitor viewer/reader tips/complaints for repetitive billing issues or trends.
Narrow down the most common issues to gather specific examples effectively.
Allow yourself plenty of time to crowdsource (to get a broad scope of the issue):
Ask for viewer/reader bills – get them to scan the actual bills, including account
numbers and information an agency would need to verify/identify individuals.
o Consider a separate, secure upload page – and have your corporate
attorney look over any disclaimers waiving responsibility.
o Assure the viewer/reader you will keep their private information secure but
that you may be reaching out with questions.
o Consider an additional comment section so they can be more specific.
Organization is important. Make folders for each type of billing issue. Create a
spreadsheet to easily identify people/contact info when you need sources or to
follow up with any resolutions/updates.
Consider briefly tell the billing agency what you’re up to and that you’ll be
sending them the bills to resolve. If they refuse, use that in your coverage and as
leverage to get a resolution later.
Be sure to market your crowdsourcing. Consider all methods – on-air, social, etc.
Promoting this element will be just as important as promoting the actual story.
Remind viewers/readers about your crowdsourcing campaign often. Make it
simple (like “I Want Answers” or “Send Your Bills”). Too many details may seem
confusing, especially in the marketing.
Report your results and keep updating them. Even after the crowdsourcing is
done, keep reminding viewers/readers about the campaign as you do followups.
They should know you’re working to help them. Good luck!

For more ideas, check out our project at: https://story.kxan.com/txtag-troubles/

