Here are some tips based on work by the Listening Post Collective, a national engaged
journalism project that seeks to establish ongoing dialogue with communities to both make
sure they access important journalism, and have a way to share their experiences and
expertise with journalists. If you’d like to get some help starting an engaged journalism
project, or talk about some existing efforts, drop me a note at jhardman@internews.org. We
also have a free playbook that can help guide your work.
Some tips on establishing a two-way news conversation with your community:
Visit and listen. Go for a walk in the community, but leave your notebook or microphone behind.
Pay attention to where people hang out and how information is shared in popular locations like
churches, grocery stores, libraries, community centers, and government offices. Sit down at a
restaurant, strike up a conversation, look for local signs posted in the neighborhood. Search for
community bulletin boards. The point of all of this is to capture the daily flow of information.
Establish relationships with people in the community who share your vision for sharing
information. Learn from them how best to connect with community members.
A more official approach. To get a deeper understanding of how local information flows, craft an
information needs survey to explore how people access and share information, which local sources
they trust, and which issues they feel most passionate about. Find a partner in your community to
help you collect the data, and share the results with them.
Craft questions. Make sure you set aside some quality time to focus on what you really want to
know from the community you’re engaging. Your goal is to make questions simple, inclusive, and
relevant to the experience of residents. You’re going for, “What’s your experience?” as opposed to,
“What do you think?”
Engage with community members. Now it’s time to get back out into the neighborhood and ask
your questions. Get creative, get offline, and make sure people have a way not only to answer your
questions, but also to let you know how best to get back in touch with them. We’ve had success with
public signs with questions on them and a phone number in New Orleans.
Create content. The questions, comments, and experiences you are hearing from your community
are a great source of reporting ideas. Use community feedback to identify new leads or new angles
on trending issues -- or ones lacking media attention -- and produce items for your outlet that speak
to the concerns and questions you are hearing.
Keep the conversation going. Stay in touch with your citizen networks. Make it a priority to
provide them with information on the topics they said mattered most. Providing feedback to your
participants is a key step to building trust and sustaining a conversation. The community needs to
see that their contributions are utilized.

Follow up with especially active participants, get a coffee with them, and establish their interest
in being an ongoing source. They can help you expand your project and alert you to important
things happening in the community.
Be patient. Community engagement doesn’t happen overnight — it takes relationship building,
trust, consistency, and time. Not everything is going to work, so don’t be afraid to experiment and
try new creative ways to get information out into your community.

