Tipsheet on crowdsourcing—Working draft
Sent for IRE 2018, Orlando, Fla.—I’m working on tidying this up,
reorganizing and adding more examples. Have suggestions or
comments? Let me know!
How we do what we do: Tipsheet on crowdsourcing
Jeanne Pinder, ClearHealthCosts – jeanne@clearhealthcosts.com, 914450-9499
What we do and how we do it
We’re bringing transparency to health care by telling people what stuff
costs.
We do this using shoe-leather reporting (a provider survey of cash prices);
data journalism (telling what Medicare pays for procedures, the closest thing
to a fixed or benchmark price in the marketplace); and crowdsourcing –
asking our communities to share their marketplace experiences on our
interactive widget.
That interactive widget lives on our home site and also on partner sites
(here’s an example).
In this way, we’re building a community-created guide to health prices – an
admittedly imperfect and incomplete data set, but a rich one that gives
people tons of actionable information. Via the widget, people can share and
search prices. We use their information to make great journalism.
We also have a collection of evergreen stories (“10 questions to ask to find
out what stuff costs in advance,” “How to read an explanation of benefits,”
“How to argue a bill”) that help people navigate through the marketplace.
Read more about our work here and here and here, where there are links to our
work; here’s our press page.
The health care marketplace is full of people working hard to keep pricing
murky. But journalists – and the internet – don’t like it when people lie and
keep secrets.

For more examples of crowdsourcing, and more references, take a look at
this “Guide to Crowdsourcing.” I was one of three co-authors of this 2015
piece for the Tow Center on Digital Journalism at Columbia University.
Also on this page are several related blog posts from the Tow Center’s blog.
Choose tools carefully – and yes, you can roll your own
After our initial quickie pilot, we started out thinking that we wanted to do
this in Screendoor, which gives a great framework for crowdsourcing. But at
that time, Screendoor was taking only non-profits. Google forms weren’t
specific enough. We had an initial form that was very stripped-down, built
by our partners at WNYC, but we didn’t think it was robust enough.
So we went ahead and built our own interactive software, something like
Screendoor only specialized to our needs.
This we did with our partners KQED Public Radio in San Francisco and
KPCC/Southern California Public Radio in Los Angeles, with a prototype
grant from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation.
Why did we need this? Well, for example, medical billing runs on a system
of numeric and alphanumeric codes that specify, for example, which of the
dozens of MRI procedures you’re talking about, or which of the many kinds
of mammogram. So to get an apples-to-apples comparison on pricing, you
have to know: is it a 72148 MRI or a 72156?
Screendoor since has evolved to take for-profits, and we talked to them a bit,
but their tool does not meet our needs. ProPublica and other news
organizations use them.
There are other tools – simple Google forms, Wufoo and so on. That’s a lot
easier than building your own.
We collect data this way because we want the data to be structured – rather
than an unruly string of comments and emails, or shared EOB documents,
which is basically very hard to search and to sort (and problematic for
privacy). We want our community to see their data in context with others’.
And we want them to be able to search even if they don’t want to share. (We

get about 20 searches for every share on the widget. Sometimes more.) It’s
like Kayak for health care! OK, the data set is imperfect, but still.
We did have naysayers who told us we couldn’t build our own software and
embed it easily on others’ sites. That turns out not to be true.
Other thoughts:
• Making a clear ask is important.
• Making it easy for people to reach us is paramount -- they can reach
us by sending us things on the widget, emailing us, calling us,
stopping us on the street, buttonholing us at a party.
• We repeated the URL, the email address and the voicemail
everywhere -- every TV segment (we gave away precious seconds
of air time to let people write down the number), every story. In a
left-hand rail, embedded in the story, at the bottom – so when
people got done reading or watching, and were moved to action, our
call to action was right there.
• The NOLA.com stories referred people to WVUE, and vice versa.
This way we were introducing each partner's audience to the others.
• Responding as quickly as possible to our community members has
been a top priority. If they send us a price via the widget, or email
us or leave us a voicemail, we respond.
• Thanking people for helping is polite.
• This is a very emotionally laden issue for many people -- they've
called us "extraordinary" and "awesome" and "genius" for tackling
this topic. We're sensitive to what they're going through.
• We got a lot of wannabe "Deep Throat" contacts. Not all of them
panned out. But there were a bunch.
Responding this way can be labor-intensive -- but it brings us a ton of
community buzz. We could tell that people were talking about us in the
community, at the kitchen table, to their friends. They would say things in
their comments (“We always enjoy watching ‘Cracking the Code’” or “I
heard about this from a friend. I have a horrible story.”).
One other big takeaway: We have done a ton of work by collecting prices
first -- before asking people to help us by reporting their experiences. That
has made a huge difference. They know we're asking them to help us solve
this problem, and they're emotionally invested in it -- because they've

experienced these problems themselves, and wish to join hands with us to
help others.
Also, if people don't want to share their prices, they can still interact with us
by searching for prices, or commenting on Facebook, or commenting on the
story, or any other means of interacting.
What we thought about when building our software
The design thinking that went into building our crowdsourcing software
includes some basic assumptions.
First, we made all the shared data publicly visible by default, rather than
insisting on pre-moderating. Our communities know more than we do about
a lot of things, and we join hands with them in this act of co-creation. Also,
in the spirit of crowdsourcing, we trust our communities to tell us plainly
what they know -- and we don't believe there are a lot of people out there
who want to lie to us about their mammogram costs.
We did make the widget software with an automatic email notification of
each share. So the shares are visible by default -- and I get an email alerting
me to the share. If I need to ask a follow-up question, that's easily done via
email: Usually I make suggested wording for an email and send it to our
partner newsrooms, because that follow-up needs to come from, say, WVUE
Fox 8 Live, and not from ClearHealthCosts. The community member doesn't
know us -- they know WVUE and shared their experiences there, so having
a response from the unknown entity ClearHealthCosts would be baffling.
(We know -- we tried.)
We also answer emails, even with a "thanks for sharing – we’ll be in touch if
we need more."
We try to be present on Facebook when a post goes up to take part in the
conversation, but FB by its very nature makes it both hard and easy to
converse with people. If they’re not there when you’re there, it can be a very
short conversation.
Facebook Live, we had some that were really successful and drove a lot of
views; others not so much. Commenting in the Live comment stream had
some resonance.

We also respond to voicemails by calling people back. This proved to be
incredibly time-consuming, but pure gold in many ways:
--We got terrific audio, which we used in our news pieces
--We could tell when people called that we were having impact in a
community that usually doesn't get asked to contribute.
--We knew that picking up the phone at the end of a segment on the 10
o’clock news was easier for many people than clicking through the share
boxes on the widget
Don’t be afraid to make mistakes and iterate
We used our knowledge of health-care pricing to make a sturdy framework
for the data to live in. This evolved over time: Our first pilot attempts were
riddled with mistakes, and we learned from them. For example:
1. We first asked “how much did your mammogram cost?” This is
impermissibly imprecise; there are at least a dozen different mammograms,
and comparing apples to apples is important. So in later iterations, we
classified not just by words, but also by the 5-digit HCPCS coding system,
which powers billing throughout the health care system.
2. We started out with an open text field for “provider name.” That brought
all sorts of heartache: “NYU hospital” “NYU Tisch” “Tish Langone”
“NYU” and multiple other variations in the pilot led us to a better
mousetrap: We’re using an autocomplete pulldown menu powered by the
Google Places API to get uniform provider names. (Remind me to tell you
about the Google speed bump on usage.)
3. We started out cautiously, asking people for their email addresses so we
could contact them. We later added a place for their phone number – and
also a way for them to upload their explanation of benefits, to speed our
reporting. We had initially been cautious about that, expecting that people
would not want to do that for privacy reasons. But we urge them to black out
any identifying details, and pledge over and over again to protect their
privacy. We are getting right around 50 percent who send their very personal
explanation of benefits.

4. The assumption that “people won’t do that” needs to be tested every time.
Our communities have been very candid with us about deeply personal
things.
5. Not everyone who shares something will want to go on the air, in the
paper, whatever. But when they reach out to us, and we reach back to them,
we are forging a deep and lasting bond with them. We heard from some
people things like: “I have been a critic in the past as to some of NOLA’s
articles but I give them a 100% on this important subject. We need more
articles like this to identify how problematic the delivery of health services
is!”
Verification
We ask people to fill in the forms on our widget to help fill out our database,
and also to give us their email and phone numbers, and to send supporting
documents (explanation of benefits, bill, etc.).
If we see anything that raises a question, we follow up with them, if they left
contacts. If they entered errant data into the fields, we correct it if their
documents support a change. If not, we leave as is.
Before we use them in a story, we ask if they’re willing to go on the record,
or on camera, or both. We also verify – not only with supporting documents,
but also backup details.
Quantity, or measuring success
More is good, but we measure our success not just in the number of shares
we get. We also think it’s important to note that we were instrumental in
passing legislation.
So the question “how many shares did you get?” tells only part of the story.
We’d like to be measuring better in terms of things like starting
conversations, creating meaningful institutional change in places like
hospitals, etc. So far that’s a dream.
Attention to detail: Language matters
We say “share” and not “submit.”

We talk about “building a community-created guide to health costs.”
We say over and over “we pledge to protect your privacy.”
Talking to people who are Not Like Us, or class issues
One big issue: We heard from a lot of people as we launched this project that
“nobody shops for health care” or “nobody will talk publicly about such
personal things.”
Nothing could be further from the truth: People look for better prices on
health care a lot. They really want to talk about this. They feel deep injustice
and true physical hurt over this. They view us as their gladiators, righting
wrongs in their name.
We’re also pretty sure that many of the people who tell us “nobody shops for
health care” have themselves never done this. It’s a class issue in many
ways: If smart, fairly privileged journos are not aware of the breadth and
scope of people’s pain, and are not aware of how much we are helping
people struggling with health costs, they will be less inclined to write about
it.
In other words: If you don’t struggle to pay for health care, that doesn’t
mean that your community doesn’t. The more you listen, the more you’ll
learn.
This is clearly true for any kind of crowdsourcing.
We heard from people who said things like “I’m not privy to the internet, but
I want you to have my bills. How do I get them to you?” and “Some
friends asked me to send you these attached EHBs, as they don’t have
internet access and they’re not able to enter the info on the online forms. ...
On behalf of everyone, we greatly appreciate your research and attention to
this matter. We hope your coverage will result in policy changes that will
make health care costs more transparent, uniform and accessible for all.”
We’re really excited to be talking to people who we may not normally reach.
That’s how we learn.

This recent piece in the Columbia Journalism Review talks about class and
journos: How journalism got out of touch with the people it covers, and how
we need to make sure we are taking into account the experiences and
narratives of people who are Not Like Us.
Poverty serves to silence voices that we wish to hear. If we set aside our
preconceived notions and ask people who are struggling to pay, they will tell
us things. For example;
• People who are on Medicaid truly care about health costs
• So do people on Medicare
• With our information, we can help underserved communities and
learn more about their concerns on health care – and establish a
relationship that will help us report on other issues
• Also interesting: well-to-do or wealthy people get really upset when
they feel like their pockets are being picked
Know your audience, or Mars and Venus
Women care a lot about health costs – generally much more than men do.
Women make or influence 80-90 percent of health purchases in the U.S.
This is not a sexist or gendered view. This is what the data says.
Think about it: Women generally own reproductive health. They often own
pediatricians’ appointments and elder care. Women nag their spouses
(whether they are husbands, wives, boyfriends, girlfriends or none of the
above) about getting their prescriptions filled, or getting that MRI.
It took us a while to understand that many of the people who were
dismissive of our work would say things like “I haven’t been to the doctor in
12 years” or “My wife does alla that.” They tended to be guys.
Other broad swaths of the population with a deep interest in health costs:
•
•
•
•

LGBTQ people have very difficult challenges in access to health care
People of color often also see challenges that white people don’t see
Non-native speakers of English, same
Vulnerable populations, same

• Chronically ill people commonly have thousands of dollars in out-ofpocket expenses
Disability or chronic illness plays a huge role here. A lot of people are
going through things that you can’t see – emotional stuff, chronic illness, the
“invisible” disabilities that change people’s lives. Be aware of these things,
and open to learning.
Have suggestions or comments? Let me know!
How we do what we do: Tipsheet on crowdsourcing
Jeanne Pinder, ClearHealthCosts – jeanne@clearhealthcosts.com, 914450-9499

