IRE18 INVESTIGATING GUNS
GUN THEFT AND CRIME
BRIAN FRESKOS, THE TRACE
Slides
● Gun theft is a two-part puzzle
○ Part One: Gun is stolen
○ Part Two: Gun is recovered
● Serial numbers are key for linking the two parts together
○ Serial numbers are not unique, but can be duplicated across makes.
○ Cops can confuse serial numbers with patent numbers, lot numbers and
part numbers. So be careful when working with data
○ Michigan State Police Firearms Identification Field Guide​ is a good
resource for understanding gun identification
● Missing Pieces data
○ Contains data on guns reported stolen to and/or recovered by more than
1,000 police departments
○ Example public records request
■ If you can be more specific, less generic, do it, and cite precisely
where the records are held
● The police department’s policy manual will often contain
information about how firearms are logged
■ If the request is denied, carefully review the statute cited
● Illinois inserted “serial numbers” ​into statute exempting
private information from release
○ Once you have the data, standardize makes
■ NCIC Code Manual 2017
■ Contains Gun Make Codes
○ See if individual records indicate whether a gun was stolen and recovered
■ Often a “Recovered” status means the gun was lost or stolen
■ May indicate that it was stolen in the Property Description column
○ Match make/serial number pairs between stolen and recovered records
■ Denver Case -- Use case numbers to request police reports
○ Police reports can help identify potential human sources
● ATF Data Page​ is another good resource for exploring gun theft. Every year the
bureau provides annual summaries on lost and stolen guns
○ Here is the 2017 summary
○ If you go onto the trace summary page, scroll to the bottom for data on
FFL lost/stolen guns that were subsequently recovered and traced.

GUNS AND PUBLIC HEALTH: FINDING THE DATA, IDENTIFYING TRENDS AND
TELLING THE STORY
KATHLEEN MCGRORY, TAMPA BAY TIMES
● A growing number of physicians are calling on policymakers to view gun
violence ​as a public health issue
● Published research is lacking, but that may soon change
● Data is available that can help you identify trends on the national, state and local
levels
○ CDC WISQARS
○ State vital statistics data
○ Hospital discharge data (maintained at the state level)
■ Use ​ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes​ to identify firearm-related injuries
■ NOTE: This data excludes people who died and didn’t go to the
hospital
○ Medical examiners data
● Possible trends to look for:
○ Geographic
○ Demographic (i.e. age/gender/race)
○ Unintentional/assault/self injury
○ Type of firearm (the hospital discharge data includes this, but isn’t always
precise)
○ How gunshot injuries compare to other injuries and causes of death
○ Trends tied to changes in public policy
● Other records can help tell the story
○ Newspaper clips/ published reports (useful for getting names)
○ Police reports
○ Court records
○ Autopsy reports
● Some tips
○ Challenge your sources to go beyond political rhetoric
○ Don’t forget your humanity. Data and policy analysis can be illuminating,
but ​this is a story about people​.
■ The Dart Center for Trauma and Journalism publishes ​guidelines
on interviewing trauma victims​. Read them.

GUNS, GUN LAWS AND GRIEF: COVERING THE AFTEREFFECTS
OF A MASS SHOOTING
KRISTIN HUSSEY, FREELANCE
The aftermath - legislation, studies, reports
● How ​Connecticut’s gun laws changed​ after Sandy Hook
○ Detailed resources for federal laws and statutes in every state at ​Giffords
Law Center​ and ​NRA ILA
● Sandy Hook Advisory Commission​ spent two years studying school
safety/design, gun violence and mental health. These documents are a treasure
trove of information.
○ Meeting agendas, minutes, testimony transcripts, videos, reports,
recommendations
■ This Connecticut state link may not work after January 2019, when
a new governor comes into office.
■ The pdf documents are publicly available on DocumentCloud.
■ One of the 100+ documents: ​School Recovery presentation​, from
Sandy Hook Advisory Commission
The federal law that prohibits most product-liability lawsuits against gun companies
● Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act
○ Passed in 2005
● Sandy Hook families sued​ the gunmaker, wholesaler and dealer in 2014, ​taking
a novel approach in order to challenge the PLCAA shield law​.
● The suit was dismissed in 2016; ​families appealed to the Connecticut Supreme
Court​. ​The Court’s decision is pending​.
● Gun Laws: Detailed resources for federal laws and statutes in every state at
Giffords Law Center​ and ​NRA ILA
Other helpful resources:
National Shooting Sports Foundation​ - gun industry trade association based in
Newtown, Conn. since the 1970s. In 2016, the NSSF spent more on lobbying than the
NRA, ​per OpenSecrets.org​.
Mother Jones mass shooting database
Washington Post police shooting database
Washington Post school shooting database
NYT Six Stories & Charts to Help You Better Understand Gun Violence in the US
https://dartcenter.org/topic/homicide-mass-shooting
https://ire.org/blog/ire-news/2017/10/02/resources-covering-mass-shootings/

http://www.npscoalition.org/school-violence
Journalist self-care tips from​ the Dart Center for Journalism & Trauma at Columbia
University
Questions?
Cheryl W. Thompson,​ The Washington Post and The George Washington University
cheryl.thompson@washpost.com​ | @cherylwt
Brian Freskos,​ The Trace
bfreskos@thetrace.org​ |​ 919-522-6354 ​|​ @brianfreskos
Kathleen McGrory,​ Tampa Bay Times
kmcgrory@tampabay.com​ | 727-580-4614 | @kmcgrory
Kristin Hussey,​ Freelance
khussey1@gmail.com​ | 917-533-4628 | ​@kristinhussey1

