No surprises: Transparency and the Art of the Investigative Interview
Candid and unconventional advice from two reporters on how to interview sources who’ve suffered
trauma and officials who fear exposure.
Tips from T. Christian Miller and Karen de Sá
•

Ground Rules. Start every conversation — including with media savvy people — by spelling out
what you mean by on-the-record, on background, not for attribution, on deep background, off-therecord. A source relationship is a verbal contract. You want all parties clear on the expectations of
that contract. In being explicit, you will impress some who see it as a mark of your commitment to
be transparent and ethical.
Term

Meaning

On-the record

You can report everything persons says.

On background, not for attribution,
Chatham House rules (UK)

You can report what a person says, but you cannot identify the
person

On deep background, off the record,
Lobby Terms (UK)

You cannot report what a person says or identify the person.
You can use the information to conduct further reporting.

•

•

•

Verbal Contract. Since a source relationship is a contract, that means you and the source have
responsibilities to each other. The most important of those is that you are providing anonymity in
exchange for their truth and candor. If a source lies to you, or publicly back tracks or impugns
your story after publishing, you are absolutely within your right to expose the source since the
source broke the contract with you.
Off the Record: As a matter of practice for any long term investigations (longer than say a
month), I generally start conversations off the record right away. I want the source to be as candid
and comfortable as possible in talking with me. I know that I am going to return to the source at
least once, and probably multiple times. And in the end, I am going to ask to put some stuff on the
record. In all the times I have done this, I have only failed once to get at least some stuff on the
record.
Exception: The exception to this rule is the subject of the investigation. You go off the record
with the people you are investigating at your peril. You don’t want to be put in a position where
they say something revealing or impolitic, and you cannot report it without damaging your
credibility. I have, on occasion, violated this advice when I believed that I had the chance to
convince the subject to talk with me on the record.

Beginning-stage
•
•

•

•

Once you establish early ground rules, note them in a prominent way in your notes. It’s easy to
forget early agreements you made if you come back months later.
If you are talking off the record, make it clear to sources, if you can without upending the talks,
that you will be revisiting the issue later, as to whether they would consider going on the record.
Chances are, you can convince them once you’ve established trust and especially if they believe
in what you are doing.
Keep a good spreadsheet list of all your sources and contact info and their key points. You’ll need
it once you’ve interviewed dozens of people. You can also create columns for ‘tags’ to categorize
people. For instance, if it’s a political story, you might create a column for party. And then another
for state. Then, you can sort the spreadsheet by the tags to look for just Republicans or just
Democrats from California
From the start and throughout, save yourself much work later by going through the interview, and
typing it up clearly - particularly quotes you know you might want. Once you have hundreds of

1

•
•

pages of notes, it will become a mammoth task to organize and highlight if you haven’t been
doing that along the way. You may want to consider transcribing the notes using one of the
mechanical transcription services like Trint, which charges $15 per hour of audio. The actual
transcripts can be wildly inaccurate. But they will give you a rough guide to where to listen to the
actual audio.
Highlight a summary of the themes of each conversation so you can see in your notes right under
the person’s name, summing up the best issues that they discussed, and good quotes.
With people who are victims or have experienced trauma, there should be no surprises: If they've
been robbed of agency, you don’t want to contribute to that feeling of helplessness as a reporter.
So walk people through what they can expect from the reporting process.

Middle-stage
• Keep your initial sources updated on your reporting progress whenever possible. This keeps
vulnerable people reassured and engaged, and builds trust. It can also help reluctant sources to
tell you more. Often, when you come back with a bit more information showing that you are being
thorough, sharing what you’ve learned from others or what the data are showing, if appropriate,
people will feel increasingly comfortable about opening up and considering going on the record if
that was an issue earlier on.
• Ask everyone you interview who else they think you should talk to. Ask everyone you interview if
there is relevant data and if so, how to obtain it.
End-stage
• Carefully time your close-out interviews: not too close to publication that you are not being fair
and giving them enough time, but not too much time so they can run around and try and mop up
malfeasance in a hurry or try to upend your story. This is not easy to gauge.
• In final close-out interviews with the people you are investigating, aim for and continue to push for
face-to-face meetings. If they refuse, duly note in writing that you offered numerous opportunities
to discuss the issues and make sure your emailed questions are detailed and specific as to what
you’ll be reporting - so you can get the specific responses you need in writing.
• Give them every opportunity to respond to everything in your story that is relevant, whenever
possible, and try to incorporate all reasonable responses into your piece.That bulletproofing will
go a long way and you will be grateful for having given them their due. Even the hardest-hitting
piece is only as good as it is fair.
• At ProPublica, we have something we call the “no surprises rule.” What it means is that nothing in
the story should come as a surprise to the subject of the investigation when it is published. For
longer investigations, that can mean sending a 40-page letter with hundreds of questions. It can
also mean having to wait to give the person an honest chance to reply — even if you are not sure
they are being honest or just stalling.

2

