Covering Mass Shootings
Tips, story ideas, links and words of encouragement
By members of ‘J​ ournalists Covering Trauma​’ Facebook group

ABOUT
We started this document after the tragic school shooting in South Florida on Valentine’s
Day, 2018. We wanted to share what we’ve learned from our experience, to help the next
newsroom that has to navigate the hectic days and months after the tragedy. Let’s not
give up hope.
“In a time of destruction, create something.” ― Maxine Hong Kingston

NEWSROOM CHECKLIST TO ​PREPARE​ FOR A MASS CASUALTY EVENT
1. How will your newsroom address employee ​mental health​ needs? Is there a
counseling group that’s willing to come in? Do you have an EAP?

2. Think of how your team covers a typical breaking news story and multiply it by
10, 20 or more. Then ​figure out who would be covering what​ and assign those
roles: Who’s going to go to the hospital; who’ll cover the scene; who’ll be on the

ready to cover press conferences; who’s editing; who’s creating a timeline; etc. etc.
3. Create a ​Google folder​ and share it with newsroom. This is where you can keep
track of calls, names, records request, etc., and avoid duplication of efforts.

4. Have a plan for how you will receive​ and process things like scanner audio and
video.
5. Get out in the community as much as possible to ​gain sources ahead of a crisis
situation. Those contacts will be invaluable when crisis hits.

6. Handling a big breaking story should only reinforce the habits you already have
in the newsroom: ​sending feeds, getting a story up quick, live tweeting, taking
photos, recording and editing video and going live on social media​.

7. Be clear on ​newsroom best practices​, and discuss specifics. What’s your policy
on interviewing children? What’s your policy on interviewing teenagers? What
will the reporter who goes to the hospital do once s/he gets there?

1

TIPS & ADVICE FOR ​COVERING​ A MASS CASUALTY EVENT
1. ALL HANDS ON DECK
2. But don’t panic
3. Think of the ​bigger picture​ and outline ideas and issues you think you need to
cover in depth. (From IRE Journal)

4. Don’t ignore your ​emotions​.

5. Make an excel sheet and ​keep a list of everyone you meet​. Make notes about
how you met them and what they said. You’ll have to write about this in six
months, a year and two years. Or, sadly, many years later
(​http://gazette.com/columbine-survivor-recovering-addict-flashes-back-own-traum
a/article/1621117​). Some sources open up months after the tragedy.
6. Curb mental exhaustion​ and anxiety by doing something that brings you joy and
peace. Watch a funny movie, share a meal with family/friends, snuggle with a pet.
It’s tempting to run yourself into the ground, chasing every lead, but maintain a
steady pace. These horrific tragedies have lasting impacts so don’t feel like you
have to cover every angle in the first week.
7. Ask your employer’s HR services about any ​Employee Assistance Program​ they
might offer. Counseling can greatly help with coping with the tragedy.

8. Use an app like ​TimelineJS​ to keep track of as many moments as possible. It can

be useful for checking details about the event when things calm down and it can
be a good place to hold your knowledge. I used this after the Aurora theater
shooting (and limitedly after Orlando.) - Charles Minshew, IRE and NICAR
(formerly of Orlando Sentinel)

9. Investigations/police records/etc will come out frustratingly slow, but when they
do it’s a lot of information all at once. ​Use a spreadsheet​ and include a column

with a timestamp (dd-mm--yyyy hh:mm:ss) - then sort it chronologically when a
new document/transmission report/CAD comes out. Will help piece together a
working timeline and more importantly uncover holes in police response
narrative. -Brendan Byrne, WMFE
10. Start a google doc, use slack, text your coworkers to let them know what you
are working on and people you are contacting​. After the Sutherland Springs
shooting, I felt completely overwhelmed. I’m a news researcher and I had several
reporters I was helping, I would forget who had asked for what information. A

2

reporter started a google sheet with all the people, numbers, responses, and which
reporters were working on what. Also helps eliminate different reporters
contacting the same people.
11. Put in ​record requests​ immediately and follow up. Ask for the most important
things but also things that other might not think of (emails of public officials,

building permitting records, etc.) Those other records lead to good exclusives later
12. Allow reporters to see budgets for the day, or week ahead of time.
Communication is everything in a crisis situation​.
13. Here’s a podcast interview of two South Florida Sun Sentinel reporters who
covered the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting:
https://www.ire.org/blog/ire-radio/2018/04/30/ire-radio-podcast-shooter/
14. Tips on interviewing witnesses and victims of trauma:
https://www.poynter.org/news/breaking-news-best-practices-reaching-and-intervi
ewing-witnesses-and-victims-trauma
15. “Whether it is a mass trauma event or simply breaking news like area flooding,
our photo staff almost always starts a group text among the people working the
event. It's just a quick way to keep everyone informed of what is happening with
each photographer. We basically send texts to the group about where is
photographer is at, the latest updates on the event. With Sutherland Springs, for
example, we texted group messages early on as the shooting count rapidly rose.
We try not to spam everyone with every move, but it chaos like that where it is
often hard to hear your phone it's nice to be able to look through a quick feed of
updates. We almost never call. Because then you have to actually stop and listen
to the messages.”

STORIES​ TO CONSIDER IN DAYS AND MONTHS AFTER THE TRAGEDY
1. Try to ​find that one patient or family​ that you can stay in touch with and follow
through the days and months. Here’s an example from Tampa Bay Times:

http://www.tampabay.com/projects/2016/features/pulse-shooting-survivor-angel-s
antiago-recovery/
2. What is the history or culture of the scene?
3. In the weeks ahead check to see if students, first responders, teachers and other
staff are accessing counseling services. ​Call local mental health providers​ to see

what they are hearing, are people displaying symptoms of PTSD? -Crystal Chavez,
WMFE

3

4. Dig deeper into the ​type of gun(s)​ used, their history, and the kind of damage
they do to human body. Inspired by this NYT The Daily podcast:

(​https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/the-daily/id1200361736?mt=2&i=10004025800
84​)
5. Interview the ​medical examiner​. During our interview after Pulse, we learned
that our medical examiner had stored the shooter’s body in an area completely
separate from the victims.
6. Deciding on whether to publish or not publish the ​autopsy reports​ is going to be
a tough one. This is how it was covered at the Orlando Sentinel

(​http://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/pulse-orlando-nightclub-shooting/os-pulse
-shooting-more-autopsies-20160808-story.html​) and this how the issue took a
strange twist in Las Vegas.
https://www.reviewjournal.com/crime/shootings/judge-orders-las-vegas-review-jo
urnal-to-destroy-autopsy-report/
7. After covering one mass shooting and seeing the questioning law enforcement
response, ​my first question is always what could have been done differently​.
Don’t be afraid to question the “official” narrative from police or other officials.
There is almost always an issue with response and communication.
8. Immediately ​create a timeline​ after the incident to help readers/viewers/listeners
understand what has happened and how it unfolded.

9. When something tragic happens in your community, I think it’s the local
journalists’ time to shine. If I’m not from X city where a mass shooting happened, I
want to know about that community. I.e. - Parkland was one of the safest cities in
the nation before the shooting there. It was a tight-knit community where many
wealthy folks lived. ​Tell the story of who your community really is​. National
folks won’t be able to do that as well as you.

10. Brent Jones of St. Louis Public Radio wrote in the IRE Journal that at the one-year
anniversary of Michael Brown’s shooting, the newsroom ​organized a

multimedia project around five phrases​: confusion, grief, waiting, the grand
jury decision and organizing for change.
11. Don’t forget about the ​9-1-1 dispatchers​. It’s challenging to get interviews with
them, but it’s worth a try.

12. Here’s a story idea:
http://wlrn.org/post/i-gave-them-my-all-meet-dj-behind-marjory-stoneman-douglas
-prom-memories

4

13.Orlando Health wrote a free online book with interviews and advice from
all departments involved in Pulse shooting response:
orlandohealth.com/DisasterResponse

5

