IRE 2018 ORLANDO
HOW THE “OTHER SIDE” OF AN INTERVIEW SEES IT AND HOW THEY PLAN AND FIGHT BACK
FROM THE WEBSITE OF UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA – IRVINE
STRATEGIC COMMUNICATIONS & PUBLIC AFFAIRS

https://communications.uci.edu/campus-resources/meet-the-media/difficult-situations.php
Working with the media has become an important part of everyday university business. In most cases, the
coverage is to our benefit. Reporters mainly call about good stories – research findings, concerts, student
activities and educational programs. Even bad stories can provide an opportunity to make a positive statement.
This guide is intended to raise your comfort level in working with the media, to demystify the process and to give
you some tips in responding to media inquiries and honing your interviewing tactics. Our goal is for you to look
at media requests as positive opportunities to put both you and the university in the best light possible.
In addition to the information provided on these pages, on-camera media training is available for a fee and
includes a sit-down session utilizing a simulated “live” environment. A professional critique during playback of
the interview also is included.
Good or bad, the media are effective tools for communicating the university’s priorities and accomplishments to
the public. Responding to media requests in an accurate and timely manner is very important, as the resulting
stories can wield tremendous influence. We encourage you to contact the UCI media relations representative
assigned to your school or department. For further assistance, see our Media Relations Staff contacts.
WHEN A REPORTER CALLS:
First things first
The first thing you have to do is decide whether you will grant the interview. To help you decide, answer the
following questions:







What does the reporter want to talk about?
Are you the appropriate person to answer questions on this topic?
What medium does the reporter work for?
What is the format of the interview? Nightly news? Feature story? Will the interview be taped? Will you
be on camera live?
Where will the interview be conducted? How long will it take?
What is the reporter's deadline?

Reporters themselves should be able to answer many of these questions for you. In addition, Strategic
Communications can get the answers, as well as help you prepare for the interview. If you can't grant the
interview – and there are times when you can't or would prefer not to for various reasons, call Strategic
Communications then, too. We may be able to suggest other sources of information. Strategic Communications
also can provide you with information about unfamiliar reporters, magazines, television shows or radio
programs.
Be particularly aware of reporters' deadlines
They have a job to do and editors to please. The deadline may be weeks – or minutes away. Respect for those
deadlines will go a long way in ensuring positive media relations in the future.
Outline your main points
Once you've decided to grant an interview, you should prepare three to five points to get your message across
as briefly as possible – preferably in 20 seconds or less. Ask yourself these questions:






What is the issue?
What is your involvement in the issue?
Why is it important?
What is the historical perspective?

Here's a formula you might use in answering questions:
Using this question as an example, "Is UCI a safe environment?"







First Sentence
Make a statement that answers the reporter's question as briefly as possible.
"Yes" or "no" often is sufficient.
Yes, it is.
Second Sentence
Support your answer.
Statistics show that UCI is the safest campus in the UC system.
Third Sentence
Transition into your message.
We ensure that this record is maintained through such programs as our new emergency telephone
network.
Fourth Sentence
State your message.
Campus safety commands a high priority.

Gather background information
Background materials are helpful to a reporter, particularly if a topic is complex. Strategic Communications often
will have a press release on a given subject or can assist you in gathering other information, such as brochures,
statistics or historical background.
"It is better to be making the news than taking it; to be an actor than a critic."
- Winston Churchill
Anticipate tough questions and prepare your answers
List the 10 most difficult questions you might be asked regarding the interview topic and the ten most difficult
questions regarding UCI in general. Think about how you will transition from answering these questions into a
key point you want to make.
Strategic Communications can help you anticipate and prepare for tough questions. Colleagues and friends
often can provide good sounding boards as well. Remember that when we ask you those tough questions, we're
on your side.
Rehearse
Go over the questions until you are confident you can handle each and every one. Public information
representatives will assist you in rehearsals, or you might even record answers with a tape recorder. Don't plan
to read your answers during the interview, however.
Relax
Most interviews are your opportunity to tell the public something interesting about UCI or your work. Be
personable and confident.

DURING THE INTERVIEW
Get your messages across
Have we said that before? Here it is again. Come to an interview prepared with your messages and find

opportunities to get them across without ignoring the reporter’s questions. Take the initiative. You are the expert.
You know what is important to tell the public – so tell them.
Be informative, not conversational
News interviews are exchanges of information. You are the source of that information; the reporter represents
the public. Do not feel obligated to maintain the social rules of conduct that guide conversations. Beware of the
reporter who remains silent, encouraging you to ramble or dilute your original message. It’s human nature to
want to fill those lulls with conversation. Don’t.
Be brief
Reporters generally don’t want lengthy, drawn-out explanations. They’re looking for quotable quotes – a punchy
line that will fill three lines of newsprint or 20 seconds of air time. Use your 20 seconds to get your message
across – there’s much more likelihood it will be used. Knowing what you want to say in advance will go a long
way in simplifying your answers. Forty-five seconds is about the maximum response time for television and
other media as well, unless the reporter truly wants a complete understanding of, for example, neutrino physics
– in which case you may have 90 seconds.
Don’t go off the record
There is no such thing as off the record. An “off-the-record” comment may not be attributed to you directly, but
the reporter often will use the information to confirm a story with other sources. If you don’t want something to
appear in print, don’t say it.
Know your role
When you are conducting an interview, understand your role. If you are serving as a spokesperson for the
university – or in some instances as spokesperson for a given committee or organization – remember: reporters
will not distinguish between personal opinion and the university’s position – and neither will the public. Answer
questions appropriately. If you don’t know the university’s position on a particular issue, find out; don’t speculate.
If you are providing commentary, opinion or perspective for a news story, and have not been designated as a
spokesperson for the university, make certain reporters understand you are offering your own views as a
scholar, researcher or expert in a field.
Separating the university from personal advocacy
Public employees are prohibited from using their office to advocate political causes. If you are involved in a
political campaign, be sure to separate your university and private duties. You may not, for example, use your
office letterhead to write a letter urging a vote for or against a particular candidate or ballot measure. You can,
however, give reasons why the person or cause would benefit or harm the institution. However, be certain you
have clearly identified any offered opinion as your own and not a position given on behalf of the university.
Additional latitude may be allowed when the UC Board of Regents has taken a stand on an issue. If you have
questions regarding these regulations, Strategic Communications can assist you in getting them answered.
Don’t use jargon
Avoid using terms or acronyms that can’t be quoted without explanation.



Don’t say: “We’re pleased that such a high percentage of students returned their SIRs.”
Do say: “We’re pleased that so many students intend to register at UCI.”

Say what you mean
Avoid bureaucratic language: “It is clear that much additional work will be required before we have a complete
understanding of the issue.” Instead, say, “We’re working on it.”
Tell the truth
The truth may hurt, but lies are deadly. You probably will get caught, and reporters don’t forget sources who
have “burned” them. Give a direct answer when asked a direct question, even if the answer is “No,” “I don’t
know” or “I’m sorry, I can’t answer that question.” You will come across as an honest, forthright person.

Be patient
These are reporters, not physicists or physicians. You may have to begin at the beginning to help them
understand an issue.
Don’t lose your temper
Sometimes reporters are intentionally rude to elicit a charged response. Don’t fall into the trap. Respond politely,
in control at all times. Don’t get into arguments – your angry comments may be reported without any mention of
the provocation.
Be friendly
It’s an interview, not an interrogation. Establish rapport with the reporter.
Don’t answer a question with a question
The reporters asks, “What do you think about affirmative action?” Don’t say, “What do you mean by affirmative
action?” Or, “What do you think about it?” Such responses come across as evasive, pejorative or hostile.
“No Comment”
Don’t say “No comment” or “I can neither confirm nor deny.” The public views this as: “I know but I won’t say.”
Instead, tell the reporter that you are unable to comment and, if possible, why. If a reporter asks about a
document that is in draft form, for example, tell the reporter: “I’m sorry, this is a working draft, and I’ll be able to
comment as soon as it becomes public.” Offer to let the reporter know when the document is available.
Don’t answer when you shouldn’t
If you know the answer to a question but can’t say, don’t hesitate to refer the reporter elsewhere – to Strategic
Communications if you’re unsure where that appropriate elsewhere might be. Don’t forget to let other offices
know when you have referred a reporter.



Question: “I understand Joe Irvine is about to be appointed as a distinguished professor. Is that true?”
Answer: “I’m sorry but I just can’t answer that question for you. The appropriate office to answer all
faculty appointment questions is the executive vice chancellor’s office. You should call there.”

Again, don’t answer questions if you are not the appropriate spokesperson. If a reporter presses, repeat your
answer. Don’t waver. (And don’t go off the record.)
Don’t guess
If you don’t know the answer to a question, say so. And be sure you offer to either find the answer or find
someone else who knows. Don’t guess, thinking the reporter will check elsewhere. There’s a good chance your
misinformation will appear in print.
It’s okay to make a mistake
The tape is rolling and you realize you’ve made a mistake. Or, more likely, you suddenly find you have no idea
what you’re saying. Stop. Say, “I’m sorry, I haven’t answered your question very well. Let me back up.” The
reporter usually will prefer your new, crisp response.
Talk from the public’s point of view
Remember that you are talking through the reporter to the public. How does what you are talking about affect
individuals in the community? How does it affect their children’s education? Say it in terms readers and viewers
can relate to. If, for example, there was a toxic spill on campus, the public wouldn’t care much how quickly it was
cleaned up or how many workers dedicated themselves to the effort. The public wants to know whether their
health is in danger.
Cite facts
Reporters love facts and figures that will lend credibility to their stories or make certain points. But don’t
exaggerate facts by using superlatives that make things sound bigger and better than they are.
Be prepared to repeat yourself
Reporters may repeat their question because your answer was too long, too complex, they didn’t understand

you, or they’re simply trying to get a more pithy response. Welcome the question as another opportunity to state
your message, perhaps more clearly.
Be confident
You’re the expert. You have a message to deliver. Recognize that reporters in fact may be somewhat intimated
by your expertise or position. Put them at ease.
Respect the reporter’s deadline
Find out their deadlines and return calls promptly. Showing respect for deadlines will go a long way toward
building positive media relations. If you can’t return a reporter’s call, please contact Strategic Communications to
assist you.
Don’t be defensive
Make positive statements instead of denying or refuting comments from others. State your message; let others
speak for themselves.
Be aware of when you are being taped
In broadcast situations, such as in the studio or when talking to a radio reporter, it is wise to assume that
everything you say is being recorded.
Use anecdotes, humor
Use examples to illustrate your points. What will sell a story about, say, graduate fellowships, are not statistics
but human interest about real students with real accomplishments. Use humor, an interesting quote. Television
in particular is “show business” so entertain when appropriate.
Avoid reading from prepared statements
This is especially true when you are on camera. You are the expert and ought to know what you want to say
without a “script.”
Never ask a reporter to preview the story
Reporters generally never let sources review stories, though they often check back for scientific details.
Remember, it’s their job to gather the facts and tell the story accurately – to suggest they can’t do so without
your input insults their professionalism. Besides, they won’t let you, so there’s little point in asking. It’s better to
listen carefully during an interview to be aware of when a reporter may not understand something. Remember
that the likelihood of your being misquoted is reduced substantially if you speak briefly and clearly.

DIFFICULT SITUATIONS
There are good reporters and bad reporters. Most are concerned with honesty, accuracy, getting the story
straight and getting it first. A few are openly biased or flagrantly antagonistic – reporters who try to make you
lose your cool and say something you'll regret. All reporters, however, have one primary goal: to get information.
And whether they are good or bad, they may use interviewing techniques that are difficult to handle.
Loaded questions
The reporter lists three to five items to build a case and then asks the "loaded" question. Begin by either
accepting or countering the statements, then bridge to your message.



Question: "Only X percent of your faculty are women. Only X percent are black. A mere X percent are
Chicano. Don't you think this displays a history of discriminatory hiring practices?"
Answer: "While your statistics are correct, your conclusion is not. Let's look at the record today. This
year, X percent of our hires were women and minorities. UCI is committed to achieving faculty diversity."

Unacceptable alternatives
The reporter asks you to choose between one extreme or the other, neither being acceptable.




Question: "Would you rather sacrifice research excellence for teaching excellence or become a leader in
science at the expense of undergraduate education?"
Answer: "Neither extreme is acceptable. At UCI, teaching and research programs complement each
other, and we are committed to excellence in both."

Hypothetical situation
The reporter creates a hypothetical situation and follows up with a specific question. Don't respond to the
hypothetical; state your message.



Question: "Imagine that there was a donor who wanted to give $10 million to establish a basket weaving
school at UCI, when the campus has no intention of starting a basket weaving school. Would you accept
the gift and start such a school, or would you tell the donor to get lost?"
Answer: "I don't know anything about your hypothetical situation. Your question seems to concern our
gift acceptance policies. At UCI, we work very hard with our donors to ensure that their interests are
served while our needs are met."

If reporters don't give up, don't try to go back and answer in a manner that will make them happy. You might
rephrase your answer, but stick to your message.



Question: "But what would happen if the interests weren't the same? Would you take the money?"
Answer: "Again, you're referring to a hypothetical situation that I don't know about. We work closely with
our donors on a personal level to ensure that they and the campus gain mutual benefit."

Commenting on others' comments
Essentially, the reporter is asking you to speak for someone else. Don't do it, especially if you did not hear the
individual make the statement yourself. It's possible the person was misquoted.
Divide and conquer
Reporters may want to divide you from your superiors or colleagues by asking, "How would YOU handle this?" If
something is out of your area of expertise, say so. Then bridge to your message.



Question: "How would you go about increasing faculty diversity?"
Answer: "I am not the one who does the hiring at the university. But I can tell you it is every faculty
members' responsibility to create a welcoming environment for all cultures."

False premises and conclusions
Reporters' questions may contain false premises. Respond by countering immediately or a viewer may accept
the false premise.



Question: "When are you going to improve undergraduate education?"
Answer: "I believe students are getting a good education now, and one of the things we are doing to
ensure this is..."

Reporters may paraphrase one of your answers to get you to agree to it and then they use only your agreement
to the new statement.



Question: "You mean students didn't used to get a good education?"
Answer: "Let me restate my answer so that there is not misunderstanding. I believe students..."

Negative entrapment
Never repeat a reporter's negative statements. Reporters often ask questions in a hostile manner. When
responding, turn the sentence around and stress the positive. Use your own words; don't repeat a reporter's
hostile question filled with buzzwords. Remember, they will quote you, not themselves.


Question: "Some students have told me they get a lousy education at the University of California."




Don't answer: "I don't think the education is lousy."
Do answer: "I believe students get a very good education at the university."

Continue with an example of an education program. Transition into your message, which may be that research
conducted at the UC keeps faculty at the very top of their fields.
Machine gunning
The reporter asks a string of questions simultaneously. Let them build a trap. Use body language (your hand) to
stop it. Then respond by simply answering the one question that you most want to answer, ignoring the other
parts, then bridge to your message.
Interrupter
The reporter interrupts you while you're trying to answer a question. Respond politely, yet firmly: "Let me finish
answering your last question first..."
Embarrassing silence
Beware of the reporter who remains silent, encouraging you to ramble on and on. Once you feel you've
answered the question, stop. If you continue, you may end up providing them ammunition with which to shoot
you. There are several things you can do to fill an embarrassing silence. You can ask, "Do you have any other
questions?" You can ask, "Have I answered your question?" or you can just remain silent.
Set-up
If you feel the reporter is setting you up, chances are you're right. Reporters often think they know the answers
before they've asked the questions. Let them know that you are the expert.
Ambush
It's not uncommon for reporters to ambush a news source outside their office or home. Respond as if the
reporter had called you on the phone. You might ask what the story is about and when they need the
information. Tell the reporter when you or someone else will be able to get back to them. You are not obligated
to consent to the ambush interview if you are unprepared or the time is inconvenient.
When asked a question on top of a question
Slow down. Patiently answer one question at a time. The reporter often will look rude in these situations.
When heckled by a questioner
Be sensitive to the feel of the interview. You may want to answer a question very briefly or be silent while the
reporter continues. Keep your cool.
When asked a tough question
Avoid such platitudes as, "That's a very good question" or "I'm glad you asked that question." The audience
recognizes such devices as obvious stalls. It is all right to pause briefly before responding. Dead time is seldom
aired on the news, and silences obviously can't be quoted in print. If your interview is live, a short pause often
will give the impression that you wish to make a thoughtful response.





Avoid saying, "Well, as I said in my speech" or "I already told you..." These responses sound as if you're
insulting the reporter.
Use the reporter's first name, showing that you still feel friendly in the face of the difficult questions.
You may want to rephrase the question, giving your audience a chance to hear it in your words: "If I
understand your question correctly, you're asking..."
In all cases, if you disagree with something a reporter or talk show host has said, you must counter it. If
you don't, the audience can only assume that you agree.

PUBLIC INFORMATION
Because UCI is a public university, much of what we do is subject to the taxpayers' scrutiny. Many documents,
particularly financial documents, are public records, open to inspection by any member of the public during all

business hours. Such information disclosure is regulated by the California Public Records Act. At the same time,
state and federal laws protect certain personal records and documents.
It's rare for a member of the general public to stroll through the building asking for public records. It's not rare for
the press, however, who act on behalf of the public. Reporters also have at their disposal the federal Freedom of
Information Act, and it's not unusual for them to file "FOIs" to gain access to disputed records. It's wise for you to
have a general idea of what's public and what's not and how to find out which is which.
Be particularly aware that information regarding litigation or personnel actions generally is not public. Disclosure
of such information can and will, as they say, be used against you.
For university employees, such information as name, date of hire, title, salary, office address and phone number
and job description all are public. Performance evaluations are examples of personal information that cannot be
released without your permission.
Contracts and grants are public, including protocols approved by animal and human subjects committees.
Preliminary drafts, notes or memoranda that are not retained by the university in the ordinary course of business
are exempt from disclosure requirements. In other words, working drafts of, for example, the long-range
development plan, would not be public documents. However, if you keep internal memos regarding office
operations or other subjects in your files, they may be subject to release if a reporter requested them.
To determine the status of information, you may need to contact the campus information practices coordinator or
ombudsman. A booklet, Private and Confidential: What You Should Know About Privacy of and Access to
Information, is available; and complete regulations are published in the campus Policies & Procedures.
University counsel will be consulted in serious and/or unusual situations.

DELIVERY

Nearly all reporters who call UCI are from the print media, yet the campus aggressively pursues television and
radio coverage because of its broad exposure. The following guidelines apply primarily to those television
interviews, but they will help you make the right impression for all media. The intent of these guidelines is to
minimize distractions, allowing the reporter and the viewers to concentrate on what you're saying.
Project
You would be surprised how much of your voice gets lost when you start talking into a microphone. Speak up.
Smile when it's appropriate. Long after you have appeared on a television or radio show, people will remember
you and the impression you made. That impression should be of a confident, thoughtful, caring individual.
Personal space
Be prepared for a necessary closeness with a television interviewer, for the camera's sake. You may be rubbing
shoulders or bumping knees with the interviewer, or talking with a microphone in your face. Don't back away.
Gestures
Gestures are a means of using stress energy effectively. Don't be afraid to use them; though don't point at the
reporter or camera.
Sitting
Sit up straight. Don't swivel or rock.
Cross your legs at the knees or sit with your legs at a 45 degree angle in the chair, legs crossed at ankles or feet
together, one in front of the other.

In the television studio, don't jump out of your seat too quickly. The show's credits may be rolling over the scene
of you sitting on the set. Consider yourself on camera until the show's director says you are finished.
Do not lean on the arm rest of the chair, you look too casual. Lean forward a little, showing interest, not back,
showing fear or indifference.
Standing
Stand up straight. Beware of slouching and tilted shoulders. Don't rock forward and back or sway side to side.
Keep your hands at your sides or bend your elbows slightly at your waist. Don't put your hands in your pockets,
don't hold them in front of you and don't cross your arms over your chest. If you are uncomfortable with your
hands at your sides, try holding a notebook or other "prop."
Head
Hold your head high. Don't tilt it to one side.
Beware of being an "active listener" and nodding in apparent agreement to comments with which you may not
agree.
Eyes
TV cameras get much closer to your face than most people, so your eye movement is critical.
Don't look at the camera. Look at the reporter 100 percent of the time. Focus on the bridge of their nose if you're
uncomfortable looking into their eyes continuously. Pay attention to what's happening or you may be
embarrassed when the camera catches your eyes wandering.
Don't look up at the ceiling ("God help me!") or down at the floor ("Let us pray").
Don't shift your eyes from side to side.
Wear glasses if you need to. But don't wear photo greys, which turn dark when the lights hit them.
Voice
When asked by a sound engineer to give a voice level, use this opportunity to "set the stage" for the interview.
The engineer wants to know your voice's normal speaking level so say your name, title and what you'd like to
talk about.
Beware of leaning toward and away from a stationary microphone while you're talking, as this causes your voice
to become louder and softer.
In a radio interview, your voice is all you have, so beware of speaking in a dull monotone. Project, be
expressive, and you'll come across better.
Voices sound best if they're from the lower register, yet they often get higher when people are nervous. You can
lower your voice through awareness and controlled, deep breathing. Smiling helps animate the voice.
Clothing
Wear clothes that are comfortable.
Solid colors or soft shades are best. A burgundy tie or scarf will reflect color onto the face. A light blue shirt or
blouse, burgundy tie or scarf and navy jacket is ideal for television.
Lightweight suits are less likely to cause perspiration if you will be in the hot lights of a studio.
Make sure socks that are long enough to avoid a gap between your pant leg and the top of your sock.
Of course, your tie is straightened, your shirttail tucked in.

Button a jacket when standing; unbutton when seated.
Don't wear high contrasts like black and white. Avoid horizontal stripes, hounds-tooth and other distracting
patterns.
No Interruptions
Don't wear a pager or phone during an interview unless you can control the sound.
Makeup and hair
Makeup is appropriate on television for men and women. It helps control shine especially on foreheads.
Before a television interview or photography session, get a haircut if you need one. Keep your hair out of your
face.
Stress
Most people get butterflies in their stomachs at the idea of an interview, especially one before the camera. Be
aware of how you show stress and control it. Don't allow nervous gestures, such as pulling at your hair, swinging
your foot or smiling too broadly, spoil an otherwise successful interview. Nervousness vanishes with frequency.
The more interviews you give, the easier they will be.

AFTER THE INTERVIEW

Disappointment
You spend hours preparing for your interview, another hour in front of the camera and you are on the evening
news for a grand total of six seconds. Or worse, the entire story is preempted by a plane crash. Or you may
spend half a day with a newspaper reporter and be quoted only once, or not at all. Don't be disappointed.
Stories often are edited or "killed" for various reasons. However, the time you spent helped establish a good
working relationship with the media that will benefit you in the long run. Chances are, the story will appear later
or the reporter will be back.
When will the story appear?
Reporters are reluctant to tell you when an interview will appear, usually because they don't know. Timing is up
to their editors or producers. Strategic Communications often can find out for you, if there is a scheduled date or
time, or we can obtain videos or clippings.
Headlines
The story was fine, but the headline! Remember that reporters have nothing to do with headlines. Those are
written by editors on the copy desk, often under great deadline and space pressures.
Compliments
When a story is reported well, let the reporter know with a phone call or letter to the editor. But don't overdo it. If
you're too complimentary, reporters may worry that their story wasn't balanced enough.
Criticisms
Newspapers will run corrections, but they don't like them. Minor inaccuracies or differences in viewpoint usually
aren't worth making a fuss. However, serious errors and misconceptions should be brought to a reporter's
attention. Strategic Communications can assist you in dealing with these problems. Some options: Call the
reporter to clear up the inaccuracy. Many reporters either will write a correction or do a follow-up piece that
clarifies the information. Avoid going over the reporter's head unless the reporter is completely unresponsive.
Contact the ombudsman, if the medium has one, to look into how and why errors were made. Write a letter to
the editor. Be brief and to the point. If you don't edit tightly, the newspaper will do it for you.
YOUR RIGHTS













To know who is interviewing you and what newspaper, magazine, television or radio station they
represent.
To be treated courteously. The questions can be tough, but the reporter's demeanor should not be
abusive.
To physical comfort during the filming or taping of the interview – appropriate setting, chair, make up, a
glass of water.
To not be physically threatened by hand-held lights or microphones shoved into your face.
To make your own tape of an interview or to have someone such as a public information officer in the
room during an interview. You should inform the reporter of this in advance, however, as they may
choose not to conduct the interview if you insist on having a third party present.
To ensure security of your laboratory and to protect it from damage from cameras or other equipment.
To get some of your points across in the interview. Don't just answer the reporter's questions. Use your
messages. Tell your story.
To be quoted accurately.
To protect the privacy of yourself, your students, colleagues or patients by withholding information that is
not public.
To establish ground rules, such as time and location.
To terminate an interview if your rights are violated.

PREPARED BY TISHA AND LEA THOMPSON FOR THE 2018 ORLANDO IRE CONFERENCE
MASTER CLASS IN INTERVIEWING

