PARTNERSHIPS
A TOP TEN LIST OF GUIDING PRINCIPLES FROM THE TRENCHES OF INVESTIGATIVE
COLLABORATIONS
1. REMEMBER THE MISSION. A first response to partnering and collaborating often goes
something like this: Why would I want to give my story to someone else?
•
We better arm the public with valuable information to make the world a better place when
we get our investigative findings out as widely and in as many ways as possible. That drives
impact, which is why we are in this business.
A second response often goes like this: Partnerships. Are. Hard. Why don’t we just do it
ourselves?
• Because the degree of difficulty on many stories is often too high to go it alone and complete
the work in a reasonable time. It makes sense to work together to improve the journalism
(more brains on a story is going to make it better…) and to capitalize on the skills and
talents of colleagues. I have data chops, you’re an expert on the environment. I do video, you
do audio. You know your town, I know FOIA. Together, you’ll have a stronger story.
2. IT BEGINS WITH THE REPORTING TEAM: You can’t force collaboration from the top on down
– in the end, two (or more) reporters have to be willing to work together, and they have to be ready
to make it a priority, too. You also have to make sacrifices: this isn’t your story alone and every
newsroom has different priorities. The key is to communicate your priorities early and often and be
willing to make trade-offs for the benefit of the reader.
3. BUT IT REQUIRES A CHAMPION ON TOP: Collaborations will never work unless each
organization has a leader who believes in this way of working and is prepared to work through all
the obstacles and deal with the inevitable trust issues. Partnerships are great until they aren’t – and
then you need help keeping the momentum moving forward.
4. PUT YOUR HUMILITY ON THE TABLE: You can’t keep asking “What are we getting out this?”
Collaborations work when everyone sees the value of the partners – regardless of size or resources.
5. FIND LIKE-MINDED PARTNERS: You have to work with organizations that share your values
and practices on issues like anonymous sources and fact-checking rigor. Partnerships are a trustbuilding exercise.
6. ESTABLISH CLEARLY DEFINED ROLES AND CEDE CONTROL: Each partner needs the
freedom to do his or her own work and satisfy his or her medium and his or her audience.
Workflow variables aside, address logistical, reporting and editorial concerns up front (everything
from deadlines to lawyering to awards). Every team needs one person who facilitates
communication. Once that’s established, let it be.
7. SHARE EVERYTHING: Don’t hold out on your partners. Reporters and producers share all
information, all tips, sources, ideas and all content gathered – everyone learns from each other. Like
we said, it’s an exercise in building trust.
8. THINK BIG BUT START SMALL: There’s a steep learning curve to working this way. Basic
issues pose challenges. Don’t assume everyone is on the same page or does things in the same way –
from how to communicate, to how to share information to how to simultaneously report on
different platforms.
9. KEEP IT SIMPLE: Be aware of how overtaxed people are today. Always simplify, streamline
communications and put extra time into thinking about the tone and substance of your emails –
before you hit “send.”.
10. IT ALWAYS TAKES LONGER THAN YOU THINK: It can take longer to do things with partners
and in different mediums but the rewards in terms of reach and impact can be well worth it.

