Tips of the Truth-O-Meter
Taken from the June 15, 2018, panel at IRE on ​misinformation and strategies to combat deceit
Katie Sanders, PolitiFact deputy editor
@KatieLSanders
COVERING CAMPAIGNS
Amplify your coverage of local, state campaigns with attention on disinformation efforts. That’s
what a swath of your online audience is seeing and, unfortunately, sharing, even if you aren’t.
And starting now will help you prepare for 2020.
Use CrowdTangle to search for groups mentioning candidates on both sides, as they often
propagate memes. At the least, you can see what they are talking about and what is worth
covering.
Case study​: In Alabama, PolitiFact fact-checked a ​swarm of false stories​ relating to Roy Moore
ahead of the December 2017 special election (in addition to normal fact-checks of political
statements by the candidates). The made-up or exaggerated stories sought to undermine the
reporters and sources used in the Washington Post investigation, and, after the election, call the
results into question.
Be speedy. (It probably won’t be fast enough.)
We used a new tool from Facebook to identify the stories with the most reach as they were
starting to trend, and reported our fact-checks as quickly as possible. Our methods are the
same as regular fact-checks on politicians: we background the “speaker” (in these cases, weird
websites) and tried to get in touch to discern motivation. We looked where else the stories had
spread. Sometimes one manipulator reposts on several sites for maximum exposure.
Shoe leather reporting still matters.
It is harder to debunk a story than to just make one up. Our reporters go the extra mile to call
the campaigns, the agencies and police departments mentioned in wild tales. Sometimes they
appreciate it and are eager to set the record straight.
Don’t recirculate the claim.

When we’re sharing a debunked story, meme or manipulated photo, we share the original but
with a big Pants on Fire logo on it, or the words FAKE, so the wrong information doesn’t just
spread further.

COVERING MASS SHOOTINGS, TRAGEDY
Like other newsrooms, we’re refining a routine for covering the misinformation that accompanies
a tragedy.
Here are eight of the most common false themes that we’ve seen on Facebook and Twitter after
a mass shooting:
-

Political leanings (fake ​profile of Santa Fe shooter with a Hillary Clinton hat​)
Weapon used
Imposter social media accounts (same thing on Instagram for SF shooter)
Reports of a second shooter
Missing people on social media
Crisis actors (the virality of the outrageous claim about ​David Hogg​ has and will inspire
more of these (​Santa Fe example​)
False flag attack
terrorist-linked

Early claims of this nature are usually not true, although (in the case of terrorism, weapon used)
they might not turn out to be later. It is important to remind the online audience when official
information has not been released and be clear about the information

One final tip: Screenshot the social media accounts for any credible leads on suspects before
they are taken down by the platforms. Having before/after will help you more credibly report on
the manipulations.
Questions?
Email KSanders@poynter.org

