2018 IRE Conference
June 15, 2018

Blue Force Tracker
"Notes from the Field" for Military Reporting and
Investigations

Rct. Maria Daume, Platoon 4001, Papa Company, 4th Recruit Training Battalion, was born in a Russian prison and brought to Long
Island, N.Y., at the age of 4 when she and her twin brother were adopted. Daume became interested in the Marine Corps around
the age of 12 when she met Marine recruiters at an anti-cancer event. The Crucible is recruit training’s 54-hour culminating event
that puts to the test everything recruits have learned since arriving to Parris Island. Photo courtesy of the Department of Defense.

1

"Quality
journalism is just
as important to
the survival of a
democracy as
the armies
guarding its
borders."
- Nolan Peterson, foreign
correspondent for The Daily
Signal

// Introduction //
By James LaPorta
It was 47-years ago this week when The New York Times published the first of many
damning articles on the highly classified Pentagon Papers — the RAND Corporation
study that showed decades of growing U.S. involvement in Vietnam from 1945 to 1967.
It was then that America learned how the U.S. government and the Department of
Defense systematically lied and misled the American citizenry and their representatives
in Congress about the progress being made in Vietnam.
The Pentagon Papers clearly illustrate that democracy does not die in darkness, it dies
in broad daylight as two-time Pulitzer Prize winning reporter Tom Ricks put it.
"When you have the appearance of democracy without the fact of it," Ricks told the
national security podcast, Warax & Natasha. "When you still have the institutions, but
they're not executing their duties and Congress isn't doing what it's supposed to be
doing."
In the the military, a "Blue Force Tracker" is a piece of military technology that is GPSenabled and depicts with icons on a satellite image where every U.S. military unit is
positioned on a given battle space. For journalists, it's our job to be the "Blue Force
Tracker" of the Pentagon — holding them accountable and reporting on their activities
2

on behalf of the American citizenry. Don't accept the appearance of democracy.
Confirm it.
Beyond the basics of learning military rank structure and chain of command hierarchy,
these "notes from the field" are designed to grow a journalist's proficiency in military
reporting and investigation. These tips will not help a journalist secure a ride with the
Navy Blue Angels though. Emoji sad face.

// Field Notes complied by //
James LaPorta, The Daily Beast
An award-winning journalist and a former U.S. Marine. He frequently covers
crime, national security, and the military community. His bylines and work have
appeared on and in The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Miami Herald, The
Boston Globe, Chicago Tribune, The Daily Beast, CBS News, CNN, NBC News,
MSNBC among others. Prior to journalism, he served in the infantry and intelligence
communities within the U.S. Marine Corps.
Brandy Zadrozny, NBC News
A librarian turned award-winning investigative journalist based in New York. She
covers politics, crime, and women’s issues as a reporter for NBC News. Brandy’s most
recent reporting has focused on the intersection of people, their politics, and the
technology that connects and divides them. Her latest work has revealed the secret
online lives of politicians, extremists, school shooters, and foreign actors.
Mike Hixenbaugh, Houston Chronicle
An investigative reporter at the Houston Chronicle. He is a four-time Livingston
Awards finalist. In 2018 he was named reporter of the year for Texas. His work covering
the military at The Virginian-Pilot was co-published with ProPublica, NBC News and the
Investigative Reporting Program at UC Berkeley. Mike graduated from the University of
Akron in 2007 before going to work for newspapers in Ohio and then North Carolina.

3

On // Developing Sources //
From Hixenbaugh
Find the mid-career service members. Regardless of what military branch or unit you're
covering, you should be targeting mid-career enlisted and junior oﬃcers as sources
because they know what they are talking about, but they are not political. Many are still
idealistic and willing to rock the boat in order to expose wrongdoing.
In my reporting on neglected and dangerous helicopters, we relied almost exclusively
on tips from mid-career aircraft maintainers who were tired of sending their buddies up
in unsafe aircrafts, and young pilots who were tired of their commanding oﬃcers
turning a blind eye to the problems in order to advance their own careers.
How do you find these sources? You report your ass oﬀ, write some solid stories, and
they start to find you.

From Zadrozny
I want to impress the importance of sourcing like normal, especially using Facebook
Graph Search and Reddit to find military sources that have experience with the issue
you're investigating.
Facebook Graph Search: https://www.facebook.com/graphsearcher/
Overall, I think military reporting can be daunting but for many of these folks, it’s a job.
And when they’re oﬀ the job they congregate where the rest of us do. We can find
military folks on LinkedIn and Reddit and Facebook just like civilians. And they’ve all
got stories to tell.

From LaPorta
Low ranking service members is always a great starting point. As a reporter, you're not
going to get the full story from these individuals, but for the most part, you're not going
to get a line of hyperbole either. I recommend starting there. LinkedIn, Facebook and
Twitter have been outstanding resources for developing sources for me. Also, tap into
the veteran community, especially from the post 9/11 generation as they may still have

4

ties to the active duty community or clue you into the plights of being a veteran
transitioning into civilian life.

On // Developing Special Operation Sources //
From Hixenbaugh
Covering special operations is a diﬀerent animal altogether. You can easily find retired
guys willing to talk, but the fact that they are willing to talk should make you
suspicious.
I earned a decent cadre of legit Naval Special Warfare sources by writing stories
exposing one of those chatty retired Navy SEALs. You can quickly kill your credibility
with this community by relying too heavily on discredited ex-commandos because
they’ve written a few books and are easy to get on the phone.

From LaPorta
Usually, I don't have an issue in this area because of my own combat experience from
the military, but the best advice I can give to a journalist is stay on top of them.
Convince them that you're the best person to tell this story because you want to tell
the story right and you don't want the truth getting lost or distorted. Build the source
relationship, professionally check in on their well-being. Have conversations oﬀ the
record in order to establish rapport before seeking to move the conversation on the
record or on background.

On // Source Protection //
Background: In 2017, a source leaked internal documents from the United States
Military Academy at West Point to James LaPorta of The Daily Beast. These
documents were protected under the Privacy Act of 1972 and showed what one oﬃcial
called the academy’s “special treatment” of cadets on the football team. After the
publication on the first set of internal documents, a second source leaked documents
to Brandy Zadronzny. These documents revealed in detail the last hours of West Point
cadet and starting defensive back Brandon Jackson, who got drunk after a game with
5

a group of oﬃcers and fellow cadets, then drove a car into a guardrail. He died in the
crash.

From Zadrozny
After our first story, the army launched an investigation into the source of the leak of
cadet records. It was a pretty dangerous thing for a second source to reach out with
new records. This source reached out to me on my proton account and then we took
the back and forth to signal. Having that secure method of communication in place is
so important, to build trust and to protect your source. This is embarrassing, but a
source once told me that he was going to reach out to me a year earlier but I didn’t
have Signal so he thought I couldn’t be trusted. And he was probably right!
I also had a conversation with my West Point source about the method of retrieving the
documents before they were given to to us to ensure beforehand I wasn’t
compromising the source. We also didn’t post any of the documents, which further
protected the source.
In terms of source protection, I would also try reaching out to as many people as
possible even after you have the goods. I didn’t get much else in this instance but
making contact with a lot of folks covers my sourcing generally.

From LaPorta
I saw this tweet recently regarding source protection and I think it's the best advice I
can oﬀer. Imagine that you're a government investigator with subpoena power, how
would you go after your own information and sources? Identity those exposure gaps in
your source protection plan and try to mitigate them.

On // Public Aﬀair Oﬃces //
From Zadrozny
Public aﬀairs is I’m sure helpful for some stories but the few military stories I’ve worked
on mirrored the many I’ve worked on with big companies. Public aﬀairs people are like
HR in my experience. They are there to protect the company. During the West Point
story, they told us to stop contacting cadets, I ignored them and ended up connecting
6

with cadets more than willing to spill the information. I see them as a challenge to
overcome.

I’m aware for people working on this beat full time that burning public aﬀairs might be
stupid advice but it’s what I did and generally do.

From Hixenbaugh
The two most important rules for dealing with public aﬀairs oﬃcials: Don’t surprise
them, and always give them a fair amount of time to respond when you’ve got a scoop
that will embarrass the admiral. I may have broken this rule once in the rush to pop a
bombshell of a story, and it cost me.

From LaPorta
Persistence and respect I have found goes along way, but don't let them intimidate you
or push you around. Also, don't take their word at face value. Confirm their version of
the "truth" to see if it aligns with the facts.

On // FOIA // Public Records // Developing Stories
From Hixenbaugh
ASK FOR PHOTOS AND AUDIO.
We all know to ask for JAGMAN (Judge Advocate General) reports after a mishap. But
some of the best stuﬀ comes from supporting material. We asked for the audio from
the flight control tower during a Super Hornet crash, and again after a destroyer
slammed into a commercial tanker in the Strait of Hormuz. Both made for riveting
stories. FOIA oﬃces will fight you on this, but it should be public, and it is worth the
eﬀort.

From LaPorta

7

Lately, I've been submitting FOIAs for medal award citations. I was doing a story on
Senior Chief Naval Special Warfare Operator William "Ryan" Owens, who was the first
man or woman killed under President Donald Trump.
Owens was a member of SEAL Team Six (Naval Special Warfare Development Group
or DEVGRU). He was killed in Yemen.
When I asked Naval Special Warfare for his award citations, I received the write up for
his Silver Star, which revealed a massive combat engagement that occurred in Somalia
in 2015 that no one had previously heard about — I discovered it by accident, so I
recommend getting high ranking medal award citations for individuals or units passed
out during a specific time period.
Also, FOIA for command climate surveys, these are "confidential, command-requested
organization development survey focusing on issues of organizational eﬀectiveness,
equal opportunity, and sexual assault response and prevention," usually the response
is partial grant/partial denial as some of the information falls under the Privacy Act.

From Zadrozny
What was helpful to me was to know that sometimes non-military FOIAs can shed light
on military issues.
For example, the local police had completed their own investigation of West Point
cadet Brandon Jackson’s death. That with the coroners report and our source’s internal
investigation documents helped to inform our Cadet drink driving story.

// Covering Trauma //
From Zadrozny
Military survivors are the same as civilian ones with one caveat: their trauma also
results from a loss of their way of life, in some instances their dream of serving, in a
way that other survivors don’t always experience.
With sexual harassment or assault, my strategy—for my own piece of mind—is to first
be human and then be a reporter.
8

I let Madeline at West Point or Phoebe at Vice or the woman at the center of the pickup
rape ring in San Diego just talk to me. I ask her what happened and I listen. I then tell
her everything I think might come out of her going on record—good and bad—and tell
her I have to try and verify her story which may involve getting oﬃcial records or talking
to people who know her and her attacker or harasser, then I let her decide if that’s
something she wants to go through with. I’ve missed a lot of stories with this method,
but I’ve gotten a lot too and so far I haven’t had anyone regret coming forward which
is, along with getting it wrong, one of my biggest fears.
The second thing I would suggest is asking your victim to request copies of her
investigation if you can’t get it through a FOIA. West Point public aﬀairs told us to go
through West Point police who refused to give us the report, but Madeline requested it
and gave us a copy which was helpful to verify.

From Hixenbaugh
The biggest barrier to reporting on the military and veterans: Widespread distrust of
journalists among veterans and service members. It’s worse if you’ve never served.
That was a major obstacle to our work on the lingering eﬀects of Agent Orange;
Vietnam vets still have a chip on their shoulder because of the way they were
welcomed home from an unpopular war. We overcame this by shutting up and
listening. A lot.
We heard from more than 7,000 vets during the course of our reporting, and with each
successive story, it became easier to get veterans to open up about what they
experienced.

From LaPorta
I recommend the resources oﬀered to journalists from the Dart Center for Journalism and Trauma, which
is a project of Columbia Journalism School. They have some great guidelines and approaches.
Covering trauma takes a toll on a journalist, so I would also oﬀer the advice to beware of your own
psychological well-being. It's okay to take a break, and in the long way, it will be better for your
reporting.

9

Author's note: The photos used on page 2 of this document are courtesy of James
LaPorta.

10

