Broadcast Track: Visual storytelling:
A new perspective
TIP SHEET
1. Opening Shots – The Long Shot
“ a venture involving great risk but promising a great reward if successful.”

Anna Hewson – KUSA - @AnnaHewson1
https://vimeo.com/annahewson
Lost at Home: use a drone, schedule shoot early, get a variety of different angles for unique perspective
https://vimeo.com/270785630
https://www.9news.com/article/news/investigations/blame/denver-man-reported-missing-383-daysbefore-his-body-was-found-buried-under-debris-in-his-own-home/73-556843117
Shelter from Shelters: Use an Osmo to take the viewer with you as you hit the streets
https://vimeo.com/243252895
https://www.9news.com/article/news/investigations/we-asked-100-homeless-people-if-theyd-rathersleep-outside-or-in-a-shelter/73-493418852
Robb St Fire: request all available evidence video, (bodycam, surveillance, drone) hold the long shot and
write to the video
https://vimeo.com/253450969
https://www.9news.com/article/news/local/investigations/blocked-doors-barred-windows-found-afterfatal-fire-in-home-for-adults-with-disabilities/73-490047948
Protection Disorder: Brainstorm early, order early (2-3weeks) write to animation, because animation
can’t change!
https://vimeo.com/269290931
https://www.9news.com/article/news/local/investigations/a-colorado-law-supposed-to-make-somesuspects-give-up-their-guns-is-not-working/73-552261756

2. Rock Solid Center – Quality Visual Content

Brendan Keefe – WXIA - @BrendanKeefe
Brendan Keefe on YouTube
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Shoot interviews with at least two cameras. Don’t have two cameras? Yes you do – you
have a phone, right?
A wide cam, a medium cam, and a tight cam on the subject allow you to use longer or
compressed sound bites, and make your interviews more interesting visually.
Multi-cam interviews give you OPTIONS IN EDITING.
Keep your old cell phones (ask work to keep the old one if they give you a newer one).
An old iPhone with no service is basically an iPod Touch. Use it as another camera or to
record audio.
Get an inexpensive lav mic ($20 on Amazon) to use with your phone. Download the
Voice Record Pro app. Now you have a second mic.
Use the second camera and second mic for reversals. You can use your questions in
interviews.
Get a 360 cam like the Rylo. It’s small, stabilized, and great for confrontations. You can
get ALL sides of the unscheduled interview and never miss the unexpected.
Shoot ‘backgrounds’ for graphics and documents with plenty of ‘negative’ space. ˇhink
of where you will add text or superimpose the documents.
Print out photos by uploaded to a nearby CVS or Walgreens and take the photos to the
scene. Shoot the photos and documents on location.
Consider a DSLR with at least one PRIME LENS. You’ll thank me later.
If you have archival photos or video, try to match the angle and shoot the same location
today. Great for stand-ups.
Use your down time waiting for an event or hearing to start -- shoot backgrounds or
special B-roll you’ll need later.
Slo-mo and time-lapse are your friends. Shoot at a higher frame rate to playback superslow, or record time-lapses to show the passage of time
Did a viewer give you vertical video shot by a cell phone? DON’T put blurred ‘wings’ on
it. Instead, put the video in your phone and shoot it playing back on the phone. On
location is even better.
‘Paint’ with light. Move the light instead of the documents or the camera. ‘Reveal’ using
the light. Play with the shadows.
Inexpensive spring clamps with photo ‘ball’ mounts can make your set-ups a lot quicker.

3. Finishing Touches – The Polished Product

Andy Miller
Executive Producer of Investigations for Raycom Media
• Just because you do it different and your cameras look great doesn’t mean it “worked”
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d_19yXuCPzo
Often times I believe there are times to shine and times to get out of the way. Find that balance. I
typically get out of the way more, when the action is more intense. Good rule of thumb is keep all the
more distracting edits to the beginning when you want to grab attention, then settle into and rhythm
that does not distract.
• Beg – Borrow – Steal
Beg for advise, borrow gear from anyone in the building that has it (Creative services always has
goodies) steal ideas techniques and anything else you like that fits you investigation.
• Moments matter most
Capture them on camera. Identify them in your video. Showcase them in the story.
From a part of the confrontation that tells the whole story - to a gentle touch on the shoulder from a
friend when someone is telling an emotional story these little actions make all the difference in your
ability to tell the full story.
• Graphics must evolve
Constantly build inside the frame or in after effects move the camera to keep them from jumping out as
a “graphic”. While on that topic, don’t rely on graphics. Shoot documents or screens or project video
onto something, print photos, incorporate video as much as you can while still being as effective as
possible.
• Reward the viewer
Make sure that as the story goes along, you reward the viewer for sticking with you by giving them a
powerful moment, a new fact, or something to advance the story in a significant way. Some people call
it the 3rd quarter surprise. Something so big that the viewer re-engages and sticks with you through the
end. The viewers time is valuable. Don’t waste it.

