DIGGING INTO FEDERAL COURT RECORDS
Brad Heath, USA TODAY, bheath@usatoday.com, @bradheath, (202) 527-9709

The very basics
•

PACER ($): The federal court website with the dockets of 94 district courts, specialty
courts (bankruptcy and federal claims) and courts of appeal. You pay by the search, and
by the page for most documents. If you want to get into federal court records, you
need a PACER account. The courts generally charge 10 cents per page, but don’t
always collect from accounts with very low balances. http://www.pacer.gov
To reduce the price – for yourself and others – consider adding the RECAP extension to
your web browser. If another RECAP user has already purchased the document, you
won’t have to; if you purchase it, other RECAP users won’t have to.

Keeping up with the cases
•
•

•
•
•

Twitter: USA TODAY’s big cases bot auto-publishes filings from major district court
cases, subject to some limitations. https://twitter.com/big_cases
Docket notices ($): Some federal courts let you get email updates for every new filing in
a case, the same way attorneys on the case do. This is by far the fastest way to get
updates. Not every district allows it. (You need PACER access to see the documents and
will have to pay the standard fee.) Ask the court clerk.
Sqoop: Allows you to track new filings in most federal district courts. The service isn’t as
fast as docket updates, and doesn’t include some key jurisdictions. https://sqoop.com
PacerPro ($): Lets you subscribe to updates for selected cases. There’s a fee to use the
service, and you also can incur PACER charges. https://www.pacerpro.com
LexisNexis and Westlaw ($$): Both services allow you to track dockets. They can be
expensive, and the docket tracking tends to be slower than other services. Use these if
you already have access and don’t need up-to-the-minute coverage.

Finding stories, subjects, people
Tens of thousands of documents end up filed in federal court every day. They can offer you an
entry point into government misconduct and private misdeeds. They can help you learn about a
business or find people who’ve suffered through a tragedy.
•
•

PACER Party Case Locator ($): Standard searches by name of party. Need to find the
case against John Smith? Start here. https://pcl.uscourts.gov
CourtListener RECAP archive: Search for keywords within the text of documents that
have been uploaded by people using the RECAP browser extension.
https://www.courtlistener.com/recap

•

•

LexisNexis and Westlaw ($$): Standard searches let you mine the text of court decisions.
These can be powerful because they often recite the facts, but they’re less complete than
looking at other filings in the case.
CourtLink and Westlaw ($$): Powerful Boolean search for keywords within documents
filed in federal courts (and a variety of state courts). The services aren’t free but they
offer the best visibility.

Data
In addition to using them as a search portal, the federal courts offer some useful sources of data
that you can consume as data:
•

•

•
•

•

•

RSS feeds: About 74 district courts and a handful of circuits provide RSS feeds for new
docket entries. The completeness of those feeds varies. (This is the data source behind
Sqoop and big cases.) Taken together, they offer a reasonably good view of the work of
federal courts.
PACER civil and criminal docket reports ($): PACER lets you construct some custom
reports for civil and criminal filings. You can pull lists of new criminal cases, new civil
judgments, cases matching some criteria, etc., and export them as an ASCII file. Log in to
the PACER site for a particular district and choose the “Reports” option at the top of the
screen.
PACER bankruptcy reports ($): You can construct similar lists of bankruptcy filings,
bankruptcy claims, creditors and judgments.
Court administration data: The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts publishes reports
on caseloads, wiretaps and other subjects. http://www.uscourts.gov/statisticsreports/analysis-reports
U.S. Sentencing Commission data: The commission publishes very detailed data on every
person sentenced in a federal criminal case, including a ton of detail about the
information that shaped his or her sentence:
https://www.ussc.gov/research/datafiles/commission-datafiles.
Federal Judicial Center data: The FJC publishes an index of criminal, civil, bankruptcy
and appellate cases filed in federal courts. It’s not up-to-the-minute, but what it lacks in
currency it makes up for in completeness: https://www.fjc.gov/research/idb.

