Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel

IRE 2018 Orlando| Norm Lewis, University of Florida | nplewis@ufl.edu

ENSURE ANALYSIS TOOLPAK IS ENABLED ON YOUR COMPUTER
Microsoft considers Analysis
TookPak an “add-in” feature. It
comes with Excel (for Windows and
for the latest Mac version) but you
must enable it first. Check to see if it Apple
Windows
is loaded by clicking on the Data tab
on the ribbon. If yours does not look like one of these examples here, follow steps below.
For Windows: Enabling Analysis ToolPak

1. Click on the File
tab on the ribbon.
3. Click on
Add-Ins.
2. Click on Options.

5. Click box for
Analysis ToolPak.

6. Click
OK

4. Click Go …

For Macintosh: Installing Analysis ToolPak
If you have the latest version (Office 365 shown here, or Office 2016), Microsoft has
reinstated the ToolPak. For users of earlier versions, Microsoft removed it and referred
Apple users to StatPlus:mac LE from AnalystSoft for free.
1. Click on the Tools
menu above the ribbon.

2. Select Excel
Add-Ins…

3. Click on Analysis ToolPak.

4. Click OK.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 2

PART 1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
The ToolPak offers a summary of a column of data. Choose the Faculty worksheet.
1. Click on Data tab on the ribbon.

2. On the right, click on Data Analysis.

4. Click OK.

3. Click on
Descriptive
Statistics.

5. Click in Input Range box.

6. Click on the Salary column heading.

11. Click OK.

7. Click in the
box for Labels
in First Row.

8. Click in the box
beside Summary
statistics.

9. Activate Output
Range button.

10. In the Output
Range box, type G3
or click on the cell
where you want the
stats inserted.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 3

12. Adjust the
columns for
readability and
to line up the
decimal points.

Let us now glean some key numbers from this output.

Use the mean for
numbers that vary
little: sports stats,
commute times,
water levels, etc.
Use the median
for numbers with
potential outliers:
salaries, income,
wealth, home
values, etc.

All three
averages are
provided.

The mode is the
most frequently
occurring number;
it is rarely used in
journalism.

The min and max
are the range.

Total of all
salaries.
Count of
data, or rows.

For this data set, the best average is the median. Because the term is not used in everyday
speech, phrase it this way:
The median, or midpoint, was $90,610.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 4

A STATISTICS PRIMER
A few words about statistics.
1. Statistics is the science of probability. Probability is not certainty. All statistics can
tell you is whether a relationship among numbers could have happened by chance.
2. You have to set the level of chance, called alpha. Social scientists generally set that
level at .05, or 5 percent. Scientists describe that as p < .05, where p is probability.
3. Colloquially, p < .05 means there was less than a 5 percent probability a relationship
among numbers was due to random chance.
4. The flip side is that p < .05 also means that anything less than a 5 percent error rate
is acceptable. To put it another way, it means that if dozens of combinations of
variables are measured at random, nearly 1 in 20 is likely to show a false
relationship. Thus, probability is not certainty.
5. Journalists care about statistics because they help us sift meaningful patterns from
random chance. For example, are data showing racial disparities indicative of a
meaningful pattern or could they just be normal, random fluctuations in the data?
Statisticians care about the former and ignore the latter.
6. Which statistic to use depends on what is being measured, including whether
a. The data are discrete (such as gender) or continuous (such as test scores).
b. A comparison is made between individuals or groups.
7. Statistics are not voodoo. They are based on empirical testing and numerical laws
such as the central limit theorem. It is, after all, a science.
8. On the other hand, statistics are not magic. They require interpretation to avoid
false interpretations or describe undue importance. Statistics cannot keep us from
making these two common errors in interpretation:
a. Presuming that correlation implies causation.
b. Failing to consider a plausible alternative explanation.
9. Although p < .05 is considered statistically significant, a more precise term would be
statistically noticeable or statistically detectable. Whether that relationship is
significant depends on human judgment.
10. If you want to read more about statistics, I recommend:
a. “Naked Statistics: Stripping the Dread from the Data” by Charles Wheelan
b. “Statistics for People Who (Think They) Hate Statistics” by Neil J. Salkind
c. “Statistics Unplugged” by Sally Caldwell

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 5

PART 2: CORRELATION
Correlation measures if two things are related: whether they
rise and fall together or in opposite directions.
Consider height and weight as in the chart to the right. As
people grow taller, they tend to weigh more. Shorter people
tend to weigh less. Thus, height and weight are correlated.
Further, this is a positive correlation: they rise together.

Or think about the relationship between drinking
alcohol and dexterity as shown in the chart to the
left. As the number of drinks consumed increases,
dexterity decreases. As one goes up, the other goes
down. This is a negative correlation.
Correlations vary between -1 and +1, like this:
+1 Perfect positive correlation
0 No correlation
-1 Perfect negative correlation

Two measures rise or fall together
The two measures have nothing in common
As one measure increases, the other measure decreases

Let’s look at the Coaches worksheet. This data set is of 2017 salaries for head college
football coaches from USA Today and the most recent graduation rates for players on their
teams as reported to the NCAA, called the GSR (graduation success rate).
Our question: Are graduation rates correlated with coaches’ pay?
Open the Analysis ToolPak by clicking on the Data Analysis button at the far
right of the Data ribbon.

1. Click on
Correlation.

2. Click OK.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 6

3. With cursor inside Input
Range box, select the Total Pay
and GSR columns, D and E
6. Click
OK.

4. Click in Labels
in first row box.

5. In the Output Range
box, type G3 or click in
the cell where you want
the stats to appear.
The resulting data look like this.
These are 1
because they
are perfect
correlations:
Total pay =
Total pay.

Cell is blank because it
would just repeat the
bottom left cell.

The correlation: 0.11
The number 0.11 is positive (no minus sign), so it is a positive correlation. The two
measures rise together. As coach pay goes up, so do graduation rates.
But is that 0.11 meaningful? Here are commonly accepted benchmarks for correlation:
0.10 to 0.30 Weak relationship
0.31 to 0.50 Moderate relationship
0.51 to 0.99 Large relationship
The correlation of 0.11 is a very weak relationship. It means pay for head college football
coaches is unconnected to their players’ graduation rates.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 7

Now click on the Crime worksheet. This is FBI Uniform Crime Report data for 2016 for U.S.
cities of at least 10,000 population.
Our question: How strong is the association between violent crime and population?
1. Open the Analysis ToolPak by clicking on the Data Analysis button at the far
right of the Data ribbon

2. Choose correlation

3. With cursor inside Input Range box,
select columns for Population and Violent.
6. Click
OK.
4. Click in Labels
in first row box.
5. In the Output
Range box, type O3
or click in the cell
where you want
the stats to appear.

The correlation of 0.94 is a large
relationship. Thus, we can say that
violent crime and population are
strongly correlated.
The correlation: 0.94

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 8

PART 3: T-TEST
Next, let’s test differences. Statistics can tell us whether differences matter.
Open the Soccer worksheet.
This is from the Florida Gators women’s soccer team for the 2017 season. The Gators ended
the season in the quarterfinals, as one of the top 8 teams, with a record of 17 wins, 7 losses.
Over the season, the Gators took 308 shots on goal compared to 180 by opponents.
Our question: Did the Gators differ from their opponents in shots taken?
The best statistic to use for this comparison is a t-test, which compares two means.

1. Open the Analysis ToolPak by clicking on the Data Analysis button at the far
right of the Data ribbon.

2. Choose t-test: Paired Two Sample for Means

3. Click inside the Variable 1 Range and choose one of
the two shots columns (does not matter which one)
and place the other in the Variable 2 Range box.

4. Click in
Labels box.

Not done yet …

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 9

8. Click
OK.

5. Click in the Hypothesized
Mean Difference box and
type 0 (zero).

6. Leave Alpha at the default,
0.05, the standard level for
determining statistical
significance.

7. Click in the Output Range and type
G3 (or click in a cell location).

Why is the Hypothesized Mean Difference box zero? It has to do with how statistics work.
Statistics actually test the opposite of what you are trying to find. It works like this:
1. My hypothesis: Shots on goal were different.
2. Opposite (null) hypothesis: No difference in shots.
3. Result: Presuming the null hypothesis is true, what is the chance of this data?
4. If alpha is .05 means if null hypothesis true, less than 5% chance of this data.
5. Therefore, if p < .05, reject null hypothesis and accept hypothesis of a difference.
We run the test and get this output:

Mean shots on goal:
Gators 12.8; opponents 7.5

The t-statistic. We could
look up the significance
level in a stats book … or
let Excel do it for us.
Because we did not choose a
direction (more or fewer shots),
we chose the two-tailed result.
The p-value is < .05, so we
reject the no-difference H and
accept our H of a difference.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 10

PART 4: CHI-SQUARE
Often in journalism we want to compare percentages. Is the makeup of our community
significantly different from the national average?
Our question: Is Florida substantially older than the United States?
This one cannot be answered by the Analysis ToolPak. However, Excel can calculate the
statistic and significance for us.
Open the Pop Raw worksheet with data from the 2010 Census.
Reported in 5year intervals.

Raw census data from
American Fact Finder.

I calculated percentage of
the whole for each interval.

These
differences
are too
small to be
statistically
significant.

The census categories are too numerous to detect statistical significance. I experimented
with different groupings that made sense according to the data and ended up with three:
young, middle, and old. The groupings are in the Pop Group worksheet. Open that now.
This grouping compares Florida with the United States by percentages.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 11

The chi-square statistic compares observed (Excel calls it actual) figures with expected
ones. Let’s translate that to the age groupings.
Fla Pct are the observed
data, or what Excel calls
actual data.

USA Pct are the expected data, or
what would be expected to happen
if the national figures were
duplicated in each state.

If you took statistics, you calculated the chi-square statistic by hand and consulted a table
to determine if the statistic was significant. Excel does that for us in a single formula:
=CHISQ.TEST(actual range,expected range)
But first, we have to calculate the percentages as numbers. So I recalculated the formulas as
*100 and changed the cell format to number so the chi-square could be computed.

Insert formula here:
=CHISQ.TEST(L2:L4,M2:M4)

This number is the p value.
It is not < .05. Therefore, the
null hypothesis (nothing
different about Florida) has
to be accepted.
Therefore, while the portion of Florida’s population that is 65 and older is 4 percentage
points higher than the national average, it is not large enough to be statistically significant.

Basic Statistical Analysis in Excel, NICAR 18, Norm Lewis | Page 12

