Mapping in Excel with ArcGIS Maps for Office
IRE 2018

Description
Charts and graphs are a great way to start to tell your story but what happens when you want to go
further? With ArcGIS Maps for office, you can create maps, perform analysis, and gain new
understanding, without ever leaving Excel. Come to this session to learn how you can visualize your
data in new ways that will capture your audience’s attention. With this session, you will get hands-on
experience with ArcGIS Maps for Office and complimentary access to ArcGIS Pro, ArcGIS Online, and
ArcGIS Maps for Office so you can continue your visualization journey long after you leave the
conference.

Data

https://esri.box.com/v/IRE-2018

1. Introduction
a. ArcGIS Maps for office is an add-in for Microsoft Office that brings mapping
capabilities into Excel and PowerPoint, although today we will only focus on
integration with Excel.

b. With Maps for Office you can easily create interactive maps of your data without ever
having to leave Excel.

c. From Excel, you can share your maps and data to ArcGIS Online or copy maps as
images wherever past functionality is supported.

d. After installing the add-in, the ArcGIS Maps tab becomes available in the ribbon at the
top of the page. With this tab, you can create and manage your maps, directly
alongside your data.

2. Download and open the data

a. Use the following link to download and open the workbook
b. Data: https://esri.box.com/v/CAR-2018
c. If prompted, click “enable editing”
3. Creating a map
a. Sign in
i. To use ArcGIS Maps for Office, you must be signed into ArcGIS Online.
To sign in, use the login which is attached to this document. Note, both
the login and password are case sensitive.
ii. From the Menu, click the ArcGIS Maps tab (along the top of the page).
This will prompt the ribbon for ArcGIS Maps to appear

b. Click Add Map
c. The Add data from worksheet window will open allowing you to select:
i. the data to map
ii. the location type
iii. the style of the map
d. Under Data ensure Table 1 is selected
e. Under Location Type ensure ZIP Codes is selected
f.

Under Style by Column select 2017 Total Population

g. Under Choose a way to visualize your data select Counts and Amounts (Color)
h. Click Add data
i.

Under Choose an option select Do not aggregate areas

4. Styling a map

a. Once your map is created, the Layer style options will automatically open in
the left side panel
b. This panel allows customization of the style that was selected in the previous
menu
c. You will see options for
i. Divided by
ii. Classification
iii. Theme
iv. Change Symbol Style
v. Transparency
vi. Visible range
d. Divided by allows you to create a ratio so you can equally compare values
e. Classification allows you to classify (group) the data. This option creates
classifications of data and allows you to group and represent similar data by
one symbol
f.

Themes include
i. High to low
ii. Above and Below
iii. Centered On
iv. Extremes

g. Clicking Change Symbol style will allow you to change the color (fill) and
outline of the symbols.
h. Transparency controls how much you can see through the symbols.
i.

Click OK when finished styling the layer.

j.

Note: ArcGIS Maps for Office utilizes Smart Mapping technology which
preconfigures the style of your map based on the data. This is often a good
starting point for those not familiar with mapping.

5. Changing Style
a. After you’ve created your map, you can alter the previous configuration by
selecting Layer Style along the top of the map.
b. Once the Layer Style panel appears, select More Styles at the top of the panel.
c. Hover over each option to learn more about each option
6. Enriching Data
a. Mapping the data in your spreadsheet offers insight into spatial patterns and
allows for quick visual analysis, but there may be times when you want to
quickly and easily add contextual information about the area surrounding that
data. Esri's geoenrichment capabilities allow you to answer questions about
locations that you can't answer with your data along. Examples include: What
kind of people live here? What do people like to do in this area? What are their
habits and lifestyles? What kind of businesses are in this area?
b. To enrich data, click Enrich Data along the top of the map pane
c. After the Enrich layer dialogue box appears, select a category to explore some
of the variables that are available for enrichment. Select Show all variables to
see a comprehensive listing of all variables that fall into each category. Clicking
the triangle next to each variable group will reveal the listing of variables which
fall into each category.
d. Select the check box next to any variables you’re interested in mapping and
click Next at the bottom of the window. Alternatively, you can keep browsing
other available data by clicking the back button.
e. After clicking, Next, the list of selected variables for enrichment will appear.
Below Column, ensure <Create New> is selected. This will add the new data to
a new column in your workbook which can be used to perform non-spatial
analysis.
f.

Clicking Add Data to System will then add the data to your workbook.

7. Adding New Layers
a. A layer in maps for office is an easy way to refer to data that’s mapped in the
map window. Layers allow different columns to be mapped within the same
map window.
b. To add additional layers to the map, navigate to the bottom of the bottom of
the Map Contents (to the left of the map) and select copy
c. Copying the layer will simultaneously add a duplicate layer to the top of the
contents pane and open the Layer Style window.
d. Once the new Layer style window appears, click More Styles and select the
newly added data from the drop-down menu labeled Choose an attribute to
show.
e. Below Select a drawing style, choose a new style. Hover over each option to
learn more about each option.
f.

Navigate to the map window and uncheck

the original layer to hide the

layer from view. Unchecking a layer allows you to control which data is present
in the map without having to create separate maps for each layer.
g. Re-check

the box next to the newly copied layer to turn it back on

h. Double click the name of the layer to rename it.

