Covering immigrant
communities
Building sources and broadening stories

Learn. Learn. Learn.
• Inform yourself about the specific communities in your coverage area.
• Reach out to local organizations, churches/mosques/temples, school clubs.

• Start by writing the smaller stories as a way to inform yourself and
your reader/listeners/viewers.

Building trust
• Start by writing the little stories if you can, or just go to these events
so they know you are interested.
• Keep in touch. Don’t be that person who only calls when it’s breaking
news and you need something.
• Meet for coffee or lunch every so often just to catch up and ask
what’s going on — that’s often where the best stories come from.
• And if you must work through an interpreter, make sure you address
the person you are interviewing directly and make eye contact with
them — not the interpreter.

Incorporate immigrant voices in nonimmigrant stories.

Everyone has an agenda. And it’s OK
• Just be aware of that.
• Inform yourself. Immigration law is very complex so talk to experts to
run any issues you have by them.
• Be in a position where you can challenge your source when needed.
• Use attorneys, think-tanks such as Migration Policy Institute,
university professors and others to help you make sure you
understand.
• We need to know what we are writing about before we explain it to
readers.

Be mindful and sensitive
• It is not our responsibility that the individual gets asylum or a visa to
stay in the U.S., but it is also not our responsibility to get them
deported.
• If they are afraid of being fully identified, check with your editor to
see what is your media outlet’s policy. Be truthful about the potential
impact the story can have to make sure the person knows what they
are agreeing to.

• Tips from the field:

go.perlatrevizo.com/immigration

“All we can do is report
responsibly and allow
people to see that
immigration, like everything,
is a nuanced issue.”
go.perlatrevizo.com/poynter

Perla Trevizo, border and immigration reporter
Arizona Daily Star
@Perla_Trevizo
ptrevizo@Tucson.com
(520) 573-4102
www.perlatrevizo.com

Finding stories
MEXICAN CONSULATE

DOCUMENTING HATE DATABASE
POLICE COMMUNITY EVENT

Building trust

Understanding ICE and Border Patrol
ICE RIDE ALONG

BORDER PATROL CITIZEN’S ACADEMY

Neighborhood project

Data
• Go around ICE to law
enforcement agencies to get
records

• Check the ICE FOIA library
• Take advantage of state laws
that you can use to get records
and information
• Work with lawyer on records
requests made to agencies
• Work with data person

Resources
• Transactional Records Clearinghouse at Syracuse
– Trac.syr.edu

• Pew Hispanic Center
• Migration Policy Institute
• Migratory Notes newsletter

Landing your first
project on the
immigration beat
MARIA PEREZ – NAPLES DAILY NEWS
@mariajpsl
maria.perez@naplesnews.com

Finding the story
 Learn about the issues that affect minority communities beyond immigration

policy, look at the intersection between those issues and deportations.
Education, housing, labor conditions, infrastructure, drivers licenses…
Minority communities are diverse, have different problems. Learn about
them, their history and their countries.

 Sources: attorneys (immigration, labor, pro bono), advocates, churches,
bodega owners, volunteers – and that person who knows everyone in town.
You don’t need to find a community hero or a high school valedictorian to
write a story of abuse.
Just because someone hasn’t connected the dots yet, it doesn’t mean the story
isn’t there.

Connect the dots…

Who is
benefitting?

Develop the story idea…
Can you measure the scope? Find the data!

What agencies could gather data that will help you quantify the story? You
can find alternatives to the federal immigration agencies: courts, local law
enforcement, local prosecutors, administrative courts…
Research online. Ask experts. If there’s form, there’s often a database.
Consider learning Excel, MySQL.
 Create your own data: records requests, court cases, story clips…

Write it down. Write your ideal nut graph/s. What evidence you
have now and how you plan to support what you say?
Pitch it! To your editors and trusted colleagues. Be persistent.

Help to get time and resources:
Marquette University O’Brien Fellowship in Public Service Journalism
ProPublica Local Reporting Network grants
The Investigative Fund initiatives , including the Ida B. Wells Fellowship for
journalists of color.
The McGraw Fellowship for Business Journalism
The Education Writers Association Reporting Fellowship
The Abrams Nieman Fellowship for Local Investigative Journalism
 IRE Freelance Fellowship for freelancers
And many more…

Reporting
Consider building your own database to spot trends. It will help you
see the forest, not just the trees.
Traditional sources may not know about the issue.

Get sources to open up:
Knocking on doors works far better than phone calls.
Is there anyone who they trust and can vouch for you?
Be honest: Explain what you are doing, what you can and can’t do.
Be extra clear about name use. Sometimes you can try to negotiate in case of
common names.

Reporting
Records: think of alternative records, ask attorneys for the
immigration files, immigrants can sign a release so you can request
their records from immigration authorities, you can often attend
immigration court hearings.
Follow the money!
Understand the system. Who benefits? How?

Responsibility of law enforcement / regulators.

Writing

Writing
Try to write as you go and keep evolving nut graph/s.

Don’t stereotype: Details are one of the best antidotes;
represent the complexity of the people you write about and
their reality.
Don’t just write about a community, write for them, about the
issues they care about – but don’t forget the rest of your
readers.
Keep the unfairness, the abuse at sight throughout the story.

MARIA PEREZ – NAPLES DAILY NEWS
@mariajpsl
maria.perez@naplesnews.com

