When the system is the abuser: Investigating injustice in child welfare
Three veteran investigative reporters who’ve worked the child welfare beat will share with you the
methods they’ve developed to explore systemic problems in the agencies running the foster care system.
Tips from Carol Marbin Miller, Karen de Sá and David Jackson
More than perhaps any other state or local coverage area, the child welfare beat produces conflicting
challenges: The stakes are enormously high. The transparency is often shamefully low.
Because most of the stories worth telling involve the health and wellbeing of children, few of the records
that are generated are public, and state and local administrators are loath to discuss the details of
individual cases on the record. That often means reporters have to be sharp-elbowed about the records
we are entitled to, and to look for ways to circumvent confidentiality laws.
Here are a few ideas that have worked:
Identify the records that are public in your state, and learn how to use them effectively:


In most states, records generated from Inspector General investigations are open to the public.
They often contain a wealth of information, and can lead to good stories. IGs can investigate
allegations of bid rigging and favoritism, falsification of records, sexual harassment and racial and
gender discrimination, theft of government property, double-dipping -- and, most importantly, poor
job performance leading to tragic results.



Similarly, most states have units within the child welfare department that evaluate performance
on a larger scale, such as quality assurance divisions. Such divisions generally engage in data
gathering, look for trends and measure outcomes among and between geographic or other units - which counties are doing a good job of protecting kids; which regions are better at helping foster
kids achieve permanency.



Most states have laws creating a path for the release of child death reviews, and many
automatically release such documents when it is determined that the child, or children, died as a
result of abuse or neglect. In some states, you will have to sue for release of reports, but your
chances of success often are quite good as judges are reluctant to keep secret the details of
state agency bungling when the results are particularly tragic.



Are emails to, from and among agency administrators public record in your state? If so, they are a
great source of information. Agency heads and their subordinates often talk openly in emails
about any number of things: the details of specific cases -- though identities almost always will be
redacted -- new policies, personnel matters, job performance and even the political influences
that affect agencies.

Identify and nurture the human sources who are most influential in child welfare:


Every local area or state has children’s advocates. You’ll want to know which advocates are
taken seriously in your community, and which are regarded as belonging to the fringe. The former
can be excellent sources, both on and off the record. The latter can be helpful in generating tips,
but you should probably avoid quoting them, for your own credibility.



Look for the equivalent of a citizens’ review board in your area, some committee of private
citizens -- or a combination of lay people and administrators -- whose job is to perform oversight
of child welfare functions. Go to their meetings; look for records if they produce any.



Find out who sits on your state legislature’s committees and subcommittees that determine policy
for child welfare, fund agencies and sometimes oversee performance. Minority party members
are more likely to speak openly or help you get critical reports, though in states with a greater
spirit of bipartisanship you sometimes cultivate sources on both sides of the aisle.



Child death review teams or committees can be an excellent place to look for sources both for
details of individual child deaths and for trends and patterns.



Many states and regions have a variety of unions, professional groups and advocacy groups:
State and local agency employees almost certainly belong to a union. In some areas, foster
parents have formed an alliance or association. They can hold meetings or maintain a website or
blog. Many states have very active children’s advocacy groups; they can maintain listservs and
produce weekly newsletters.



Look for legal services agencies in your area and state, and the ACLU. For years, legal services
groups filed individual and class-action lawsuits involving abuses of the foster care system, the
drugging of foster kids and excessive lengths of stay in state care. Such suits have become
considerably less common as the federal courts have restricted causes of action. But legal aid
lawyers often know what’s going on in your state.



Like any other beat, you can learn things from former and retired administrators and workers,
disgruntled and otherwise.



Most states have a federally funded advocacy group for people with disabilities. They are
generally called P & As, or protection and advocacy agencies. They are chartered by state
governments, and can vary from very effective to downright useless. Because so many children
in foster care have either a developmental disability or mental illness, they often get involved in
child welfare efforts by filing individual or class-actions suits, or release reports on state
performance.



Don’t be shy when it comes to your local judiciary. If dependency court hearings are open in your
state, attend some of them. Then introduce yourself to the judges who preside over such cases.
Consider asking a judge or two to go out for lunch. Sit in their chambers, if you can, and get to
know them. Judges will leak if you can get them to know and trust you.

One of the hardest things you’ll have to do is interview the parents of kids who have been killed or
grievously injured -- or the kids’ grandparents. Here are some tips for conducting those interviews:


Listen, even in silence. Never interrupt the quiet. Your subjects often are trying to compose their
thoughts, and it helps to use that time to observe the way they think. And it helps to later frame
the quote that follows: “Tears welled in her eyes, and she nodded and sighed before saying…..”



Find something in the room that allows them to walk through their memories or thoughts -- a
photo album, a wall of photos, a book or yearbook. Those are the things that give people a
framework for how to think and talk about a particular subject, especially if it is a victim or
survivor. Inevitably, they will share bits of humanity.



Save the hardest stuff for last. Let them talk first from their comfort level. They will give you the
stuff you need to put the denial or affirmation in context. Then, the hard questions -- make sure
you observe them, too. Watch those answers carefully, as they may be the last quotes you get.
You also will have something to work with, such as the subject’s reaction to the question, which
might be more telling than the answer itself.



Always bring documents or records -- or even videotapes -- with you. If the subject is friendly, you
can elicit a reaction. If the subject is fibbing, you can use the documents or tape to push back.



Be as polite, composed and gentle as you can possibly be. If you’re speaking to the grieving
parent or grandparent of a deceased child (who isn’t the person responsible for the death),
remember that there is nothing in the world worse than losing a child.



Don’t forget to learn all the basics: How does the family fit within its world? Did the child
participate in Boy Scouts or Brownies? Were they regulars within a church or synagogue or
mosque? What’s the name of the family dog? Did she have siblings, and how did she fit within the
family’s ecosystem? Did he get good grades? What were his favorite subjects? What position did
he play in his Little League team? Did she do modern dance, or ballet, or urban dance?

When interviewing current and former foster youth, the following things will help you keep trusted frontline
sources as solid voices in your story, and allow you to work in an ethical manner that does not harm them
in the reporting process:


Be aware that they have likely known few adults they can trust, and that you may well be just
another stranger asking them a bunch of personal questions and writing things down for unknown
purposes. So be transparent about your process, who you are, what you’re writing about, what
you’d like to learn from them.



Be extra kind and sensitive when interviewing young people who’ve suffered trauma. With foster
youth, the trauma is repeated - the abuse or neglect at home, the separation from home and
family, and then typically the abuse suffered in “the system.” That’s a lot for a young person to
survive - let alone tell a reporter about. Acknowledge them, and most importantly, give them
agency in the process of working with you. For example, let them know that they don’t have to
answer everything you ask, and that they can (in some instances, if it’s early enough) change
their mind about things they told you. Don’t re-traumatize them through your journalistic process;
it’s not worth it.



Try to see if you can connect with some trusted adult in the foster youth’s life whom you can a)
corroborate things they’ve told you with, and b) circle back with throughout your reporting process
to make sure they are really OK. This person can also come in handy when, for instance, youth
are reading their court files for the first time and learning things they may need extra support to
digest. They can also help you find sources who go missing.



Simple meals, snacks or drinks - before you dive in with the interviews - go a long way to building
trust.



No surprises: Again, back to agency. For young people who have had no control over their lives
and things that have happened to them, it’s important that you not rob them again. Let them know
how things are progressing, when the story will come out, what it will say in general, and
specifically in their sections. Do not assume they know what it’s like to be interviewed by a
reporter and to appear in the public eye.

Some additional thoughts:

.



This is one of hardest beats to cover in local journalism, along with the crime or courts beat, in
terms of the sheer volume of human misery. And it mostly involves the misery of children, mostly
small children. At the beginning, especially, it can be very difficult to deal with emotionally. It can
be even harder if you have your own children at home.



It helps to develop effective coping mechanisms, and it is not a sign of weakness if you need to
discuss your feelings with your editor, your partner at home, or even a pastor or a member of
your church, synagogue or mosque. Exercise is an excellent outlet, both physically and
emotionally. It also helps to maintain healthy eating habits, as food can be an attractive source of
comfort.



And there’s nothing wrong with having a glass or two of wine or beer when you get home. But if
you find yourself using substances more and more, and you think you are becoming dependent
on them, it’s probably time to seek help.

