September 24, 2017

PART 1

Secrets in the sky
The United States remains an easy mark for drug dealers, terrorists and others who prize anonymity
when registering aircraft or getting licensed to fly. So much for the lessons of 9/11.
By Kelly Carr and Jaimi Dowdell | Spotlight Fellows

MEREDITH KOHUT FOR THE BOSTON GLOBE

The Gonzalez family, (left to right) Arnaldo Enrique Linares Gonzalez, 19, Joecruz Alexander Moreno, Carmen Milagros Yanez
de Gonzalez, 62, and Asnaldo Gonzalez, 65, stand on the roof of their former home that was badly damaged on April 28, 2008
when a charter plane crashed into it, causing a fiery explosion that killed four members of their family, and everyone onboard
the plane. The pilot was licensed by the FAA, and at the time of the crash, had been convicted of smuggling cocaine in the U.S.
and smuggling cocaine while flying in Venezuela.

A

CATIA LA MAR, VENEZUELA
t first, he thought the thunderous
boom overhead was the sound of an
electric transformer exploding; his
wife thought it might be an earthquake. But then Asnaldo Del Valle Gonzalez
saw the blistering orange flames and suffocating black smoke billowing from his own
home, and — inconceivably — an airplane
embedded in his roof.
Gonzalez sprinted inside the house where
nine members of his family were that April
morning in 2008. He found his baby grandson in his crib under a burning mosquito net,
but the rising flame and smoke prevented
him from rescuing everyone. Gonzalez heard
his daughter screaming for help and saw fire
enveloping his 6-year-old granddaughter.
The pilot of the plane, a twice-convicted
drug trafficker traveling with a large amount
of cash, had lost power just after taking off
from nearby Simon Bolivar International Airport, spiraling down onto Gonzalez’s house.
When the smoke cleared, Gonzalez’s twin
daughters, two granddaughters, and all three

people on the plane were dead.
Gonzalez had no idea where the plane had
come from or why it had crashed. But amid
the horrific scene, the registration number
on the ruined aircraft — N6463L — held a
clue: The plane was from the United States.
As he sought to unspool the story behind
the tragedy, Gonzalez would come face to face
with what he calls “the monster,” the web of
secrecy that surrounds thousands of planes
like the one that devastated his family, making it nearly impossible to identify a plane’s
real owners and hold them accountable.
A Spotlight Team investigation has found
that lax oversight by the Federal Aviation Administration, over decades, has made it easy
for drug dealers, corrupt politicians, and
even people with links to terrorism to register private planes and conceal their identities.
With the US stamp of approval — signified by
a number on the tail fin that always begins
with the letter “N” — owners often find more
freedom from scrutiny and anonymity while
traveling. This has allowed criminals and foreign government officials to mask illicit activ-

MEREDITH KOHUT FOR THE BOSTON GLOBE

Carmen Gonzalez and her grandson, Arnaldo Gonzalez, lost four family members when a US-registered plane piloted by a convicted drug dealer crashed into their home in 2008.

ities or keep wealth hidden from their home
countries.
The registered owner of the crashed twinengine Piper, a company called Aircraft Guaranty, is part of a nearly invisible private industry that sometimes operates from computer
terminals inside FAA offices in Oklahoma,
busily registering planes on behalf of foreign
nationals — and working in a system that allows them to hide their names from the public. More than 1,000 planes are registered in
Aircraft Guaranty’s name at an address in a
Texas town of 2,500 that doesn’t have an airport. But it’s enough to give clients both anonymity and coveted US registration for their
planes.

Gonzalez never did figure out who really
owned the plane that crashed into his home
— even when the name of the client Aircraft
Guaranty had on file, Luis Nuñez, was revealed during court proceedings. A court official who visited the listed Miami address for
Nuñez found cobwebs on the doorknob and a
package addressed to someone else. A private
detective working for Gonzalez’s attorneys
spent a year searching for additional clues
and for Nuñez, before concluding that he was
nothing more than a “phantom person.” The
Globe also was unable to locate Nuñez.
More than 16 years after aircraft were used
as weapons in the worst terrorist attack in US
history, the FAA still operates more like a file

MEREDITH KOHUT FOR THE BOSTON GLOBE

Asnaldo Gonzalez couldn’t track down the owner of the US-registered plane that crashed into his house, killing two daughters
and two granddaughters.

clerk than a reliable tool for law enforcement,
enabling secrecy in the skies here and abroad.
The price to register a plane is still just $5 —
the same as in 1964, even though the agency
has the power to raise it — generating little
revenue that could be used to expand oversight. And the FAA does so little vetting of the
ownership and use of planes listed in its aircraft registry that two of the airliners hijacked
and destroyed on 9/11 were still listed as “active” four years after. And that’s prompt compared to this: The FAA didn’t cancel the registration for one TWA cargo plane until 2016,
57 years after it crashed in Chicago, killing
the crew and eight people on the ground.
Today, thousands of planes are registered using practices that can allow for anonymity of
ownership. A Spotlight review shows that one
out of every six aircraft is registered through
trusts, Delaware corporations, or using post

HOWARD YANES/ASSOCIATED PRESS

Officials examine the remains of the plane that crashed into the Gonzalez home.

office box addresses, techniques commonly
used to make it hard to discern the true owner. The number is likely even higher because
the FAA acknowledged that it does not verify
the validity of documents filed for the registry’s more than 300,000 planes.
Critics, including federal investigators
who’ve scrutinized the aircraft registry, say it
is little more than “a big file cabinet” in which
precious little information has been verified,
leaving the door open for people with bad intentions to hide behind a US registration.
FAA officials essentially agree. They stress
that they have a “robust oversight system”
that includes a team of special agents to investigate fraudulent plane ownership, but say
they don’t have the resources to determine
whether information on US plane registration forms is accurate.

“The FAA is constantly working to strengthen the integrity of Registry information,” according to an FAA statement to the Spotlight
Team that came after months of correspondence about the registry’s shortcomings. “The
agency is developing a plan to significantly
upgrade and modernize the aircraft registration process.”
But that’s no guarantee reforms will come
swiftly, if at all. The FAA has a reputation for
making change at a snail’s pace even when
problems are clearly identified: The agency,
for example, still doesn’t put a photo of the
pilot on airman’s licenses 13 years after Congress called for it.
“It is like walking through thick glue. They
just don’t move very quickly at the FAA, and
it’s a chronic problem,” said former North
Dakota senator Byron Dorgan, who served

GREG KAHN/THE NEW YORK TIMES

Former North Dakota senator Byron Dorgan has criticized the FAA for its lack of progress on verifying planes registered in the
United States.

as chairman for the Senate aviation panel in
2009 and 2010. “I would have thought after
2001 that we would have made more progress
by now with respect to verifying the ownership of aircraft.”
Today, the public often only discovers the
gaps in US oversight when something goes
wrong or criminal investigators get involved:
The Venezuelan air force shot down a USregistered, drug-loaded plane near Aruba
in 2015, leaving a trail of bodies and cocaine floating in the bright blue sea. Records
showed the aircraft was registered to a Delaware shell company and managed by Conrad
Kulatz, a Fort Lauderdale attorney in his late
70s.
Federal agents investigating US-registered
planes that bore the hallmarks of drug smuggling in 2013 found that three had been illegally registered here in the name of a Mexican

national. He fooled the FAA simply by listing
a Texas strip mall near the Mexican border as
his address and claiming to be a US citizen.
Early this year, US officials labeled Venezuela’s vice president, Tareck El Aissami, a foreign narcotics kingpin, freezing access to his
US assets, including a luxury jet. The Treasury
Department charged that the jet, registered
at the FAA in the name of a shell company,
was actually controlled by El Aissami, who,
in addition to drug trafficking, also has been
accused of aiding Islamic extremists. But, at
the FAA, the jet’s registration remains valid
in the name of 200G PSA Holdings.
In 2015, federal authorities broke up a
scheme to deliver US airplanes registered
through trusts to an Iranian airline that US
officials say helps to transport troops and materiel to the brutal regime of Bashar Assad
in Syria. Though the sale was stopped, the

KELLY OWEN/GETTY IMAGES

The crop-dusting airplane that 9/11 terrorist Mohamed Atta once allegedly tried to rent sat idle behind police tape Sept. 24,
2001, on a Belle Glades, Fla., airfield.

names of the people who planned to sell the
airliners to Mahan Air were not revealed publicly.
With so little oversight, there may be more
dangerous people in control of American-registered planes whose names have not come to
light. The 9/11 conspirators considered using
private crop-dusting planes to launch terror
attacks before deciding to hijack commercial planes instead. Three months before the
World Trade Center attack, terrorist Zacarias
Moussaoui was trying to acquire crop dusters
in Oklahoma. There is no reason to think his
efforts would have been blocked or even noticed by the FAA’s Aircraft Registry just a few
miles away in Oklahoma City.
Responding to the Globe’s findings, US
Representative Stephen Lynch, a Massachusetts Democrat who has long promoted corporate transparency, said the public urgently

needs to know whether there are other potential terrorists among the thousands of unknown individuals who control US-registered
planes.
“The FAA has basically abdicated their responsibilities,” said Lynch, who in July filed
a bill requiring that the real owners of USregistered planes be publicly disclosed. “We
have all these aircraft being operated by who
knows who and for what purpose. . . . It’s not
the exception, it is the rule, and I think it is
important to hold the FAA accountable.”

‘If it isn’t broken . . .’
Family pictures, fitness schedules, sticky
notes, and birthday balloons decorate the
computer terminals inside the FAA Civil Aviation Registry’s public documents room in
Oklahoma City.

This is where members of the public can
look up information on US-registered planes,
but the terminals at the back are rarely used,
according to the man at the desk, and when
a Globe reporter tried one, it was slow and
balky. Most of the other terminals — many
of them seemingly better machines equipped
with double monitors — are used by the same
people day after day, and they’ve dotted their
workstations with personal items.
They work for aircraft title companies, law
firms, and companies that create trusts — the
way for foreign nationals to register their
planes here legally and without attracting
public attention. Companies actually lease
terminals in the document room, allowing
Aircraft Guaranty to boast to potential clients that it has an office inside the FAA’s Mike
Monroney Aeronautical Center.
For anywhere from a few hundred to several thousand dollars, the agents will create a
legal trust to “own” private aircraft on behalf
of their actual owners, whose names are typically not disclosed to the public. The registration form itself is even easier to complete —
less work than registering a car in most states.
Once the paperwork is done, agents can turn
it in at the cashier’s window in the corner
of the document room, paying a $5 registration fee whether the plane is a $20,000 Piper
Tomahawk or a $20 million Learjet.
Then, the FAA is supposed to review the
registrations for completeness, but a 2013
outside review found that the FAA is not very
thorough. The Department of Transportation inspector general audit estimated that
records for more than half the aircraft registered to non-US citizens through trusts were
incomplete.
In part because US plane registration is so
cheap, easy, and often anonymous, it is extremely popular for people registering internationally. Two-thirds of business jet owners
worldwide register their planes in the United States, according to a 2014 estimate on
the website Corporate Jet Investor. Another

bonus: US-registered planes are believed to
attract less attention when traveling internationally.
Defenders of these “noncitizen trusts” say
they’re an important tool for businesses, especially companies that include foreign nationals among their owners or executives.
US corporations conducting global business
might have key officers who do not meet the
FAA’s citizenship requirements. Additionally,
noncitizens who plan to relocate planes from
the United States sometimes set up trusts
so that the plane has a legal owner while in
transit.
Under US law, foreigners can’t legally register a plane here unless they have a US citizen or US-based legal entity to serve as their
representative in dealing with the FAA. It is
a longstanding safeguard that, in practice,
safeguards nothing.
Champions of the trust system also point
out that the FAA has tightened up the rules in
recent years, requiring the trustees to disclose
agreements with their clients to the FAA at
the time of application for registration. The
trusts don’t have to keep the names of their
clients in the FAA’s permanent record, but
they are supposed to make the information
available to investigators when asked.
The FAA checks for the completeness of the
paperwork, and trusts are often reviewed by
the agency’s legal counsel’s office. However,
the agency does not verify that the trust information is accurate, nor are they required
to under the law. When the Department of
Transportation inspector general tried to get
the names of the real owners directly from
trust companies in 2013, investigators said
some trustees either refused to provide the
information or took months instead of the
two days allowed by the FAA to turn over the
names.
The FAA, similarly, puts few restrictions
on who can hang out their shingle as a trust
company set up to register aircraft. As a result, the industry is a hodgepodge of banks,

A cottage industry
Thousands of planes are registered to companies — some operated
out of private homes — that represent foreign plane owners.

1,030

226

Aircraft Guaranty, Oklahoma City

Plane Fun Inc., Snellville, Ga.

400

620

TVPX, Concord, Mass.

Southern Aircraft Consultancy,
Bungay, Suffolk, England

businesses, and individuals, including several lacking recognizable websites or phone
numbers. At least three operate offshore in
Germany, the Netherlands, and the United
Kingdom — even though the whole point of
such trusts is that they are supposed to provide a US contact for the FAA.
A Georgia-based trust company called Plane
Fun Inc. exemplifies the elusiveness of several
of the trust agents contacted by the Spotlight
Team. Plane Fun lists a modest, split-level
home in Snellville, Ga., as its headquarters,

with more than 200 planes registered to the
address.
But the home is owned by Kathleen Schumacher, who told the Globe she is not involved
with the business. “I handle nothing on it; my
son does,” Schumacher said. Despite repeated attempts, the Globe was unable to reach
Schumacher’s son, Kenneth, who she said is
the operator of Plane Fun.
Aircraft Guaranty, with offices in Texas
and Oklahoma, is much bigger and more
visible than Plane Fun. The nearly 30-year-

JOHAN ORDONEZ/AFP/GETTY IMAGES

Former Guatemalan vice president Roxana Baldetti, who regularly flew in a plane registered in the United States by a trust company, arrived at the Guatemalan Supreme Court in 2016 before a hearing on a new corruption scandal.

old business describes itself as “one of the
most well respected and trusted Trustee Service providers in the aviation industry.” But,
like the manager of Plane Fun, Aircraft Guaranty owner Debbie Mercer-Erwin didn’t want
to talk about her work.
Only after numerous attempts to interview
Mercer-Erwin, including a visit to the singlefamily home in Oklahoma City where she has
an office, did the Globe receive a statement
from the company’s attorney.
Aircraft Guaranty “fully complies with all
US laws and FAA and other regulations in
providing this specific service to its customers,” wrote attorney Wallace C. Magathan III
of Miami. He noted that the firm voluntarily
follows federal “know your customer” rules,
which require company officials to collect
“personally identifiable information” from
clients that may include name, date of birth,
address, and identification number.
Magathan added that Aircraft Guaranty “is

not in the business of thoroughly investigating its customers’ private business affairs.”
He declined to answer the Globe’s questions
about individual clients.
But detailed information about some of Aircraft Guaranty’s more unsavory past clients
has come to light. One of them, Fausto Veliz
Urbina, was sentenced to 78 months in federal prison for cocaine trafficking before being deported to Mexico in 2010. According to
federal court records in Florida, he registered
a plane through Aircraft Guaranty on behalf
of a Mexican shell company, Consorcio Melun
SA de CV, in 2012, something investigators
discovered while looking at a fleet of planes
suspected of involvement in drug trafficking.
A former Guatemalan vice president, Roxana Baldetti, has been indicted in the United
States on federal drug charges and is currently jailed in her homeland. According to
media reports, she regularly jetted around in
a Raytheon 400A that FAA records show was

registered by Aircraft Guaranty on behalf of
a Panamanian company, Best Advisors Group
Inc. Baldetti resigned and was arrested on
fraud charges in 2015 amid media reports of
her many luxury purchases, including multimillion-dollar homes.
And there’s Luis Nuñez, the “phantom person” whose plane — registered through Aircraft Guaranty — crashed into Asnaldo Gonzalez’s house. Gonzalez’s inability to find the
real owner prevented his family’s attorneys
from suing for damages to rebuild his family’s life.
Analysts say there’s a good reason that trust
companies like Aircraft Guaranty are attractive to shady characters: Anonymity is good
for business.
“Criminals find that US planes allow them
to fly under the radar far more easily than
if using some dodgy Russian aircraft,” said
Kathi Lynn Austin, an expert in arms trafficking and executive director of the Conflict
Awareness Project. “The simple act of flying
out of US airspace — where regulatory standards are perceived to be high — conveys a
level of legitimacy on its aircraft and its operator. The American flag also makes it easier
for corrupt officials to wittingly turn a blind
eye.”
In 2009, a jet registered on behalf of a foreign owner through Wells Fargo crashed in a
remote area of the Bahamas, triggering scrutiny of the FAA’s noncitizen trust policy. FAA
officials briefly shut down the option for foreigners to register through noncitizen trusts,
amid concern that some plane owners were
making side agreements that made ownership hard to trace, especially in an emergency.
“There was a frustration that everybody
had,” Joe Standell, counsel to the FAA’s Aeronautical Center at the time, recently told the
Globe. “You let them register airplanes as an
owner trust. But look what that does; nobody
is accountable.”
Trust companies such as Aircraft Guaranty
teamed up with businesses to ensure the survival of noncitizen trusts, arguing they are

crucial to companies with multinational executives who want to own American-registered
aircraft. In all, a dozen associations along
with 70 companies and law firms combined
forces to deluge the FAA with comments.
“If it isn’t broken, don’t fix it,” advised Conrad Kulatz, the Florida attorney linked to
the drug-laden plane shot down off Aruba in
2015, in a 2012 e-mail to the FAA. “I have
never had a problem arising from trustee registration of aircraft in over 30 years practicing law in South Florida.”
The FAA eventually backed off, allowing foreign plane owners to use noncitizen trusts as
long as they met some new conditions: share
the trust agreements with the FAA and agree
to provide ownership information within 48
hours when requested.

Flying under the radar
A bright orange fireball erupted on the
screen of Jeroen Lucas’s video camera while
he filmed a commercial for his media firm in
the early morning of Jan. 29, 2015. His frame
captured the Aruba skyline twinkling at dawn
as a flaming streak twisted and turned over
the Caribbean Sea.
Minutes before the flash appeared, a business jet had failed to respond to air traffic controllers, and soon the Venezuelan Air
Force marked the private jet in its crosshairs.
A shot transformed the white and green Challenger 600 into a Roman candle spiraling
through thick gray clouds. The plane crashed
in the water, killing three people. More than
a ton of cocaine floated on the waves.
The aircraft was obtained by two Colombian drug kingpins, Dicson Penagos-Casanova
and Juan Gabriel Rios Sierra, who worked as
key members of an international drug trafficking ring that supported multiple cartels
bringing cocaine to the United States, federal
prosecutors said in an indictment.
But the aircraft’s tail number, N214FW,
told a different story, tracing the ownership
of the plane to a company incorporated in

Delaware, a state that often requires minimal
public disclosure about the owners of a business. FAA records showed that the cocainepacked plane was owned by Dinama Aircorp
Inc., formed in Delaware less than two weeks
before it purchased the airplane in 2013.
According to FAA records, the president and
sole officer of the firm was Kulatz, the Fort
Lauderdale attorney who, a few years earlier,
sent an e-mail to the FAA opposing efforts to
make plane ownership more transparent.
There are nearly 200 other planes registered to the same address as Dinama Aircorp
in Delaware, including a jet that was seized
in 2014 by the Dominican Republic, according to a Globe analysis. Kulatz and another
attorney are listed as the key officers of the
firm that registered the seized plane.
Kulatz did not respond to repeated calls
and correspondence from the Globe. At one
point, a receptionist at his office said Kulatz
had retired. In July, the Florida bar association listed him as ineligible to practice law
because he did not meet the continuing legal
education requirement.
Penagos-Casanova and Rios Serra are like
many drug traffickers who actively seek
American planes because they believe they
can more easily “fly under the radar,” according to Benjamin Barron, an assistant US

USDA

Cocaine that was seized from a US-registered jet that was
shot down by the Venezuelan Air Force in 2015.

attorney in the Central District of California,
who prosecuted the pair. To ensure success,
they paid aircraft owners a fee of about 30
to 35 percent of the cocaine shipment and
bribed Venezuelan military and government
officials, according to federal court records.
Kulatz has not been accused of wrongdoing
in connection with the case.
“They hope they will attract less suspicion
particularly by using expensive jets that are
US-registered and might appear to be something that a corporation might use,” Barron
said. “It’s all a way of avoiding detection and
getting the cocaine safely from point A to
point B.”
But Delaware makes hiding especially easy

MARCOS PAULO CAPUT

This plane, owned by a Delaware corporation, was ultimately controlled by two Colombian drug kingpins before it was shot
down, according to federal prosecutors.

for corporations of all kinds, setting some of
the nation’s most lenient rules. For as little
as $90, people can create a Delaware-based
company to “own” anything they don’t want
to be associated with by name. Delaware
goes further in protecting privacy than most
states, not requiring a list of officers for some
types of firms.
Transparency International, a global anticorruption organization, calls Delaware a
haven for transnational crime and “a place
where extreme corporate secrecy enables corrupt people, shady companies, drug traffickers, embezzlers, and fraudsters to cover their
tracks when shifting dirty money from one
place to another.”
More than one-third of all US aircraft —
122,336 — are registered to corporations. Of
those, nearly 11,000 are registered to firms in
Delaware.
A review of FAA records by the Globe
found that about 3,500 aircraft are registered
to more than 2,000 companies located at a
single Wilmington address that is home to a
business incorporator.
Law enforcement officials say these easyto-create shell companies can be significant
roadblocks in trying to convict criminals.
A Los Angeles DEA agent who investigates

narcotics-related aircraft said the dummy
ownership makes it harder for him to draw a
direct connection between drug dealers and
their product.
“If I can’t demonstrate the individual who
owned the aircraft or whose name was on
the registration paperwork received money
to knowingly and intentionally purchase this
vessel in a drug transaction, then almost always there is no prosecution,” said the agent,
who spoke on condition of anonymity because the case is ongoing.
Penagos-Casanova and Rios Serra acquired
a second drug-loaded plane that crashed in
the Caribbean Sea due to engine failure in
May 2015, according to court papers. In all,
authorities recovered more than $70 million
worth of cocaine from the two planes.
Both men pleaded guilty in US District
Court in Los Angeles to “conspiracy to possess cocaine on board a United States-registered aircraft with intent to distribute.” They
are awaiting sentencing.
Colombian kingpins are not the only suspicious users of aircraft registered to corporations set up by Kulatz, the Florida attorney. He and his wife are listed as officers of
Delaware-based Secure Aircorp Inc., which
owns the Gulfstream American 2 jet that was

It is impossible to know how many planes are registered to non-US citizens through trusts because the FAA does not
keep track. The Globe identified several businesses that provide the service. Together they have more than 7,500 aircraft registered across the country.

seized in 2014 by the Dominican Republic,
according to FAA records.
N522HS was seized as part of an investigation by the Dominican Republic’s Justice
Ministry Anti-Corruption Department into
possible money laundering and embezzlement by one of the country’s senators, Felix Bautista. According to Dominican media
reports, authorities said Bautista attempted
to evade prosecution and the forfeiture of his
aircraft by changing the plane’s tail number
about two months before he was indicted.
While businesses and individuals may request
specific tail numbers to act as vanity plates,
criminals utilize the tactic to evade detection,
much like switching a license plate on a car.
FAA officials in a statement said such
number changes are routine: “The Registry
does not generally deny requests for a number
change,” in part because they can still track
planes by their serial numbers.
Likewise, FAA officials appeared to have no
idea that plane N214FW had been shot down
off Aruba or that it was controlled by alleged
international drug lords. About 15 months

WIKIMEDIA COMMONS

A US-registered plane was seized as part of an investigation
by the Dominican Republic’s Justice Ministry Anti-Corruption
Department into possible money laundering and embezzlement by Senator Felix Bautista.

after the plane crashed, the agency sent a
notice to Dinama Aircorp reminding the company to renew registration for N214FW. Over
several months, the agency sent multiple
letters to the same address and all came back
to Oklahoma City marked “Return to sender.”

30 years of frustration
Ronald Reagan was president when
Congress took the FAA to task for not doing enough to keep criminals from secretly
acquiring US-registered planes as well as
pilot’s licenses.
At the 1988 hearing held by the House
Committee on Public Works and Transportation, members wanted to know why the FAA
so rarely revoked aircraft and airmen certifications for individuals knowingly violating
controlled substance laws in the Aviation
Drug-Trafficking Control Act of 1984. Over a
four-year period, the FAA revoked the certifications of only three aircraft and six airmen.
Law enforcement officials explained that
criminals were able to hide behind a veil of
anonymity created through fictitious owners, fake addresses, post office boxes, illegible
signatures on documents, repeated changes
in ownership, and the switching of tail numbers. These administrative issues — found on
paper and documents — created hurdles for
law enforcement officers attempting to fight
the US war on drugs.
“Aircraft identification and registered owner identification is an elusive veil, behind
which the smuggler finds refuge,” testified
Carol Knapik, then a detective with Florida’s
Broward County sheriff’s office. “All to his advantage that there is no true piece of identification required for the registration of an
aircraft.”
Congress directed the agency to make
information in the aircraft registry more
reliable, prompting common-sense reforms
at the FAA such as using computer software
to validate addresses and requiring that signatures be legible.

But after 9/11, the continuing weakness
of FAA oversight — and the urgent need for
reliable information — became increasingly
obvious. An internal agency audit of the
aircraft registry in 2010 found unreported
address changes and sales that left the ownership of about one-third of the more than
300,000 aircraft on the registry in question.
In response, the FAA required reregistration
of all aircraft along with future renewals.
Three years later, the inspector general at
the Department of Transportation identified a concerning pattern among trusts set
up on behalf of foreigners: 5,600 of the aircraft records maintained by the FAA were
incomplete, often lacking key information on
owner identities. And, in a follow-up letter, the
investigators identified several trust-owned
aircraft that should have set off alarms:
An FAA inspector was unable to obtain
information about who was flying a US trustregistered Boeing 737 in the United Arab
Emirates. The plane was suspected of not
following US regulations and possibly being
used for illegal activity.
Hours before the United Nations Security
Council met in 2011 to approve a no-fly zone
over Libya, a US plane registered to a trust
approached the Tripoli International Airport
without a landing permit.
And one aircraft was registered in a trust
arrangement on behalf of a Lebanese politician who was “backed by a well known US
government-designated terrorist organization.”
It wasn’t until March 2017, after months
of questions from the Globe, that FAA officials sat down with the inspector general to
address its seven major concerns. After the
meeting, the inspector general said the FAA
had addressed three of them, tackling issues
of data integrity and security.

‘A crown jewel target’
Today, US air security is a study in contrasts. Since the attacks of 9/11, the govern-

TONY GUTIERREZ/AP

Investigators searched through the aircraft wreckage after Joseph Stack flew his plane into a building where several Internal
Revenue Service employees worked in 2010.

ment has made enormous changes to security
procedures in commercial air travel, creating
a whole new agency to screen passengers before they board. Since hijackers seized and
weaponized four commercial airliners that
September morning in 2001, the public has
gotten used to a host of small indignities,
from removing shoes to whole-body scans
and dogs sniffing their carry-ons, all in the
name of safety on planes.
But there have been far fewer security improvements for planes used in general aviation that, collectively, represent three-quarters of all US air traffic.
Partly, that may reflect some security analysts’ view that private planes can do far less
damage as tools of terror than airliners.
But private planes have been used in attacks

such as Joseph Stack’s 2010 suicide crash into
the IRS offices in Austin, Texas, which killed
an IRS agent and injured 13 others. Stack
had posted a suicide note about the “greed”
of the IRS on the same day he burned down
his own house and deliberately flew his Piper
Dakota into the four-story office building.
The 9/11 conspirators had bigger ambitions for small planes. Zacarias Moussaoui,
one of the masterminds who had looked into
buying crop-dusters in Norman, Okla., possessed “a computer disk containing information related to the aerial application of pesticides” when he was arrested, according to his
2001 indictment. The indictment said that
lead hijacker Mohammed Atta made similar
inquiries in Florida in 2000 and 2001.
In June, all these years later, the head of US

MERIDITH KOHUT FOR THE BOSTON GLOBE

Joecruz Alexander Moreno was rescued from his burning crib when a plane flown by a twice-convicted drug trafficker crashed
into his home. Joey is now 9, but his face is badly scarred from his burns.

Homeland Security called commercial aviation “a crown jewel target” for terrorists.
“The threat has not diminished. In fact, I
am concerned that we are seeing renewed interest on the part of terrorist groups to go after the aviation sector,” said John Kelly, thenDepartment of Homeland Security secretary
and now President Trump’s chief of staff, during remarks in June on enhanced aviation security for commercial flights.

Scars that won’t heal
For Asnaldo Gonzalez, the failed oversight
of US-registered planes had a devastating effect. The federal lawsuit filed on his behalf
by Podhurst Orseck, a Miami-based firm,
against the plane’s owner was dropped partly
because the true owner couldn’t be found to

hold accountable. To this day, nine years later, Gonzalez still cannot afford to rebuild his
shattered home.
“Absolutely everyone is in total and absolute silence,” said Alfredo Jose D’Ascoli Centeno, an attorney for the Gonzalez family in
Caracas.
Before the crash, Gonzalez’s multistory
dwelling was the largest home on the block.
It served as an imposing reminder of an accomplished dream — a house built to fit his
entire extended family.
Now the cement walls peel with black and
gray scars. The bedrooms, once filled with the
laughter of his grandchildren, resemble oversized emptied ashtrays. An old couch, two
plastic chairs, and wall decorations of homes
shifted sideways are among the only family
items left behind in the uninhabitable house.

“What I’m looking for is for everyone involved in this tragedy to be held responsible,”
said Gonzalez, who continues to pursue the
case in Venezuela. “My family and I are fighting without any type of economic resources,
and we will fight to the end.”
As Gonzalez recounts his nightmare, voices
of children echo from the elementary school
across the street as they change classes and
play at recess. His wife, Carmen, folds her
hands inside of her lap and presses her lips
together. The story makes her breathe in
hard.
Gonzalez’s grandson, Joecruz, who was
rescued from his burning crib and is now 9,
paces in the background as he listens to the
familiar story that always ends with the same
terrifying climax: The explosion. The terror.
The deaths.
Joecruz wears his baseball cap low, covering his dark hair and a burn scar that stretches across his forehead. Below his deep brown
eyes on both of his cheeks are two more scars,
constant reminders he’s unable to erase.

September 25, 2017

abcd
PART 2

Flight plan for failure

The FAA was warned in 2009 that people with terrorist ties were licensed to fly and repair aircraft.
Eight years later, it is, incredibly, still the case.

By Kelly Carr, Jaimi Dowdell, and Jenn Abelson
onda
y, September 25, 2017
Spotlight M
Fellows
and Globe Staff

1998

1999

2001

MARICOPACOUNTY
COUNTYSHERIFF’S
SHERIFF’SOFFICE
OFFICE/THE
DANISH ACCIDENT
ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION
INVESTIGATION BOARD
BOARD
MARICOPA
/THE DANISH

Nader
Haghighi
started
hishis
crime
spree
in the
latelate
1990s
andand
had had
his own
pilot’s
license
revoked
in 2008.
Haghighi
NaderAli
AliSabouri
Sabouri
Haghighi
started
crime
spree
in the
1990s
his own
pilot’s
license
revoked
in 2008.
later
stole
the
identity
of
another
FAA-certified
pilot
and
flew
with
that
license
for
several
years
until
he
crashed
a
plan
Haghighi later stole the identity of another FAA­certified pilot and flew with that license for several years until hein
Denmark
2012.in Denmark in 2012.
crashed ainplane

SECRETS IN THE SKY

THE DANISH ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BOARD

Nader Ali Sabouri Haghighi’s plane crashed in Denmark in 2012.

J

BORNHOLM, DENMARK
ust two minutes after the private jet
was cleared for landing, the pilot realized his error and declared an emergency. He had miscalculated the fuel needs
for the one-hour journey from Germany, and
now his engines were flaming out.
The Learjet plummeted toward the ground
that day in September 2012, then carved its
way through a field, coming to rest amid
cornstalks and mud, the passenger onboard
seriously hurt. First responders found the
pilot, an Iranian with a criminal record,
unconscious in the cockpit. Nearby, investigators discovered a US pilot certificate with a
name that wasn’t his.

Nader Ali Sabouri Haghighi’s own pilot
certificate, it turned out, had been revoked
years earlier for providing false information,
but the Federal Aviation Administration conveniently mailed him a new one. Haghighi
had called the FAA hot line claiming to be a
professional pilot named Daniel George who
had lost his license. He then recited George’s
license number and other personal details
that he’d obtained from their business dealings. Without asking further questions, the
FAA agent sent Haghighi a license with
George’s name on it.
It ought to have been difficult for the blackhaired, brown-eyed Iranian to use a pilot’s license belonging to a fair-skinned, gray-haired

THE DANISH ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BOARD

First responders found the pilot, an Iranian with a criminal record, unconscious in the cockpit. Nearby, investigators discovered
a US pilot certificate with a name that wasn’t his.

American nearly 20 years his senior, except
for one factor: FAA pilot licenses do not include photographs of the pilot. Haghighi was
able to pull off his ruse for nearly four years
until Danish police found the license in the
rubble of the crash.
Almost a decade after Haghighi’s brazen
identify theft, the FAA still does not include
pilot photos on its licenses, and the agency
does not fully vet pilot information before
issuing them credentials. Last year, a leading
congressional overseer of the FAA, then-Representative John Mica, called US pilot licenses “a joke” and said that a day pass to Disney
World in his native Florida contains more
sophisticated security measures.
FAA officials defend their licensing practices, noting that pilots are also required to
carry a government-issued ID such as a driver’s license to prove their identity. The pilot
certificate, they say, is more an indicator of
the pilot’s level of training than a security
tool, and commercial airports and airlines
generally issue their own IDs for access to
tarmacs, planes, and other secure areas.

US DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

But the flawed airman licenses are part of
a troubling pattern of lax oversight of more
than 1 million FAA-approved airmen — including pilots, mechanics, flight attendants,
and other aviation personnel — that has made
the agency vulnerable to fraud, and the public vulnerable to those who mean to do harm,
a Spotlight Team review has found.
After the 9/11 attacks, Congress called on
the FAA to overhaul its licensing for more
than 600,000 US-certified pilots. But the
FAA’s changes so far have been modest, such
as making licenses with higher-quality materials to reduce forgeries. Today, FAA security procedures remain geared more toward
the convenience of pilots than the needs of a
nation engaged in a “war on terror,” often failing to challenge airmen’s claims on
their applications and seemingly unaware of
deceptions.
Haghighi, for example, continued to finagle
help from the FAA even after he went to jail
in Denmark for flying without a valid license
and endangering his passenger. After his release, the FAA issued him a medical certificate that helped him land a job at an airline
in Indonesia in 2014. All he had to do was
change one letter in the spelling of Sabouri
and alter his birth year. An official at another
federal agency eventually tipped off the FAA
to Haghighi’s duplicity.
Or take the case of Richard Hoagland. Beginning in 1994, he purchased homes, registered a plane, obtained a pilot license, and
even got married under the name Terry Symansky, according to court records. The ruse
wasn’t discovered until Symansky’s nephew
was doing family research on Ancestry.com
and found that his late uncle was listed as
alive. The FAA never caught on that the real
Terry Symansky had been dead since 1991,
issuing Hoagland a new private pilot certificate in Symansky’s name as recently as 2010.
Hoagland is now serving a two-year sentence
in federal prison for identity theft.
FAA procedures also make it easy for pilots

to hide damaging information, by simply not
reporting it. That’s because the agency relies
on them to self-report felony convictions and
other crimes that could lead to license revocation. Among the licensed pilots currently
listed in the airman registry are Carlos Licona and Paul Grebenc, United Airlines pilots
who were sentenced to jail in Scotland earlier
this year for attempting to fly a commercial
airliner with alcohol in their blood. Under
FAA rules, an alcohol-related offense, especially related to flying, can be grounds for
license revocation or suspension, though the
FAA decides on a case by case basis.
But as of Sept. 1, Grebenc and Licona were
still listed in the FAA’s active airman registry. Agency records showed that as of January, four months after the men were arrested,
there were no reported incidents or enforcement actions related to the pilots.
FAA officials stress that they are not the
police officers of the skies, leaving that job
to an alphabet soup of agencies including
the Transportation Security Administration,
Homeland Security, and the FBI. The FAA
merely issues the airman certificates and
keeps the database that helps these investigators do their work. And, while FAA officials
admit they don’t routinely investigate information that pilots, mechanics, and others
list on license applications, the TSA says it
continuously reviews the FAA database
against the Terrorist Screening Database,
additional terrorism-related information, and
other government watch lists. Since 2010, the
TSA has completed 28 million airman threat
assessments.
But it is hardly a fail-safe system. Outside reviewers have repeatedly found that
the FAA’s Airman Registry is riddled with
errors and gaps, making it difficult for law
enforcement officials to rely on. More than
43,000 pilots received licenses even though
they did not provide the FAA with a permanent address, according to a 2013 audit by
the Department of Transportation inspector

JESSICA HILL/AP

Investigators looked at the remains of a small plane in East Hartford, Conn., after a crash that killed a Jordanian student pilot
and injured his instructor.

general. Two years earlier, the Department of
Homeland Security inspector general found
that 8,000 of the Social Security numbers on
file belonged to dead people, in part because
the FAA doesn’t purge its files of dated information. Another 15,000 didn’t match the airmen’s personal information on file.
When asked whether the FAA vets the information on airman certificate applications,
officials did not answer directly. The FAA issued a statement reading, “Pilots are expected to provide accurate and complete information on all FAA forms.”
Agency officials also said that, when pilots
apply for medical certificates — a crucial document needed to fly — they conduct a onetime check against the national drivers’ database for drug- or alcohol-related convictions.
The lack of accurate information can have
serious consequences. Last October, when

a student pilot from Jordan intentionally
crashed a twin-engine plane near a major defense contractor in East Hartford, Conn., law
enforcement officials initially feared terrorism and converged on the Illinois address he
had given the FAA. But the student, Feras M.
Freitekh, had listed the address of a family
friend, a place where he had never lived, so
law enforcement descended on a house nearly 900 miles from his actual home.
Most worrisome, even with ongoing TSA
vetting, people with suspected or proven ties
to terrorism still keep active airman certificates.

FAA-approved offenders
Mark Schiffer couldn’t believe what he was
finding.
Schiffer, the chief scientist for a company

MANOOCHER DEGHATI/AFP/GETTY IMAGES

Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi had an FAA license in 2009 while in prison for terrorism.

that helps banks detect fraud, was simply
testing an algorithm to check names against
publicly available watch lists that included
suspected terrorists and other bad actors. In
April 2009, he was using data from the FAA
Airman Registry for his test because the list
was large and readily available.
But he kept turning up terrorists.
There was Fawzi Mustapha Assi, who was
on the FBI’s most-wanted list for five years
before being convicted of providing material
support to Hezbollah in 2008. Though imprisoned, he had an active pilot’s license, which
never expires. His release was expected in a
few years.
Also on the list was Myron Tereshchuk, an
FAA-certified mechanic and student pilot,

who was convicted in federal court in 2005
for possession of biological agents or toxins
that could be used as weapons. Tereshchuk
was also in prison, but he, too, was expected
to be released in a few years.
And there was Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed alMegrahi, who was sentenced to life in prison for his role in the bombing of Flight 103
over Lockerbie, Scotland. Scottish authorities
released him in 2009 on compassionate
grounds after he was diagnosed with terminal cancer. He still had a valid aircraft dispatcher certificate from the FAA.
“Holy cow,” Schiffer said to himself.
In all, Schiffer and his company, Safe Banking Systems of New York, confirmed eight
matches between FAA-approved airmen and

various watch lists.
“The results were as unexpected as they are
chilling,” Safe Banking Systems said in a June
2009 report distributed to nearly 40 lawmakers and top government officials, including
the FAA administrator and then-Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton.
But no one responded until a New York
Times reporter asked the Transportation
Security Administration about the certified
airmen with terror ties listed in the Safe
Banking Systems report. The following day,
in June 2009, the TSA advised the FAA to
revoke airman certificates for six of the eight
names that SBS gave to the reporter.
The Department of Homeland Security’s inspector general, in an 18-month investigation
released in July 2011, found that the TSA’s
ability to screen airmen for national security
threats is hampered by the quality of information the FAA provides. The TSA could not
properly vet thousands of airmen because of
missing or inaccurate data within the FAA’s
registry, according to the report. From 2007
to 2010, the TSA recommended the revocation of 27 licenses, but that number would
likely have been larger had all of the information been complete.
The inspector general also found that the
TSA doesn’t screen for broader criminal activity, allowing airmen who “have outstanding
warrants or are known fugitives” to escape
detection. The IG said that one US-approved
pilot was actually a “drug kingpin” serving 20
years in a foreign prison.
Since then, the TSA and FAA have stepped
up their screening for national security
threats, reviewing the FAA database four
times a year to ensure accuracy.
The Spotlight Team wanted to check whether the heightened scrutiny has improved the
FAA’s record in preventing bad actors from
having pilot’s licenses. At the request of the
Globe, Safe Banking Systems tested the public
part of the airman registry and again found
problems.

U.S. ATTORNEY’S OFFICE FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK/
THE NEW YORK TIMES

Tairod Nathan Webster Pugh was listed as an active aircraft
mechanic on Aug. 1 after being convicted of trying to aid
militants. FAA officials now say they revoked his certificate in
2015 but failed to remove his name.

Running the same name-matching program in January 2017, SBS found five
active airmen on watch lists with possible
ties to terrorism or international crime, including Tairod Nathan Webster Pugh, a former Air Force mechanic who bought a oneway ticket to Turkey in 2015. His packed bags
included flash drives with maps, a letter to
his wife about jihad, and his Federal Aviation
Administration airman certificate, according
to court records. When he was arrested, Pugh
was headed to Syria to offer himself as an
aircraft mechanic.
In May, Pugh was sentenced to 35 years
in prison for attempting to provide material
support to the Islamic State, though he is appealing.
On Aug. 1, Pugh’s name still appeared on
the FAA’s list of active airmen. But Pugh was
removed by Sept. 1, days after the Globe requested his records. FAA officials now say that
Pugh’s license was actually revoked in 2015,

EMILY ZENDT/GLOBE STAFF

David Schiffer is president of Safe Banking Systems, the company that discovered airmen with ties to terror in 2009 and 2017.

though on Friday, they could not explain why
his name continued to be on the active list for
another two years.
In addition, SBS turned up a long-time
American Airlines mechanic who attempted
to broker a deal that would have moved seven
Airbus A300s to Iran, which the United States
has identified as a state sponsor of terrorism;
a Florida businessman who was planning on
illegally shipping navigation systems used for
steering planes, ships, and missiles to Turkey;
and an Irish pilot sanctioned by the US Office
of Foreign Assets Control for his connections
to a company and plane that were also sanctioned. The mechanic and Florida businessman both have been released from prison,
while the Irish pilot has not been charged
with a crime.
In August, when the Globe requested information about the airmen identified by SBS,
FAA records contained no indication that any
of the five had faced FAA enforcement action.

“Have things really changed? Does the government know who they are dealing with?”
said David Schiffer, Safe Banking Systems’
chief executive officer (and Mark Schiffer’s
father). “The fact that some are licensed
while still incarcerated is unbelievable. We
certainly view this as a very serious threat to
national security.”

A history of deceit
Long before the crash in Denmark, Nader
Haghighi had spent years duping the FAA.
When his name came across the desk of federal investigator Robert Mancuso in late 2008,
Haghighi had already racked up a significant
criminal record for stealing a plane, had had
his pilot’s license revoked, and had even been
deported from the United States in 2006,
according to federal investigative reports and
court records. And the FAA was receiving two
new calls per month about Haghighi’s scams.

TV 2/BORNHOLM

Daniel George was interviewed by a local television station in Bornholm, Denmark, during the 2013 trial of Nader Ali Sabouri
Haghighi, who stole his identity.

Mancuso, a special agent for the US Department of Transportation Inspector General’s
Computer Crimes Unit, began investigating
a report that Haghighi had tried to illegally
obtain a pilot’s license online using Daniel
George’s name. Mancuso quickly discovered
that George was just one more victim of a
con man who used at least a dozen aliases
and falsely claimed to have a degree from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a
job at Lockheed Martin.
But Haghighi made a mistake when he
initially tried to get George’s license. He had
collected George’s personal information when
he hired the professional pilot to fly a plane for
him. But when Haghighi entered the stolen
information online to get a copy of George’s
license, Haghighi neglected to change the
e-mail address on the account, so George
received notification about the new license
and contacted the FAA. The agency intercepted the certificate before it was sent out.
And Mancuso thought that was the end of

it, though he kept investigating Haghighi.
Then, when Haghighi crashed with
George’s license in his possession a few years
later, Mancuso made a stunning discovery:
Haghighi had found yet another way to get
a license. He called the FAA directly, posing
as George and complaining that he had never
received the certificate he had requested
weeks earlier. The FAA, without further investigation, mailed out a new copy to Haghighi’s
post office box in Texas, something an FAA
employee told Mancuso was “not uncommon
for our office to do, based on a phone call
from the airman.”
“I was shocked,” said Mancuso, who traveled to Denmark to testify against Haghighi.
“I assumed that some type of fraud alert would
be placed on Mr. George’s record to prohibit
this from happening, especially when it was
sent to the same bad address.”
The FAA said pilots today can no longer
request duplicate certificates by telephone,
but they can get them online or by mail.

During his trial in Denmark, Haghighi
tried yet another scam, insisting that his
real name wasn’t Haghighi or George but the
one on another passport recovered from the
crashed plane. But the judge didn’t believe
him and sentenced Haghighi to 10 months in
prison for endangering passengers, including
children, flying without a valid license or a
required co-pilot on multiple occasions.
Even then, Haghighi was not through tricking the FAA. A year after his release from
prison, in February 2014, he contacted the
agency to secure another medical certificate,
which is needed for pilots to fly.
On his application, he changed his name
from “Sabouri” to “Saboori” and his birth
year from 1972 to 1973. According to a US
Department of Transportation investigative
report, Haghighi lied repeatedly on the form,
claiming that he had not visited a medical professional in three years, even though
emergency responders had found him unconscious inside a crashed plane just two years
earlier.
His word was good enough for the FAA,
which gave Haghighi a new certificate that he
promptly used to land a job with Susi Air, an
Indonesian airline.

Flying again
Haghighi is an extreme example, but his
case is by no means isolated. At least one
other pilot on the FAA registry, Re Tabib, won
his license back after he went to prison for
attempting to smuggle aircraft parts to Iran
and was formally declared a security threat
by the TSA.
In 2006, federal officers seized thousands of
aircraft parts, some packed in suitcases, and
“shopping lists” from the California home of
Tabib, an Iranian-born FAA certified pilot.
He was arrested on charges of attempting to
illegally export parts for F-14 Tomcat jets to
Iran.
Tabib, a veteran airman who at one time
piloted private flights for the designer Gi-

anni Versace, pleaded guilty and served time
in federal prison from July 2007 until January 2009. Yet, according to court records, the
FAA issued him an Airline Transport Pilot
certificate, the highest-level license for pilots,
just three months after his release, allowing
him to fly large jets.
Unlike other pilots with a criminal record,
Tabib made no attempt to hide his past, alerting the agency about his felony conviction on
an application form that calls on candidates
to disclose any previous arrests or convictions. But the FAA — which can suspend flying privileges for anyone with an ATP license
it judges not of “good moral character” — did
not revoke or suspend his license.
As of August, FAA records revealed no incidents or enforcement records connected
to Tabib. The agency declined to comment
further on Tabib’s case but said it examines
possible violations of the “good moral character” standard on a case by case basis. The
agency said that a criminal conviction is not
automatic grounds for action against an ATP
license.
In June 2009, just months after Tabib
received his new certificates from the FAA,
Safe Banking Systems, the New York fraud
detection company, matched Tabib’s name to
public watch lists and passed it along with
others to The New York Times.
The TSA responded to the story by advising
the FAA to revoke Tabib’s certificate. Tabib’s
airman certificates gave him “insider access”
that, combined with his connections to Iran,
could render him a security threat, according
to a 2010 decision by an administrative law
judge.
Tabib fought the decision for years and
finally reached a settlement with the TSA in
2012. His attorney, Robert Schultz, said the
law permitting the TSA to revoke airman
licenses is unconstitutional because it treats
airmen as presumed guilty without proper
due process.
“Mr. Tabib was a professional pilot who

FACEBOOK

Recent social media posts showed Re Tabib in front of an aircraft.

was denied the right to earn a living for years
based on mere suspicion,” Schultz said, referring to the TSA threat assessment. Last year,
the FAA issued him new commercial pilot
and flight instructor certificates.
This time, Tabib’s name was kept out of the
FAA database of active airmen that the public
can download to review the full list of pilots
and mechanics. As a result, his name did not
appear this year when Safe Banking Systems
checked for airmen who had been on terror
watch lists. More than 350,000 airmen were
excluded from the public database at their request.
Recent social media posts show Tabib in
front of a King Air C90 turboprop aircraft. A
photo from this spring shows him wearing an
aviation headset in the cockpit of a plane at
the Azadi airport in Iran. His Facebook page

says he’s now a flight instructor and pilot at
John Wayne Airport in Orange County, Calif.
Tabib is flying again.

Con air
Mario Jose Donadi-Gafaro, a US-licensed
pilot, died along with six others in a horrific
plane crash in Venezuela in 2008 when his
plane plummeted into a bustling neighborhood a few minutes after takeoff. He never
made a distress call, and questions still remain nine years later about the cause of the
accident.
But another mystery is how Donadi-Gafaro, a pilot who also moonlighted as a drug
trafficker, kept a US pilot’s license as long as
he did.
Donadi-Gafaro’s criminal career began at

CSPAN

US Representative John Mica of Florida, chair of the House Subcommittee on Transportation and Public Assets, last year described pilot licenses as “a joke.”

least a decade before the crash. His initial US
felony drug conviction in 1999 for importing cocaine into Miami International Airport
should, under FAA rules, have immediately
triggered agency scrutiny of his license.
But even after the pilot was convicted a second time — this time in Venezuela — in 2006
for attempting to transport cocaine on an
aircraft, the FAA did not revoke DonadiGafaro’s license. Instead, the agency gave
him a promotion. He applied for and was
issued his Air Transport Pilot’s License, the
gold standard of US airmen ratings, on July
23, 2007. Almost a decade after the crash in
Venezuela that killed him, the FAA still listed
Donadi-Gafaro as an “active” pilot, including him in its database as recently as March
2016.
The agency finally deactivated his license
in 2016 after the Globe began asking questions about it. The FAA declined to comment
on whether Donadi-Gafaro had reported
his conviction, saying that information is

protected under the Privacy Act.

‘We don’t know who they are’
A frustrated John Mica held up a plastic
card as he addressed a 2016 hearing of his
House subcommittee on the topic of “securing our skies.” The card, borrowed from thenRepresentative Tammy Duckworth, a pilot,
was an example of a modern FAA certificate.
“An airline pilot has access to the controls, flying the plane,” said Mica, but a US
pilot’s license lacks basic security features and
includes only a decorative picture. “The only
photo on this license are the Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur. Orville and Wilbur, I
blew it up here. OK?”
To make his point, the congressman held
up an entry pass for Disney World. The card,
decorated with Minnie Mouse, has a magnetic strip that is capable of linking identities
to fingerprints. This allows Disney to track
when cardholders enter or leave the park.

The FAA license is primitive by comparison.
“This is Minnie Mouse,” said Mica, referring to the Disney pass. Then, nodding to
Duckworth’s certificate in his other hand, he
added, “and this is Mickey Mouse.”
Congress long ago called on the FAA to
implement significant changes. The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act
of 2004 mandated not only pictures of pilots,
but also that pilot licenses include biometric
capabilities such as fingerprints or iris scans.
“Fifteen years later, we see a system that
has not complied with the laws that we have
passed multiple times,” said Mica. “We have
pilots that are flying planes. We don’t know
who they are.”
The FAA said that it has made some improvements. In 2003, the agency switched
from paper licenses to new “securityenhanced airman certificates,” the FAA said.
The plastic documents include an FAA seal
and, according to the FAA, are resistant to
tampering, alteration, and counterfeiting.
But lawmakers have repeatedly challenged
the agency on why the FAA has not followed
congressional mandates regarding the licenses. Mica, in particular, voiced his concern publicly about the licenses in letters
and hearings in 2010, 2011, 2013, and most
recently, last year.
In 2017, the former congressman says he’s
still concerned about the lack of progress and
failure to have a “credible” document.
“We tried to get them to comply, but they
never did fully comply,” Mica said. “Any credit card in your wallet has better capability.”
Many pilots and flight instructors opposed
the photo IDs, some complaining that it could
add to the cost of licensing without improving national security. In written comments to
the FAA, pilots said the photo on the license
was unnecessary because they are already
required to carry other photo IDs — and because airport officials never ask to see pilot
certificates anyway.
“Many of our members describe this effort

as ‘security theater,’ putting a photograph on
a document that authorities never ask for,”
said Doug Stewart, chairman of the Society
of Aviation and Flight Educators, in a 2011
letter.
“What is most critical in the issuance of an
FAA pilot certificate from a security standpoint is the accurate establishment of the
pilot’s identity, background descriptors, and
qualifications,” wrote Robb Powers, chairman
of the national security committee at the Air
Line Pilots Association, International. “Presently, FAA does not verify the identity of the
person requesting a pilot certificate other
than through visual inspection of the individual’s driver’s license or passport.”
As of last month, the agency said it, along
with the Department of Transportation,
is “still evaluating options for including a
photo,” a project expected to cost about $1
billion.
While the FAA has pondered additional security requirements for more than a decade,
special interest groups have worked to quietly relax regulation for pilots. In a victory
for advocates of general aviation, Congress
eased the medical requirements for pilots
seeking a basic license, requiring only a visit
to the family doctor and participation in an
online course provided by the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association. And the FAA reauthorization bill now in the Senate includes
an amendment to roll back some commercial
pilot training requirements enacted after a
2009 regional airline crash that killed 50 and
was blamed on pilot error.

‘What a nightmare’
Early into his new job, officials at Susi Air in
Indonesia grew suspicious of Nader Haghighi
and discovered that his passport number
belonged to someone else. They alerted the
United States.
Robert Mancuso, the Department of Transportation investigator who tracked Haghighi
for years as the con man fooled authorities

while using many aliases, including Nader
Schruder, learned about the latest escapade
and sent an e-mail to FAA officials.
“Hello all! It’s my yearly e-mail regarding
Mr. Nader Schruder. He seems to have popped
back up in Indonesia with his revoked FAA
certificate . . . Can you also run a search for
any pilots with the name ‘Nader Ali Saboori’
to make sure he doesn’t have another certificate.”
The FAA responded the next day: “I do
show a record for SABOORI; Nader Ali with a
First Class Medical certificate issued 2/27/14
. . . It’s probably the same airman.”
Haghighi soon after found himself without
a job. He left Indonesia and was detained
during a stopover in Panama after US authorities put out an alert. In November 2014,
Haghighi pleaded guilty in US District Court
in Houston to four counts of identity theft.
George, the man whose identity Haghighi
stole, wrote a letter to the judge detailing the
personal toll — hundreds of thousands of dollars in lost revenue from potential pilot positions and thousands of hours spent trying

to figure out where Haghighi would turn up
next.
“What a nightmare this man has been to
me personally and professionally,” George
wrote.
After Haghighi was released from federal
prison in October 2016, he was deported to
his native Iran — ending roughly 15 years of
deception.
“It’s sad it went on this long. He was putting the public’s life in danger,” said Mancuso,
now a special agent at another federal office
of the inspector general.
Haghighi, in Facebook messages to a Globe
reporter, expressed no remorse for his behavior and described the FAA in bluntly critical
terms: “know the right person, pay the right
amount in a right way and then the sky turns
green.”
The Globe could find no evidence that
Haghighi has a US pilot’s license today, but a
Facebook photo update in March suggests he
hasn’t given up hope: He was smiling from
the cockpit of a plane with his hand inches
away from the controls.

FACEBOOK

