Investigative Reporters and Editors
IRE18 Conference
Public Records Track: Mastering the law to overcome roadblocks to access
Tip Sheet
By Carol Marbin Miller, Miami Herald
With contributions from Herald writers Mary Ellen Klas, Alex Harris and Sarah Blaskey,
and Christina Veiga of Chalkbeat

The explosion of technology, the infectious spread of government privatization, the growing
power of contemptuous politicians who view journalists as foes and transparency as an
avoidable nuisance -- all of these things have combined to make our jobs as reporters more
difficult than ever before.
One no longer can just memorize the important parts of a government’s open records law, and
keep a copy of ​The Reporter’s Handbook​, or its equivalent, on the desk and nightstand. The
20th Century toolbox is no longer adequate.
Of course, some of the old catechism remains relevant today: Never assume a record is not a
public one just because a government official says so. Insist that department administrators,
agency lawyers and records custodians tell you, in precise language that tracks the relevant
local, state or federal law, ​why​ they refuse to give you the documents you desire.
Sometimes, even when you are fighting complex, multi-front wars over records, you only have to
win the first, decisive battle. It’s a little like housebreaking the new puppy: After you’ve rapped
him on the snout a few times with a rolled-up newspaper, he eventually learns to stop soiling the
carpet. You seldom have to discipline him again.
In Florida, as elsewhere, the broad definition of "public record" makes it clear that it is not the
form of the record that matters, but whether the record was generated or received by a public
agency in the course of its transaction of official business.
This means, for example, that when it comes to the debate over private email accounts used by
public officials, there is no debate. If the account, email, cell phone, server or computer was
used to transact the public's business, the record is subject to disclosure.
Florida First Lady Ann Scott wanted to spruce up the governor's mansion when she first came
into office. The governor’s office hatched a plan to buy up distressed nearby properties and pay
for them with corporate donations. Government employees used state time to work on the
project, but they kept their efforts off the books, using their personal cell phones and email
accounts to avoid creating a public-records trail.

One of the properties they sought was owned by a cantankerous Tallahassee lawyer named
Steven R. Andrews. He submitted a public records request. When the Scott administration
denied the existence of relevant text messages, Andrews sued. The disclosures that ensued
formed a road map for understanding how the governor’s office was doing business: state
officials were routinely using personal accounts to circumvent open government laws. Andrews
was awarded $1 million for his effort to vindicate the public records law. He refurbished ​his
office.
Sometimes, despite all your best efforts -- and even those of your lawyers -- you are going to
lose the battle over important government documents. Your last option in such cases can be to
shame the people who insist on keeping secrets. More and more media outlets are writing not
just about about the news -- but also about the challenges they face in ​gettin​g the news.
Sometimes holding public leaders accountable involves reporting about their efforts to resist.
In Florida, for example, we created the hashtag #WarOn119 -- the public records statute is
codified in Chapter 119 -- to aggregate published accounts of state leaders who assault
transparency. Such stories have become increasingly common in a state in which leaders have
become more emboldened, but journalists have become more creative and insistent.
Here is a practical guide to overcoming common barriers to access to public records. You are
likely to encounter one or more of these in almost any state.
Private agencies doing public business:
Virtually every sphere of public life has undergone some degree of privatization. Within the K-12
public educational system, most states have now turned a substantial number of schools over to
private management as charter schools. States have privatized many of their prisons, or specific
functions within prisons, such as health and mental health care. Many states or local
governments now have foster care and adoption functions under private administration.
Generally, all records produced by private agencies performing a public function are public
records -- so long as they otherwise would be if performed by the state or local governments
themselves. So, if prison maintenance reports are public in your state, they still are even if the
prison is under private management. Likewise, if a foster care quality assurance review is a
public record, it remains public even if it was written by administrators at a private agency.
Recently, the Lakeland Ledger sought a copy of a settlement agreement between an inmate
and the private medical provider that served the county jail. The company refused, saying it was
not subject to Florida’s public records law. The Ledger sued and won in court.
Sometimes it’s best to start your journey with the public agency itself. Most of the records
generated by private providers are sent to the public agency with which the vendors contract,

and the public agency maintains the records separately. That’s usually the best route, because
the public entity knows the law -- and the potential consequences of violating it.
Now and again, the public agency will send you to the private contractor, usually to buy time or
make your job harder. When you submit your request to the private entity, it’s best to be specific
about where in your state’s statute book the records are designated as public. If the private
administrators won’t budge, go back to the public agency and make clear that you know the law
and you intend to use it. If necessary, get your lawyer involved, and make sure the state agency
understands that you will sue, if necessary. You usually only have to take this hill once.
This problem has become especially acute for education reporters who cover districts with
thriving charter school industries.
Miami-Dade County is one of them. In recent years, the school district’s auditor looked into
issues regarding a handful of charter schools with questionable histories. The charter company
said that it didn't have to comply -- though it eventually did, since the school board technically
oversees its charter. Enlisting the aid of whomever oversees the charter can be a good place to
start. It's also smart to check all the agencies that audit or police charter schools, such as
inspectors general, to see if any reports have been written on the schools or their leaders.
Most charter schools are supposed to have public board meetings, and sometimes you can get
information, tips or cultivate sources just by showing up or digging through meeting agendas
and minutes.
There are many other ways to look for public records on charter schools, especially since they
are spending public money. These include: digging through grant applications and approvals,
government vendor registrations, contracts and contract management documents.
The law regarding the release of public records from private vendors is evolving, and not always
in a helpful way. For example, a contractor that fails to comply with a request for records it
maintains on behalf of a public agency “may” be subject to contract penalties and “may” be
subject to criminal penalties for violating an open government law.
But there’s a giant loophole: subcontractors. More and more contractors are farming out
important tasks to subcontractors that do not consider themselves bound to the language of the
primary contract.
An example from Florida: the state Department of Environmental Protection contracts all of its
environmental petroleum tank clean-up management to two contractors who then contract with
an environmental clean-up company as a subcontractor. If the petroleum tank clean-up
subcontractor fails to clean up a gas tank that leaks into the groundwater supply, reporters may
not be able to enforce the state’s public records law to get the details.

The high cost of public records:
Many agencies of local, state and the federal government have learned a simple way to deny
access to public records without ever actually denying access. They just make it financially
prohibitive. Records custodians understand that this is our Achilles heel: some of the big media
outlets can’t afford to pay thousands of dollars for public records often -- and the small outlets
can barely afford to do it at all.
Agency administrators sometimes just make up the figures they charge you. A source at a state
agency in Florida once conceded privately that her bosses would have explicit conversations
about how much the agency should charge in order to discourage the release of records.
Agency heads count on reporters not standing their ground and demanding a detailed
accounting of the charges.
In 2015, the Miami Herald received a $20,000 invoice from a state healthcare agency for a
series of public records pertaining to Florida’s purge of 14,000 impoverished children from an
insurance program for kids with severe medical needs and disabilities. The newspaper invoked
a little-known program that allows journalists to mediate public records disputes using a state
public records czar as the arbitrator. When the state agency was pushed to justify its $20,000
price tag, it provided the entire set of records -- for free.
Most state public records laws prescribe what governments can charge for such things as
copying and redacting. For example: a department can charge what it pays an attorney to
redact records, but not at the rate of a silk stocking law firm.
And there are ways to avoid costly copying fees. Ask for public records in their original digital
format, if possible. Or, if the records are not stored digitally, insist upon viewing them in person.
Administrators cannot stop you from bringing your own portable copy machine or wand -- and
you can eliminate copying fees altogether.
“Trade secrets” as a shield against public records:
Government agencies are relying more and more on technology they acquire from private
vendors, particularly data storage and processing systems.
It doesn’t end there.
A couple years ago, Florida’s tourism arm refused to release its contract with the entertainer
Pitbull for a million-dollar "sexy beaches" ad campaign -- saying the contract was a trade secret.
The speaker of the Florida House didn't think the agency had good cause to keep the contract
secret, and thought the state was getting scammed. He sued. The trade secret claim fell apart
and the agency had to make the contract public.

Also recently, the Florida Department of Health redacted the names of the chief officers of a
nursery that was applying to become a medical marijuana provider. The state’s First
Amendment Foundation discovered the names were readily available -- right on the company’s
website.
If in doubt, insist that the agency you’re covering define a “trade secret,” and then show you how
the records it is withholding meet the definition. Claimed trade secrets must actually constitute
trade secrets ​as defined by law. ​There are specific trade secrets exempted in Florida law, for
example, but not many. They include data processing software, tourism promotion agencies,
Space Florida, 911 technology, scientific data, and information relating to the dairy and
agriculture industries.
Some agencies will accept a claim by a company, or vendor, that their information is proprietary
and therefore privileged as a trade secret without bothering to confirm it conforms with the law.
Ask an agency to present to you in writing how the material meets the statutory definition of
trade secret. If it doesn't, it's not protected. The agency can notify the vendor it has a public
records request and will release the information. It's up to the vendor to then seek a protective
order if it wants to challenge release..
There’s another roadblock that is becoming increasingly common, and very dangerous to
reporters who work with data. To understand the complex inner workings of how government
departments store and use data, you sometimes need a system-wide map of the agency’s
software.These roadmaps are usually called data models.
But because the software was developed by private companies, the public agencies: 1)
sometimes don’t really know how their own data systems work, 2) can run into interference from
the private vendors who sometimes view their technology as proprietary, and 3) often use
number 2 disingenuously as an argument for denying access.
You can sometimes get into a merry-go-round involving public agencies sending you to
contractors for answers, only to be sent back to the public agency by contractors who say they
don’t have the authority to release information without the agency’s permission.
Records that cross jurisdictional boundaries:
What happens when a document is, for example, prepared in a state where it is clearly
confidential, but then given to another state where it would, by that state’s law, be public?
In Florida, it’s a public record. Period.
Your state may not be bound by another state’s more restrictive public records law.

A few years ago, the Herald sought child abuse reports for two small children visiting from
another state who were killed by their mother in Florida. Under Florida law, the documents
would automatically be released, as the child welfare records of kids who die of abuse or
neglect are not exempt. Florida, however, argued that it had a confidentiality agreement with the
other state, Pennsylvania, which provided its records with an understanding they would remain
secret. The Herald mediated that dispute, and won. Florida could not enforce an agreement
that required it to violate the state’s public records law.
Similarly, federal records that are otherwise confidential may be subject to disclosure when they
are in the hands of a state government with a broad, generous public records law. A court ruled
that a draft settlement agreement between the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation
and the Florida Sugar Cane League was a public record, even though the agency had agreed
not to release it at the request of the federal government.
The Miami Herald currently is suing the state Department of Transportation in pursuit of records
related to the Florida International University bridge collapse that killed six people in March. The
transportation department won’t release emails, meeting minutes and other documents that
would shed light on the collapse, citing an ongoing National Transportation Safety Board
investigation which, it argues, preempts state law. At issue, though, are records that were
generated prior to the bridge collapse, which clearly would be subject to release under Florida’s
public records statute.
Never accept a denial that rests on applying the more restrictive public records policies of any
state or local jurisdiction other than your own.
Student privacy​:
Reporters seeking information from a school don't have to go far before they're hit with a Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act, or FERPA, exception. The law is meant to protect students'
privacy, but it's often used to deny all sorts of ridiculous things, including a list of scholarship
recipients or a roster of passengers on a charter plane for a school sports team.
Schools will generally tell you that without a student's written consent, only directory information
can be released from educational records created while he or she is a student. That means it's
usually pretty easy to find out if a student is enrolled at an institution and when they first
enrolled, but it's impossible to find out their GPA.
In terms of arrest reports, schools can't deny them, nor the student's names on them. They will,
however, redact the heck out of them, like the University of Florida did when one of its football
players was accused of raping a classmate. The initial 18-page arrest report was completely
blacked out except for time, location, nature of the offense and the football player's name.

If the same record had been generated by the Gainesville Police, or the Alachua County
Sheriff’s Office, instead of the university police, they would have been subject to full disclosure.
Some of these records, particularly criminal records, can be partially reconstructed elsewhere: If
a law enforcement agency separate from the school or university made the arrest, its records
are likely to contain far fewer redactions. And aggregated criminal histories, such as those sold
by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, are likely to include all arrests, even those
made by a university police department.

