WHO’S YOUR AUDIENCE: BUILDING INVESTIGATIVE STORIES WITH IMPACT
CREATE A MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION PLAN
Once you’ve determined which platforms would be most effective for reaching your audience,
you need a distribution plan. For large-scale enterprise and watchdog pieces, more formal and
advanced planning is required. Use a checklist to build your plan.
Distribution checklist:
❏ Have you established who the intended audience is?
❏ Is the story and video framed appropriately for that audience?
❏ Do you know how the intended audience consumes and engages with media?
❏ Based on their media habits, have you decided which platforms to promote your
investigation on? Do any of the platforms require advance set-up? (i.e. Facebook Live,
Snapchat, etc.) Is Facebook native video appropriate?
❏ Have you double checked the SEO on the story ​BEFORE ​publishing?
❏ Search headline or Meta title: roughly 50-60 characters
❏ Summary: 135-150 characters (1-2 sentences packed with keywords).
❏ Keywords: 8-10.
❏ Is the story packaged appropriately for the audience and the platform?
❏ Does the headline leave a curiosity gap? Is it interesting and easy to understand?
❏ Is the photo or keyframe eye-catching? Is it cropped well for the social media
package?
❏ Have you drafted conversational share text options for Facebook and/or Twitter
and/or Instagram? Does it preserve the curiosity gap in your headline? Have you
created Twitter threads and strategized when to use them?
❏ Does video placement work with the flow of the story?
❏ Are there aggregators that you can send this story to? If so…
❏ Have you created a list of local and/or national websites and organizations to
pitch the story to? Do you have their e-mail address or do they have a Facebook
page you can message?
❏ Have you contacted Facebook groups in advance to so you’ll be able to post to
their page or they know to share your work?
❏ Are there influencers on Twitter who would like to read and share this story? Are
you prepared to tweet it to them or tag them in a tweet?
❏ Have you developed compelling Twitter threads to engage that audience in more than a
passing Tweet and link?
❏ Have you developed a timeline promoting your series from posting to socialing compelling
elements?
Rick Hirsch
Miami Herald
rhirsch@miamiherald.com

