How to Use Data About U.S. Terrorism Cases
(Or: Steal Our Data, Please!)
Trevor Aaronson and Margot Williams
Investigative Reporters and Editors
Orlando, June 2018

Please review the project page:
https://trial-and-terror.theintercept.com/

Since Initial Release, We Have Updated
and Published Iteratively

How We Built Trial and Terror
Type of Database
• Trial and Terror’s database is hybrid of an existing database and a built
database. It expands considerably on previously released lists of DOJ
terrorism defendants by joining with original research and Bureau of Prisons
data.
Sources
• DOJ terrorism defendant lists, DOJ National Security Division press releases,
U.S. District Court records, Bureau of Prisons inmate data
Tools
• Research: ECF, RECAP, Docket Alarm
• Analysis: R, Excel, Google Sheets, OpenRefine
• Scrape: We built a tool to scrape BOP data daily and automatically update
inmate information
• Website: Javascript framework React with graphQL
• Visualizations: D3, with Tachyons CSS library
• Distribution: GitHub
• Maintenance: Custom CMS allows researchers to update and add new
defendants in real time.

Alerts for Updates
DOJ National Security
Division Press Release

Back End to Custom CMS

Filtered by “Released”

Scraping BOP for Updates

Download the Database From GitHub

Raw Data Viewed in Excel

Ideas For Using Our Data
Context for a Terrorism Prosecution in Your Area
• The next time DOJ announces a terrorism-related arrest, the defendant may
be from your city. Trial and Terror’s data will allow you give context: how many
international terrorism prosecutions since 9/11 have there been in your district,
how many involved stings, or how many involved the use of the controversial
material support law.
Released Terrorists in Your Community
• When DOJ brings terrorism charges, the cases get a lot of publicity. What’s
gone largely unnoticed are the hundreds of people convicted on terrorismrelated charges who have been released. These people could be your
neighbors. Our data can help you determine if you have released “terrorists” in
your community.
Roll Your Own Terrorism Data Project
• Since our data is released under Creative Commons licensing, you can take
our data and expand on it by populating new fields that would give your project
an original angle or you can create a new interactive project or visualization.
We’ll Even Help You Steal Our Data
• DM us on Twitter at @trevoraaronson and @MargotWilliams if you want help
in using the Trial and Terror data for your project.

