IRE Orlando: Sat. June 16 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m.
On the beat: Charter Schools and vouchers

SO, YOU WANT TO INVESTIGATE
CHARTER SCHOOLS?
(AND OTHER SCHOOL CHOICE OPTIONS)
Arianna Prothero Education Week aprothero@epe.org @AriannaProthero
Shaina Cavazos Chalkbeat Indiana scavazos@chalkbeat.org @shainarc
Rose Ciotta EdSource rciotta@edsource.org @roseciottaca
Depending on your viewpoint charter schools are innovative, dynamic school options or
schools that are draining students and funds from traditional public schools.
How are charter schools operating in your community?

Where to start?
A good first step in covering school choice policy is to familiarize yourself with the
charter school and voucher laws in your state. In general, charter schools are more
regulated and required to report more information than private schools participating in
voucher programs. In turn, voucher programs are more regulated than tax-credit
scholarship programs.

Charter Schools:
1. Who’s in charge? Are charter schools in your state overseen by the state department of
education? The local district? A separate charter school board? Lawmakers? No one?
Getting this answer early will help point to who ultimately needs to be held accountable
when problems arise.

2. What does your state law say that created charter schools? They vary across the
country. For example, in Indiana, charter schools are public schools that must abide by
just about all the same public reporting requirements as traditional public schools.

3. Does your state allow for-profit companies to run charter schools?
4. What are the school’s reporting requirements and where can you get those
reports?

5. Who all is involved in running the charter school? Charter schools can have
complicated structures, involving nonprofit boards, nonprofit or for-profit operators,
sponsors, and outside service providers. Its board can be a source of additional funding
for the school.

6. What business relationships does the charter have with other companies? Various
documents including the IRS 990 can reveal whether the charter is paying another
company for management or other services.

7. What is the status of the property where the charter is located? If it is a rental, who
is the property owner?

8. How do the teacher and other educator salaries compare to the traditional public
school? Are there any unions?

9. Is the presence of the charter school(s) affecting the finances of the public
district? In some cities so many students are attending charters that officials are
claiming that they are threatening the fiscal stability of the district. Request “last known
school reports” or other data that might show you how kids move between schools to
check this claim out.

10.

Does your community have a virtual charter school? How does it operate?
What are the teacher to student ratios? What oversight does the state or local district
provide?

Vouchers and Private Schools
School vouchers have gone from obscurity to arguably a household policy name since
Betsy DeVos became the U.S. Secretary of Education. More than half of states have
some sort of private school choice policy that allows students to use state aid to attend
private schools. If your state is among them, here are some questions to jumpstart your
reporting.
What kind of private school choice program(s) exist in your state? Although vouchers,
tax-credit scholarships, and education savings accounts all give students public aid to
attend private schools, these three types of programs differ in how they are regulated
and what students are allowed to do with the money.
Education savings accounts allow parents to spend money on a range of educationrelated things beyond private school tuition, such as therapy and home schooling
supplies. See this explainer for a breakdown between the three types of private school
choice: https://www.edweek.org/ew/issues/vouchers/index.html
1. What are the private schools required to report? Do they have to report graduation
rates? The answer is often, not much. But a story on what private schools that receive
public aid don’t have to do can be illuminating.
2. Is there any outside research on private school choice programs in your state? State
law may not require private schools or the oversight agency to report much on the
academic achievement of students participating in private school choice programs, but
there may be independent research.
3. Are private schools that receive public aid required to be accredited? If yes, what kind
of accreditors are allowed? There is a wide range in quality of accrediting agencies.
4. Are there any curriculum restrictions? What kind of curriculum are private schools that
participate in these public programs using?
5. What types of private schools are participating? Are they mostly religious? Are there
schools where the majority of the students enrolled are using vouchers, tax-credit
scholarships or education savings accounts?
6. Does state law have admission requirements for the schools participating in private
school choice programs? Or are private schools allowed to admit and reject students on
the grounds of religious affiliation or sexual orientation? If yes, a good next step is to
look at school websites to see what their admission requirements are.
7. Do schools contract with other companies to provide certain services? Who runs those
companies? What are the anti-nepotism rules? If they exist, how are they enforced? Are
schools contracting with companies owned by the school’s founder? Are schools renting
property owned by the school’s founder?

8. How do state tests factor into your state’s voucher program? Do all students
take state tests or just those on voucher? Are those results made public? Do they
factor into your state’s accountability system? What other laws do private schools
have to abide by to accept voucher dollars? (immunization requirements,
curricular requirements, safety guidelines?)

9. What kinds of private schools in your community accept vouchers? Are the
vouchers serving as a way to keep those schools afloat? How do those schools’
(or reputation) compare to private schools that don’t accept vouchers?
10. What students is the voucher program designed to serve? Low-income
students? Students with disabilities? Students in foster care?

The intersection of politics and education
The growth of charter schools has also meant the growth of political activity by charter
supporters. That has resulted in massive campaign contributions to candidates but more likely
to independent committees that under the Citizens United Supreme Court ruling can spend
unlimited amounts on behalf of a candidate with supporters contributing unlimited amounts. That
reality has given charter supporters enormous influence in elections from school board seats to
governor. Your question is simple: What do they want?

Questions for covering school choice in politics
1. Are school choice philanthropists, especially those that live outside your state, getting
involved in a local or state election? Some of America’s richest families and individuals
are big charter school and voucher supporters and spend millions across the country to
get pro-charter school or pro-voucher candidates elected or ballot initiatives over the
finish line.
2. What school choice groups or companies are hiring lobbyists? Education is just like any
other industry when it comes to advocacy groups and companies lobbying legislators to
get favorable policies. What do they want and how effective have they been in shaping
policy?
3. What school choice advocacy groups, philanthropists, and companies are giving to
candidate campaigns, ballot initiatives, or PACs?
4. What school choice advocacy groups are getting involved in the election? Are they
based in your state or from out of state?
5. Have the school choice advocates been involved in your state for a long time? Were
they involved in shaping the current school choice laws/policies in your state? Some
are truly parent and student-led grassroot organizations, but some are grass tops and
closely linked to companies and larger advocacy groups.
6. What groups are opposing the school choice advocates? This will often include
teachers’ unions, but who else? Who is funding them?
7. How do partisan politics align (or not) with your state’s education politics? What issues
divide caucuses and parties who tend to agree? Explore those (perhaps) unlikely
alliances and the issues they come together over.
8. Who are the major education groups lobbying and making contributions in your state?
What do they have in common? Do they support state races or local ones, or both?
9. How does your state’s education policymaking body factor in — do you have a
governor-appointed or elected state board of education? An elected or appointed
schools chief?
10. Of the state board and education department, if they are separate, who gets final say on
education policy issues? The answers to these questions can help set the stage for the
political dynamics you might encounter as education issues heat up.

Documents/Records/Data to look for:
- Charter applications and contracts/agreements
- Records from the Secretary of State’s office (business listings, articles of
incorporation, etc.)
- Grant applications (state and federal — these are often made public)
- IRS Form 990s for nonprofit charter school operators and school choice advocacy
groups
- Form 9s (or whatever yearly financial reports might be required from your state
education department)
- SEC filings
- Campaign contribution records/data
- Education service provider contracts
- As private school choice programs are generally lightly regulated, there are often
fewer reports and less data on the programs. Check state statutes for any reports or
audits required. The department of education or, in the case of tax-credit scholarships,
the department of revenue, may not have what you’re looking for, but it may turn out
that the statute requires reports filed with other agencies or the Governor’s office. These
can be invaluable for finding data.
- Fire safety/building inspections.
- Lawsuits. These may be filed against schools or operating companies by parents or
the state, or lawsuits filed against the state, to name a few examples.
- Lobbying disclosures by advocacy groups or related companies (such as charter
management companies or groups)
- State data that analyzes revenue/spending by traditional public and charter schools

NATIONAL GROUPS AND RESOURCES
The National Conference of State Legislatures has a good primer on school choice
policies as well as a map that shows which states have charter schools and private
school choice laws: http://www.ncsl.org/research/education/school-choice-andcharters.aspx
The Education Commission of the States provides thorough breakdowns of state
charter and voucher laws, easy-to-navigate 50-state comparison of state charter and
voucher laws, as well as policy briefs that provide good overviews of issues surrounding
school choice policies. https://www.ecs.org/issue/choice/
EdChoice, a pro-voucher advocacy group, has a handy interactive map that gives vital
stats such as funding, participation numbers, and legal history on private school choice
programs in every state.
https://www.edchoice.org/school-choice/school-choice-in-america/#
National Alliance for Public Charter Schools and the National Association of
Charter School Authorizers are two national, pro-charter school organizations collect
data and put out detailed reports breaking down the charter school laws and sectors in
each state. While their ranking systems are biased toward the idea that school choice
policies are good, their reports include a lot of interesting details, such as the number of
charter schools closed each year by state, or whether state law exempts charter
schools from open meetings and freedom of information laws.
https://www.publiccharters.org/our-work/charter-law-database
The National Association of Charter School Authorizers has an interactive map that
provides information on the groups (authorizers) that are charged with overseeing
charter schools in each state.
http://www.qualitycharters.org/policy-research/
National Education Policy Center, or NEPC, is a research group based out of the
University of Colorado that tends to be skeptical of school choice. In addition to original
research, NEPC’s website has a very helpful database of researchers searchable by
expertise that belong to the NEPC network.
http://nepc.colorado.edu/fellows
The Center for Research on Education Outcomes at Stanford University has done
what is widely accepted as among the most rigorous and large-scale research on the
academic achievement of students in charter schools (there are, of course, criticisms of
CREDO’s methodology, which is definitely something people should familiarize

themselves with). In addition to national studies, they have done much state- and citybased research. See their research here: https://credo.stanford.edu/
Federal data. Good federal-level resources include the U.S. Government Accountability
Office, National Center for Education Statistics, and the Education Department’s Civil
Rights Data Collection.

Story links:
Chalkbeat Indiana:
As students signed up, online school hired barely any teachers — but founder’s
company charged it millions
Online charters in Indiana
In the Wild West of virtual learning, an Indiana charter school is opening in an unlikely
place — a farm

Education Week
What are School Vouchers and How do They Work?
There is no oversight. Private School Vouchers Can Leave Parents On Their Own
Outsized Influence Online Charters Bring Lobbying (see state-by-state lobbying data to
see how much virtual charter school companies have spent in your state)
The Data and Debate Over Diversity in Charter Schools (see state-by-state racial and
ethnic breakdown of students enrolled in charter schools)
In States’ Private School Vouchers Few Safeguards Against Discrimination
The Evolution of the Chartered School
More on charters and vouchers
Homeschooling: Research, Requirements, and Who Does It
EdSource
Campaign Funding Update
Big money from charter backers has potential to reshape governor's race
Charter school backers support for former LA majors big for governor grows

Millions spent in final weeks of statewide races for governor and schools chief
California superintendent candidates oppose big money from independent committees
Charter school backing for Villaraigosas gubernatorial bid grows
Charter groups and unions spend millions for control of LA Unified school board

