IRE Tipsheet
Orlando, Fl
June 16, 2018
Katrice Hardy, Phil Williams, R.G. Dunlop
There’s nothing better than finishing an investigation and finally sharing the results with your
audience. But publication or broadcast is not the end. It’s just another chapter. How you handle
yourself can cement relationships with existing sources and attract new ones. If you aren’t
careful, you can alienate sources and undercut your impact.
Post-publication tips to win your investigation the best reception and propel you and your news
organization forward into additional stories:
Stay Humble: After a big investigation, you may briefly become part of the story. Resist gravedancing and victory laps. The media attention or speaking requests you may get is your chance
to market yourself and your media outlet to new sources and people who may want to open up
to you, too. Be gracious. Focus on the positive changes your reporting will bring.
Stay Focused on the Public’s Interest: Successful investigations often alter lives. Your subject
may be embarrassed, disgraced, fired or indicted. Innocent or not-so-innocent people
associated with your subject may also suffer (or benefit). Remind critics and your audience that
the purpose of your investigation is to serve the public’s interest.
Stay Alert to Collateral Damage: When your investigation shifts or shatters an existing
narrative, some may get uncomfortable. Supporters of your subject are invested in the status
quo. They may make their livings or have built their identities on their associations with the
subject and blame you. Be responsive. Listen politely but also remind critics that you are
reporting what you uncovered.
Stay Off Social Media: Resist the temptation to counter unfounded criticism with rational
discussion. It rarely works. Most of your harshest critics don’t care what you think, or about the
substance of your work. If you respond to a vitriolic email, be polite, respectful and brief. Go
high when they go low.
Stay in Touch With Your Sources: The higher the stakes, the more likely informed insiders are
withholding information or haven’t shared the truth. After publication, people in the know are
more likely to fill in reporting gaps. Go back and ask what you’ve missed, left out or gotten
wrong. People almost always know more than they initially realize or feel comfortable
revealing. Even the best investigations only capture a small fraction of the entire story.

Stay Hungry: Success begets success. Nothing generates new tips related to your current
investigation—and unrelated tips for future investigation—like a story that delivers big impact.
Knowledgeable sources will see that you are able to deliver and want to talk. Go to work the
next day looking to follow your investigation and for your next big “get.”
Stay committed to accuracy: Prior to publication, make 1,000 percent sure your work is
unassailable: Read it again and again. Rewrite it again. Edit it again. Lawyer it again. There
comes a time when reading, writing, editing and lawyering become counterproductive, but
most of us never approach that point. If you publish something that’s wrong, whatever impact
your story might have had, will be eroded. Correct your mistake immediately.

Katrice Hardy
Greenville News
khardy1@greenvillenews.com
R.G. Dunlop
Kentucky Center for Investigative Reporting
rdunlop@louisvillepublicmedia.org
Phil Williams
News Channel 5 Nashville
phil.williams@newschannel5.com

