How to protect yourself from trolling (or doxxing)
Tips from Alex Harris at the Miami Herald
aharris@miamiherald.com​ / @harrisalexc
Moments after news began to break on the Parkland school shooting, I started to reach out to
witnesses on Twitter. That drew attention from trolls who eventually faked some of my tweets,
making it appear as if I asked for pictures and videos of dead bodies or if the shooter was white.
It drew all kinds of toxic attention my way and complicated my efforts to report the story.
In hindsight, here’s what I’ve learned and what I would do differently next time.
When trolls start swarming some first steps include:
●
●
●
●
●

check that your social media accounts are totally private (Facebook, Instagram)
consider temporarily removing personal info (personal email, cell number) from your
personal website if you have one
find out if your address is available publicly anywhere (e.g. property appraiser, voting
records)
talk to your boss about it. Mine offered to host me in a hotel, hire security or walk me to
my car if I felt unsafe.
screenshot, screenshot, screenshot. A lot of my initial tweets were deleted, and I wish I’d
kept better records.

If it starts getting bad, consider shutting down your DMs if you need to. Block specific terms on
Twitter with abandon. If you know that users are coming at you with slurs, blocking them can
clean up your feed dramatically.
Be aware that once trolls find you, they’re not necessarily going to just attack you with slurs and
threats. Treat every ‘tip’ coming your way with extreme caution. A common troll trick is to
attempt to get old inside jokes (i.e. Sam Hyde is the shooter) reported as real news. Don’t fall for
it. Google every name and reverse image search every photo they send you. Don’t trust
screenshots of initial social media accounts, but save them for later just in case they turn out to
be correct and the account is deleted.
Report every single hateful tweet so it can stand as a record, but don’t count on Twitter to help
you. If you see the fake news spreading, quickly combat it on your own account or on your news
organization’s. Your social media team may be able to connect you with a real human Twitter
employee to suggest tips.
Most importantly, put the phone down. If you don’t need to be on social media for your job then
stay off it. If you’re getting upset about the hate, don’t be afraid to ask for a reassignment that
doesn’t involve social media, like running paper on the shooter or knocking on doors. These
types of attacks (on top of a traumatic news event) add up. Give yourself time to recover.

