5 ways to track your Washington representative
when you’re not in Washington
Jonathan D. Salant, Washington correspondent, NJ Advance Media
jsalant@njadvancemedia.com
Twitter: @JDSalant
1. What are your lawmakers’ financial ties? Members of Congress file annual financial
disclosure forms that disclose their investments, outside income, etc. The 2017 forms are
available now at http://clerk.house.gov/public_disc/financial.aspx.
Lawmakers also must disclose their stock trades. These also are available under the member’s
name.
2. Is your lawmaker vulnerable in the next election? The Cook Political Report and Inside
Elections rate congressional races.
http://cookpolitical.com/ratings/house-race-ratings
http://cookpolitical.com/ratings/senate-race-ratings
http://insideelections.com/ratings/house
http://insideelections.com/ratings/senate
3. How does your lawmaker vote on major issues? Many groups issue congressional
scorecards, and often tell members in advance that they will scored on particular issues in
advance of a vote.
Here are six groups whose scorecards are worth tracking:
U.S. Chamber of Commerce (business) www.uschamber.com
AFL-CIO (labor) www.aflcio.org
Americans for Democratic Action (liberal) www.adaaction.org
League of Conservation Voters (environment) www.lcv.org
American Conservative Union (conservative) www.conservative.org
Heritage Action for America (very conservative) www.heritageaction.com
4. Who knows about your lawmaker? These are the people to ask:
• Lobbyists
• Interest groups
• Previous occupants of the seat
• Defeated candidates
• Political party officials
• Friends and neighbors
• Other lawmakers who share committee assignments or co-sponsor legislation
• Other members of the state’s delegation
5. How did your lawmaker vote? Did his or her bill pass? A comprehensive list of roll call
votes on bills, amendments and resolutions can be found here:

https://www.govtrack.us/congress/votes
You can also find plenty of information from the Senate and House press galleries. These are
where congressional reporters work at the Capitol and staff members track floor action.
https://www.dailypress.senate.gov
https://pressgallery.house.gov

N.J. lawmakers who backed Obamacare
repeal invested in health companies
during debate
Posted June 3, 2017 at 10:45 AM

By Jonathan D. Salant
jsalant@njadvancemedia.com,
NJ Advance Media for NJ.com
WASHINGTON -- The two New Jersey lawmakers who voted to repeal and
replace the Affordable Care Act bought or sold securities in health care companies
while the issue was before the House, financial disclosure filings show.
Rep. Tom MacArthur (R-3rd Dist.), whose proposed changes helped bring back the
Obamacare repeal debate, bought as much as $800,000 in stock in health care
companies this year. Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen (R-11th Dist.) sold off shares of
another company at their yearly high, according to filings with the Clerk of the House.
They are the two richest members of the state's congressional delegation.
"Why are they buying and selling health care company stock when they're working on
a health care industry bill?" said President George W. Bush's top ethics officer,
Richard W. Painter, now a University of Minnesota law professor. "This looks
incredibly suspicious."
Camille Gallo, MacArthur's spokeswoman, said the investments were made by
financial advisers "with no input from the congressman."
MacArthur sold off his financial industry holdings when he joined the House Financial
Services Committee just as he divested himself of any defense industry stock when
he served on the House Armed Services Committee, Gallo said.

"This is not required, nor was he asked to do so," she said.
Frelinghuysen spokesman Steve Wilson did not respond to requests for comment.
House Ethics Committee rules say members do not have to recuse themselves from
voting on issues affecting companies they hold stock in since they simply get the
same benefits as other investors.

"If members of Congress couldn't vote on any share of stock they owned, no one
would be able to vote," former House counsel Stan Brand said. "They don't regulate
companies the way regulators do. It's not as if they can unilaterally benefit a company
they're investing in."
Even so, the timing of these transactions raised concerns.
"It's always concerning to see lawmakers explicitly participating in the marketplace
while simultaneously making policy choices that could impact those markets," said
Lisa Gilbert, a Glen Rock native who is vice president for legislative affairs for Public
Citizen, a Washington advocacy group. "It isn't illegal, but it certainly raises red flags."
Both lawmakers voted for the House Republicans' American Health Care Act, which
the Congressional Budget Office said would leave 23 million more Americans without
insurance, cut Medicaid by $834 billion, allow insurers to charge more for those
with pre-existing conditions in states with federal waivers, and reduce taxes for
corporations and wealthy Americans.
New Jersey's other three Republicans and all seven Democrats voted no. The bill,
strongly backed by President Donald Trump, now is before the Senate.
Following the House vote, the Cook Political Report, a Washington publication that
tracks congressional races, rated both Frelinghuysen and MacArthur as more
vulnerable in 2018.
Frelinghuysen sold $15,000 to $50,000 worth of stock in Varex Imaging on April 20,
disclosures show. That was the day the shares reached their 52-week high price.
The sale occurred as House Republicans tried to resurrect their health care
legislation, which had been pulled from the floor a month earlier due to lack of
support.
Varex, which supplies X-ray imaging components, was spun off from Varian Medical
Systems, giving Frelinghuysen shares valued at between $1,000 and $15,000 on Jan.
30. Frelinghuysen owned $100,000 to $250,000 worth of stock in the original
company, according to his 2016 personal financial disclosure report.
The Republican bill would eliminate a tax on medical device companies. Varex said
in its quarterly report with the Securities and Exchange Commission that "the repeal
of all or parts of the Affordable Care Act resulting from the recent U.S. presidential
election" could have an "adverse effect" on its business.
MacArthur this year bought between $250,000 and $800,000 worth of stock in health
care companies, almost all of it on Jan. 9 and 10, just days before he dissented on
the House Republican budget bill making it easier to repeal the existing law.

His biggest purchases were stock worth $102,000-$280,000 in CVS Health and
$51,000-$115,000 in Roche Holding AG, a pharmaceutical and biotechnology
company.
CVS listed "reform of the U.S health care system," including "possible repeal of all of
parts" of the Affordable Care Act as risk factors going forward in its quarterly report.
MacArthur also bought from $4,000 to $60,000 in Tenet Healthcare corporate bonds
from Feb. 28-March 3, and $4,000 to $60,000 in HCA corporate bonds in March and
April. Both companies own hospitals and other medical treatment centers.
In its first-quarter financial report, Tenet acknowledged that "the health care industry,
in general, and the acute care hospital business, in particular, are experiencing
significant regulatory uncertainty based, in large part, on legislative efforts to
significantly modify or repeal and potentially replace" the existing health care bill.
Of concern to Painter, vice chairman of the watchdog group Citizens for
Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, is whether the lawmakers acted with private
information they gleaned as the health care legislation was drafted.
"What are the chances that everything they know is public?" Painter said."Health care
bills are very long and complex. They put stuff in, they're taking it out, they're
wheeling and dealing."
Gallo said MacArthur was not interested in cashing in on his position.
"Anyone trying to make the case that Tom entered public service to make money is
flat out wrong and is a hammer in search of a nail," she said.

Will Frelinghuysen defy GOP leaders to
oppose Obamacare repeal that slams his
district?
Updated May 3, 2017; Posted May 3, 2017

B y Jonathan D . Salant
jsalant@njadvancemedia.com,
N J A d v a n c e M e d ia fo r N J .c o m

WASHINGTON -- Here's the question facing Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen:
Does he support a bill that would leave thousands of his constituents without health
insurance, or does he defy party leaders who made him Appropriations
Committee chairman and one of the most powerful Republican lawmakers in the
House?

No wonder Frelinghuysen (R-11th Dist.) is the only member of the New Jersey
congressional delegation who has yet to declare whether he will support the latest
Republican effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
"By virtue of your position, you are leadership," said former Rep. James Walsh (RN.Y.), who used to chair an Appropriations subcommittee. "Expectations are high.
That's the tension. But at the end of the day, he represents the same number of
people everyone else does. They expect him to reflect their values."
Frelinghuysen opposed the original bill, which was pulled from the House floor rather
than go down to defeat.
He's now under pressure to reverse his position and allow President Donald
Trump and House GOP leaders to notch a legislative victory.
"There's a certain level of responsibility when you're given a gavel," said Rep. Tom
Cole (R-Okla.), who sits on the Appropriations Committee with Frelinghuysen. "The
expectation is that you'll be supportive of leadership."
But the bill before Frelinghuysen would leave 24 million more Americans without
health insurance, according to the Congressional Budget Office. That's 500,000 more
uninsured in New Jersey, according to New Jersey Policy Perspective. In his district
alone, the number of those without insurance would climb to 55,847 from 32,147.
The Republican replacement also would allow states to seek a waiver from the
provision in current law that prevents insurers from charging more for
policyholders with pre-existing conditions. That could affect 3.8 million New
Jerseyans, according to NJPP.
It would reduce Medicaid funding by almost $840 billion over 10 years and use the
savings to cut taxes for corporations and wealthy Americans; and cut off the extra
federal funding for new enrollees after 2020 in states like New Jersey that expanded
Medicaid.
With more moderate Republicans balking at taking health insurance away from
millions of Americans and no longer guaranteeing coverage of pre-existing conditions,
GOP leaders remain short of the 216 votes they need.
That makes Frelinghuysen's vote that much more important.
"It's a balancing act," said John Feehery, spokesman for two former House
Republican leaders, Speaker Dennis Hastert of Illinois and Majority Whip Tom DeLay
of Texas. "If you buck leadership too much, you risk losing your chairmanship, but if
you buck your constituents, you risk losing your seat."

Frelinghuysen won re-election last fall with 58 percent in a district that Trump carried
with less than 50 percent. Since then, constituents have demanded an in-person town
hall meeting. He instead met with demonstrators in Washington and talked to
constituents by telephone.
His spokesman, Steve Wilson, did not respond to a request for comment for this
report, nor respond to several queries about whether Frelinghuysen was
reconsidering his opposition.
The other members of the state's congressional delegation have not changed their
minds.
Reps. Leonard Lance (R-7th Dist.), Frank LoBiondo (R-2nd Dist.) and Chris Smith (R4th Dist.) and the seven House Democrats are in opposition, while only Rep. Tom
MacArthur (R-3rd Dist.), whose amendment allowing states to opt out of federal
mandates has helped keep the repeal effort alive, supporting the measure.
No matter which way he votes, Frelinghuysen, who will lead the debate this week on
the $1.2 trillion spending bill funding the government through Sept. 30, is in no
danger of losing his powerful position, Cole said.
"He's going to move a trillion-dollar piece of legislation," Cole said. "He has the full
support of his committee and his colleagues."

This N.J. Republican is in big trouble
because of Trump. Here's what he's doing
about it.
Updated May 14; Posted May 14

B y Jonathan D . Salant
jsalant@njadvancemedia.com,
N J A d v a n c e M e d ia fo r N J .c o m

WASHINGTON -- Longtime Rep. Leonard Lance is in for the fight of his life as New
Jersey's most vulnerable Republican lawmaker in a state that clearly doesn't like
President Donald Trump.
As he runs for re-election this fall in one of only 23 Republican-held House
districts whose voters supported Democrat Hillary Clinton for president, Lance has
been more willing to vote against Trump and his GOP colleagues.

In fact, Lance, R-7th Dist., last year was rated as more liberal and less conservative
than his lifetime record in Washington, according to a NJ Advance Media analysis of
legislative scorecards from seven different interest groups.
His votes include opposing Republican efforts to repeal President Barack
Obama's landmark health care law and a tax bill that targeted New Jersey and other
high-tax states.
Lance said the change was due to the presence of Republican Trump rather than
Democrat Obama in the Oval Office. It emboldened Republicans to move different
issues to the House floor, he said.
"I am a moderate conservative," he said.
Still, for the first time since coming to Congress in 2009, Lance was rated below 50
percent by the Tea Party-aligned FreedomWorks. His 2017 score from the Family
Research Council, a Christian conservative group, dipped to 67 percent compared
with a lifetime 80 percent rating.
While he has voted in line with conservative Heritage Action positions more than half
the time during his tenure in Congress, his rating dipped to 43 percent last year.
On the other hand, his score from the more liberal League of Conservation Voters
was his second-highest ever, 34 percent, compared with 27 percent lifetime. And his
AFL-CIO labor rating was 39 percent, significantly above his 34 percent lifetime rating.
"It's pretty plain what's happening," said former Assistant U.S. Secretary of State Tom
Malinowski, one of the Democrats seeking the nomination to oppose Lance this fall.
"He shifted to the right when he was scared of the Tea Party and he's moving to the
left when he's scared of his increasingly moderate and energized constituents. But it's
all a product of fear, not of principle or leadership."

When a majority of House Republicans and House Democrats found themselves on
opposite sides, only eight other GOP lawmakers were more likely than Lance to cross
party lines, according to Congressional Quarterly. Two were from New Jersey: Reps.
Frank LoBiondo, R-2nd Dist., and Chris Smith, R-4th Dist.
Lance was rated the 12th most bipartisan House member in 2017, up from 75th in
2016, by the Lugar Center, a public policy group headed by former U.S. Sen. Richard
Lugar, R-Ind. Among Garden State lawmakers, only Rep. Josh Gottheimer, D-5th
Dist., ranked higher.

Even so, Lance sided with his party 85 percent of the time, according to CQ, and
supported Trump more than 86 percent of the time, according to FiveThirtyEight.
And while his 2017 American Conservative Union rating was 15 points lower than his
lifetime score, he still supported the group's positions more than half the time. The
ACU puts on the annual Conservative Political Action Conference.
He scored high enough on the U.S. Chamber of Commerce scorecard to receive its
annual award, though his 2017 approval rating of 87 percent was slightly below his 90
percent lifetime score.
In addition, just two years earlier, Lance backed a Republican budget
proposal that eliminated traditional Medicare, repealed the health care law, and cut
Medicaid and food stamps to help balance the budget.
"Like the career politician he is, Congressman Lance is twisting himself into knots
trying to reinvent his record," said Evan Lukaske, a spokesman for the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee.
"The truth is that Lance voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act nearly 20 times,
voted to defund Planned Parenthood and supported a budget that would slash Social
Security and end Medicare as we know it," Lukaske said. "Lance's record is vastly out
of step with this district, and that's why he's ripe for replacement."
Lance, though, quickly put some distance between himself and his fellow
Republicans at the beginning of his current term.
One month after Trump's inauguration, Lance ticked off his differenceswith the
president at a feisty town hall meeting in Branchburg, including opposing the Mexican
border wall and supporting the investigation into Russia's role in the 2016 campaign.
Lance then bucked Trump and the House Republican leadership on two high-profile
votes. He opposed replacing the existing health care law with legislation that the
Congressional Budget Office said would leave 23 million more Americans without
coverage, and voted against the GOP tax bill that curbed the federal deduction for
state and local taxes.
He said he opposed both bills because they would hurt New Jersey. In addition, the
tax bill increased the deficit by more than $1 trillion over 10 years, so a no vote was
the conservative position, he said.
"I've always been a deficit hawk," Lance said.

Just recently, he challenged Trump and the House Republican leadership and joined
an effort to force a vote on legislation allowing unauthorized immigrants brought to
the U.S. as children to remain in the country they grew up in.
In a state where Trump has the support of slightly more than 1 in 3 voters, the Cook
Political Report rated Lance as the New Jersey incumbent most in danger of losing in
November. Cook, a Washington-based publication that tracks congressional races,
called the contest a tossup.
National Republican Congressional Committee spokesman Chris Martin was more
optimistic.
"Congressman Lance continues to tirelessly deliver results for his district and we're
confident voters will reward him once again in November," Martin said.
Lance noted that while Clinton carried the district in 2016, Republican gubernatorial
nominee Kim Guadagno won it by a much larger margin the following November,
Lance said.
"It's a Republican-leaning district," Lance said. "I think my views are the views of the
overwhelming majority of the district."

