Getting the goods on
members of Congress
without a D.C. bureau
Jonathan D. Salant
Washington correspondent
NJ Advance Media

Financial disclosure
• Members of Congress must disclose their assets and outside income
every May 15. Candidates also must file financial disclosure forms,
though the deadline depends on their primaries.
http://clerk.house.gov/public_disc/financial.aspx

• Lawmakers also must regularly disclose stock trades instead of
waiting for the annual disclosure form.

That’s how you get stories like this one:

N.J. lawmakers who backed Obamacare repeal
invested in health companies during debate
The two New Jersey lawmakers who voted to repeal
and replace the Affordable Care Act bought or sold
securities in health care companies while the issue
was before the House, financial disclosure filings show.

Is your lawmaker in political trouble?
Two Washington-based publications track Senate and House races and
regularly update their ratings:
Cook Political Report www.cookpolitical.com
Inside Elections www.insideelections.com

Interest group ratings
Groups representing all sides of the political spectrum, from liberal to
conservative and from business to labor, regularly issue congressional
scorecards.
It’s a way to track your lawmaker’s votes on issues of concern to a
particular organization, and compare him or her to others in the state,
region or country.

Some of the more notable groups include:
U.S. Chamber of Commerce (business) www.uschamber.com
AFL-CIO (labor) www.aflcio.org
Americans for Democratic Action (liberal) www.adaaction.org
League of Conservation Voters (environment) www.lcv.org
American Conservative Union (conservative) www.conservative.org
Heritage Action for America (very conservative) www.heritageaction.com

Checking a lawmaker’s ratings over time yields a story like this:

This N.J. Republican is in big trouble because of Trump. Here's what
he's doing about it.
Longtime Rep. Leonard Lance is in for the fight of his life as New
Jersey's most vulnerable Republican lawmaker in a state that clearly
doesn't like President Donald Trump.
As he runs for re-election this fall in one of only 23 Republican-held
House districts whose voters supported Democrat Hillary Clinton for
president, Lance has been more willing to vote against Trump and his
GOP colleagues.
In fact, Lance, R-7th Dist., last year was rated as more liberal and less
conservative than his lifetime record in Washington, according to a NJ
Advance Media analysis of legislative scorecards from seven different
interest groups.

Who knows about your lawmaker?
• Lobbyists
• Interest groups
• Previous occupants of the seat
• Defeated candidates
• Political party officials
• Friends and neighbors
• Other lawmakers who share committee assignments or co-sponsor
legislation

That’s how you get a story like this:
Will Frelinghuysen defy GOP leaders to oppose Obamacare repeal that
slams his district?
Here's the question facing Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen:
Does he support a bill that would leave thousands of his
constituents without health insurance, or does he defy party leaders who
made him Appropriations Committee chairman and one of the most
powerful Republican lawmakers in the House?
No wonder Frelinghuysen (R-11th Dist.) is the only member of the New
Jersey congressional delegation who has yet to declare whether he will
support the latest Republican effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
"By virtue of your position, you are leadership," said former Rep. James
Walsh (R-N.Y.), who used to chair an Appropriations
subcommittee. "Expectations are high. That's the tension. But at the end of
the day, he represents the same number of people everyone else does. They
expect him to reflect their values."

