Hidden in the Courts
IRE / Orlando 2018
Jenifer McKim – New England Center for
Investigative Reporting
Charles Maldonado – The Lens
Reade Levinson – Reuters News

jenifer.mckim@necir.org
cmaldonado@thelensnola.org
reade.levinson@tr.com

First the basics: The United States has two bodies of law meant to deter and punish
wrongdoing and to compensate the victims of such wrongdoing.
Civil law deals with behavior that injures an individual or a corporation. Examples are
negligence, defamation, and property damage. Civil lawsuits are actions brought by a private
party (“plaintiff”) against another party (“defendant”). The defendant can be held monetarily
responsible for some type of wrong doing, but punishment will never include jail time.
Criminal law deals with behavior that can be considered an offense against the public or
state, like murder, theft, assault, and drunk driving. Only the federal or state government can
initiate a case; cases are almost always decided by a jury. In a criminal suit, a defendant is
accused of violating a criminal statute, and the punishment may include jail time and/or fines.
There's a myriad of local, state and federal courts that can be mined for stories.
Many of these records are available under public records laws.
How to get started
 Show up. Go to courthouse and look at case records. Court records can provide a
reporting trail, including names of defendants, detectives, attorneys, witnesses, jurors,
police reports and narratives. You never know what you will find.
o Many state and local court records also are available online.
o Federal court records are available for a fee via PACER (ft: RSS feed)
 Sit in a court hearing. Spend a day in housing court, immigration court or district court.
 Seek court transcripts. Depending on the court, you can purchase them from a court
reporter, purchase an audio recording of the hearing, obtain them online or ask an
attorney to provide. When cases are on appeal, there should be transcripts available. If
costs are prohibitive, ask for advice of which testimony is the most interesting.
 Don’t forget the Prosecutorial File. File a public records request with the District
Attorney’s office. There can be additional records, exhibits, photos, audio, video
interviews not available in the public file.
 Expand your sources. Talk to people throughout the court system, including lawyers and
clerks, to look for story ideas.
 Reach out to prisoners. Generally, you can find an inmate by putting their name into
Vinelink.com. You can email inmates in many state and federal prisons through
corrlinks.com. If not, write a letter.

Story ideas
Court records can be used to build stories on multiple beats. Here are a few of them:
 Cover the courts as an institution. Are there backlogs? Can you obtain data bases of court
cases? How does court handle complaints against employees? Are their records of
settlement payments? Does the court create annual reports or reports to the Legislature?
 Sex trafficking. Seek out cases filed under state sex trafficking laws in your state. Follow
particular cases to create a case for child sex trafficking, illicit massage businesses, the
business of pimping.
 Wrongful death suits in jails and prisons. Seek suits filed by families who lost loved ones
in the criminal justice system.
 Juvenile Justice. Pull cases of children charged as adults in your community.
 Debt. Look at debt collection cases, track debt collection companies.
 Scrub individuals. Check for criminal charges and civil cases. Bankruptcy, divorce filings
are full of interesting info.
 Housing. Court records can provide many paths for good housing stories. Land court can
provide a look into tax lien foreclosures; housing court provides a door into evictions;
district courts can detail the number of lawsuits filed against homeowners owing debts to
reverse mortgage companies.
 Immigration. Technically, immigration court in the U.S. is not a court at all, but an
administrative body within the Department of Justice. It is not part of the U.S. judicial
branch. For reporting purposes, though, immigration court for the most part operates like
any other court. Records from the Executive Office for Immigration Review can show
trends in immigration enforcement including detention and deportation as well as legal
representation, asylum petitions, families going through removal proceedings, and others.
Dig, dig, dig!
Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER): https://www.pacer.gov/
*To get notified when stuff happens in specific cases, use the RSS feeds: https://ifttt.com
Westlaw: https://www.westlaw.com/
SCOTUS Blog: http://www.scotusblog.com/
National Caseload Data (LIONS)
https://www.justice.gov/usao/resources/foia-library/national-caseload-data
National Archives: https://www.archives.gov/research/court-records/

