Gary Harki
Staff Writer
The Virginian-Pilot
Norfolk, Va., USA
Twitter: @garyaharki
gary.harki@pilotonline.com
304-290-6739

Looking at how people with mental illness are treated
in the criminal justice system
-

Spend a morning in the courthouse
o Lower level courts churn through mental health cases. Spending a morning or two
listening to cases can get you sources throughout the criminal justice system – from
judges to people with pending charges.

-

Go beyond the jails
o If someone dies or is mistreated in jail due to their mental illness, the story of what
happened to them begins long before they ended up in a cell.

-

Figure out how the system works.
o There are several local and state entities involved in these types of cases. You need to
figure out how each works and how they interact.
 Police
 Courts
 Local mental health services. Are they centralized or decentralized? (In Virginia
these are called community service boards and each municipality has one.)
 State mental health services (where individuals are usually sent to be restored
to competency.)

-

Learn where the communications between these systems breaks down.
o Courts, cops, hospitals and social workers can all have information on the same person,
but very often they don’t talk. That can translate into extended jail stays, delayed
treatment and system breakdowns that can lead to tragedy. Here are some common
problems that happen when systems don’t communicate.
 Missed diagnoses when people are arrested.
 Drugs delayed, missed or simply denied when people are sent to jail.
 Delays in Medicaid services for people coming out of jail.
 Court orders sending people from jails to mental health hospitals being delayed
or lost.

-

The good news is this is such a big problem for local jails that people usually want to talk.
o There are sources in a lot of places, from sheriffs to social workers to lawyers and
families.
 Sheriffs who run jails know what their jail populations are and know there’s a
problem.
 Police who arrest mentally ill people often feel they’re caught in an impossible
situation.
 Judges are put in difficult positions and don’t have many options on where to
send people.
 The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) has a chapter in every state.
They usually can walk you through how the systems work in your state and
know other sources.
 Families of mentally ill people in jails get accused of not caring about their
loved ones. This is not really the case. They are often word down by the illness
and want to talk about their situation.
 Lawyers for the families are also a good resource.
 Other inmates see the abuse and will talk to you. Sometimes they call
themselves. Be cautious and verify, but don’t discount their stories.
 The Treatment Advocacy Center has lots of resources and can give you a broad
perspective on the issues.

-

Freedom of information Act requests are your friend. Send requests for:
o Number of jail deaths across the state. Look at how your local jails compare.
o Any and all reports of jail deaths
o State hospitals for the number of mental health beds and how many are used for people
to be restored to competency
o All the emails everywhere, always.
o Any and all state reports generated by misconduct allegations or jail deaths.

Meg Kissinger
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Meg.kissinger@jrn.com
(414)559-0507
Twitter: megkissinger1
Megkissinger.com

Tips for interviewing people with mental illness
1. Ask the person to describe the symptoms he/she experiences. It’s a lot more interesting to use
their words to describe what they are feeling than to give a label.
2. Use “people first” language — Don’t say “a schizophrenic.” It’s” a person with schizophrenia.”
And, for God’s sake, please don’t say “THE mentally ill.” They are PEOPLE with mental illness.
3. Ask to see the person’s medical records. You’d be amazed how many are eager to share. Ditto
for Medicare or Medicaid billing records.
4. Talk to their friends and family members to confirm what they say. A lot of people with mental
illness have thinking disorders that cause them to be forgetful or confused.
5. People with mental illness are not necessarily dangerous. They are are much more likely to be a
victim of a violent crime than to be the perpetrator.
6. People are a lot more than their illnesses. Ask what their hobbies are, what they like to read, or
what music they listen to.
7. Very often, people with mental illness are really intelligent. There is a big difference between
mental illness and cognitive disabilities, developmental disability and brain injury.
8. Like all people, people with mental illness can be mean and deceitful and manipulative. Don’t
give them an extra pass just because they have mental illness. They can also be charming,
thoughtful, hilarious and kind.
9. I like to use people’s names — stigma or no stigma. Not naming them just adds to the stigma.
10. Sometimes, people share VERY intimate details about their lives. I like to go over what I am
reporting about them word for word so there are no surprises.

Jessica Priest
Reporter
Victoria Advocate
Office: 361-580-6521
Cell: 832-643-7845
Twitter: Jessica_Priest
jpriest@vicad.com

Questions to ask about mental illness and jails:
-

Who pays for mental health treatment?

-

How does what our government spends on mental health treatment compare to what it spends
on criminal justice?

-

How many inmates have a mental illness? (You can also get at this by asking, “How many
inmates receive psychotropic medication?”)

-

What is the wait time to see a psychiatrist in the community?

-

How many psychiatrists are there in the community?
o

State medical board show know the answer to this
http://www.tmb.state.tx.us/page/look-up-a-license

-

Is there somewhere for a mentally ill person to go in your community for treatment overnight?
o If not, how far away is it?
o Is there a shortage of beds?

-

What do police do when they interact with people with mental illness?
o Do they believe in the so-called 21-foot rule? (Rule that says you should shoot a suspect
armed with a knife if they get within a certain range)
o If you’re state offers it, how many officers take special training to interact with people
with mental illness?
o http://www.tcole.texas.gov/content/specific-course-reporting-numbers or agency
should keep this data and you can open record request it

-

Are jailers screening for mental illness during booking or at any other time?

-

Are there resources, such as counseling, offered at the jail? (Jails in my coverage area said they
could not justify spending money on counseling because inmates aren’t there long enough for it
to make any difference.)

-

The more you report, the more readers will see you genuinely care and come forward to share
their stories. But you can also do a general call out by blogging that you’re interested in this
topic or setting up a google form people can fill out.

-

Back up your reporting with all the court, arrest and hospital records you can get your hands on.
I went with a subject to request hospital records and had another sign a note that gave his
attorney permission to speak with me about his case. These documents will verify and provide
additional sources. Jury notes to the judge can also enrich your reporting.

