Digging up secrets and story ideas in
bankruptcy court records
By Katy Stech
The Wall Street Journal

Bankruptcy records put a spotlight on drama, trends and quirk. They unlock new details on
heavily covered stories, and while some information like trade secrets or defamatory statements
can be put under seal, the standards for that are high. The information is filed under penalty of
perjury, so it’s trustworthy. Here are my top six digging spots in Pacer.gov for bankruptcy
records.
Digging Spot #1: New filings
Check new chapter 11 filings in your coverage area. There are usually between 30-50 filings a day.
Pacer’s national case search is good, though it has a one-day delay in getting the information on new
filings made to the 94 federal court districts, so I recommend checking for new cases using the local
court’s Pacer portal.
Digging Spot #2: Statement of Financial Affairs/Schedules
Read through a chapter 11 filer’s schedules/statement of financial affairs documents. This is where you
can find out how much money a business took in during the last three years or what lawsuits the bankrupt
person/business is involved with. In personal bankruptcy cases, these forms show salary information,
kids’ ages and details like how much someone spends each month on auto payments, entertainment or
student loans. A person or company typically has 14 days to file this information. Find this information
by searching the docket in a particular case.
Digging Spot #3: Creditor lists
A creditor list shows every business and person that the bankrupt entity has a relationship with. Search the
docket in a bankruptcy case for a service list, which is often updated throughout the case, or click on a
case’s “Creditors” link.
Digging Spot #4: Claims register
Every creditor who wants to be paid a portion of whatever money is doled out has to fill out a claims
form. Often, the creditor will file a contract or other typically confidential information as proof that

they’re owed money. Get this information by opening a bankruptcy case and clicking on the “Claims
Register” link.
Digging Spot #5: 341 Meetings
These are meetings that every bankrupt person (or the head of a bankruptcy company) must attend to
answer questions under oath from a U.S. Department of Justice official. The questions are usually about
assets. Either attend these hearings in person or get a recording through the DOJ’s U.S. Trustee’s
Program.
Digging Spot #6: Lawsuits
Within a bankruptcy case, someone can ask the judge to determine an important issue by filing a type of
lawsuit that’s called an adversary proceeding. To search for specific types of lawsuits, go into one of the
94 courts and click “Query.” That’s where you can find and search by a range of lawsuit types.

