USING SOLUTIONS JOURNALISM IN INVESTIGATIONS
Tina Rosenberg
Solutions Journalism Network
tina@solutionsjournalism.org
WHAT CAN A SOLUTIONS STORY DO?
Solutions stories can remove excuses.
At SJN, we work with hundreds of news organizations to help them do solutions reporting with rigor,
avoiding advocacy, cheerleading, “good news” and fluff.
Many of our partners are investigative units. They use solutions stories in their investigative series to
show that it’s possible to do better, and take away the excuses of those who are behaving badly. A
solutions story moves a problem from “unavoidable” to “unacceptable.”
One example: the Cleveland Plain Dealer had done several major series on lead paint. They showed in
convincing detail how the city was failing its children. But these series didn’t produce impact.
What did bring major change was a 2015 solutions series: "Toxic Neglect." The paper did a traditional
investigation, looking at the lead problem, and the city’s failures, through the lens of race. But its real
focus was the solutions component, showing how Rochester was doing a better job overall and how
neighbors such as Grand Rapids and Akron had each solved pieces of the puzzle.

Lead paint was seen as such an entrenched problem that city officials could dismiss “Cleveland is failin
its children” as unavoidable. But “Cleveland is failing while its neighbors are succeeding” was a differe
message, one profoundly embarrassing to city and state officials.
WHICH INVESTIGATIONS CAN USE A SOLUTIONS ANGLE?

Investigations of problems that are widely shared. If lots of places have the problem, then lots have tri
to solve it. Some of those responses will be worth reporting on.
This covers …a lot. Almost every investigation, actually.

There are exceptions — truly unique or particular stories. But fewer than you’d think, especially when
you take a step back and think about what caused the problem. Say you’re investigating a fire in a
building where the wiring was not up to code. That sounds sui generis. But say the wiring was permitt
because the building’s owners bribed the inspectors. Now that’s a widespread problem. Perhaps a
nearby or comparable city had major corruption in its inspection force, and cleaned it up. How that
happened would be a good story for your series.

HOW CAN I USE SOLUTIONS JOURNALISM IN MY INVESTIGATION?

Find the “positive deviants.” Ellen Gabler at the Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel did a series on state dela
in screening newborns for diseases that can harm children if untreated. It won numerous prizes and h
national impact. “Deadly Delays” published a state-by-state (in some states, hospital-by-hospital)
database of how fast states tested newborns. List in hand, she looked at the states that were doing bes
— and wrote about how they did it.

As installments in the series. Often it’s a “last in the series” — a story (or two) with the same weight
and richness as the problem-focused installments. (Instead of the dreaded “Part 7: Five Necessary
Reforms.”) One example: WEWS Cleveland News 5’s investigation of Cleveland’s policing problems had
segments on how a consent decree worked in Detroit and how police in Durham, NC did crisis
intervention training. Another from the Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel: Meg Kissinger’s "Chronic Crisis"
series, which focused on Milwaukee’s emphasis on emergency detentions over care for mental health
patients. It had two solutions stories, including this last-in-the-series on the dramatic improvement in
how Houston treats people with mental illness.

In the very first story in a series. “Deadly Delays” covered the practices of positive deviant states, and
states which had greatly improved, in the series introduction. That meant people could read the later
“states are failing” stories already knowing that failure was unacceptable.

As bite-sized chunks. Every problem can be broken down into many smaller slices that are importan
to solve. Both Toxic Neglect and Deadly Delays reported on which cities and states had solved these
small slices of a problem. This strategy is a natural for interesting data visualization.

As an overall frame for a series. The Arizona Daily Star reporters Patty Machelor, Emily Bregel, Perla
Trevizo and Sarah Garrecht Gassen organized their big investigation, Fixing Our Foster Care Crisis,
around what six other states were doing that worked better. “The team searched for solutions that cou
work in Arizona,” said the introduction — and those also became the way to tell the story of Arizona’s
failure.
As an overall frame for a single story. When your audience assumes failure, success is news. A
surprising success story is also a fresh and high-impact way to package a traditional investigation that
might otherwise be dismissed as “too depressing.”

For example, Jason Cherkis’ Polk Award-winning Huffington Post story Dying To Be Free, on the forces
keeping the U.S. from widespread adoption of medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder. H
frame for the story was Europe’s success with this strategy.

My New York Times magazine story Look at Brazil investigated how Washington and the pharmaceutic
industry pressured countries not to make or buy generic AIDS medicines. The frame was Brazil, which
successfully fended off these pressures to make cheap drugs and provide them at no cost to its people.

Gabrielle Glaser’s Atlantic piece, The Irrationality of Alcoholics Anonymous, showed how other countri
often rely on medicines to help people moderate their drinking — and how the dominance of AA keeps
the U.S. from doing the same.

Since this model focuses intensely on one example of success to highlight widespread failure, it works
best for national or non-place based publications.

