Kae M. Petrin
Digital Reporter
St. Louis Public Radio
kpetrin@stlpublicradio.org​ / ​@kmaepetrin

Investigating Private Landlords
When to Start
Maybe a landlord just got a big tax abatement on an apartment development. Or has a reputation for
moving into cheap buildings and flipping them into “luxury” housing. Or keeps ending up in the courts.
Maybe the same name keeps popping up in development or housing hearings, but the associated LLC is a
little bit different every time. These flags can make a private landlord worth looking into.
Step-by-Step
1.

Check consumer complaints.
a. Better Business Bureau, Yelp, Craigslist, and even Reddit​ can fill you in on tenants’
scuttlebut. “Bad reviews” don’t necessarily justify an investigation. But look for trends,
lawsuits, weird lease terms, potential violations of local landlord-tenant law or improperly
licensed renovations. You can also start sourcing tenants from reviews. If the landlord
responds to complaints, you might get a sense of the management.
2. Check the courts.
a. Landlord-tenant lawsuits aren’t unusual. But keep an eye out for any ​cases outside of the
standard small claims battles​ over rent or security deposits. High rates of eviction-related
lawsuits can indicate something else is going on. ​Class-action lawsuits​ are nearly always
a red flag.
b. Leases, security deposit receipts, and apartment walkthrough records​ are often public
exhibits, even in minor lawsuits. Experts can check these documents for illegal or unusual
clauses.
3. Reach out to fair housing enforcement agencies.
a. Familiarize yourself with local laws and agencies. Both private and public agencies receive
funding to enforce fair housing law. Local, state, and federal agencies tend to protect
different tenant categories, so complaints might be scattered across two or more
agencies. Many fair housing agencies receive complaints that fall into “gray areas” or don’t
result in lawsuits because of confidentiality issues. These complaints can be invaluable for
reporting. Local agencies may be happy to provide non-confidential documents and even
aggregate data on landlords who have high complaint rates. You may have to make formal
public records requests, depending on local laws and what information you want.
b. Make sure you understand what type of funding an agency receives, because the actual
tasks and capacities of these agencies can vary widely based on FHIP vs. FHAP and
funding subtypes.
c. Lawyers employed by these agencies will also be able to tell you if the trends in reviews
(or complaints) are legal, “extralegal,” or illegal. They often have experts who use leases or
undercover property tours to identify dubiously legal landlord/development activities.
4. Keep an eye out for familiar names. Try to identify key parties — owners, leasing managers,
property managers, office staff, lawyers — affiliated with the company. Where’s the money coming
from? Who’s benefiting? Who actually owns everything?
a. Many landlords purchase properties under several different LLCs. It’s a smart way to
separate assets and manage large projects. But it also conveniently obscures who’s

involved with a project, how much public money they might be getting, and how many
complaints or lawsuits might be against an individual.
b. Start with properties definitely associated with the landlord/developer in question; work
outwards to identify additional LLC names and unknown properties. Identifying properties
owned by the same landlord/developer under different names may lead to new sources,
problems, and stories.
c. Find the agent showing the properties through ​Craigslist and Zillow listings​. ​Reverse
domain name lookups through WHOIS​ can lead to websites owned by the same person
that list different properties. ​Public hearings for tax abatements ​will name the
outward-facing officers (and often the person signing the checks). ​Business filings​ and
state incorporation papers ​can indicate officers, owners, and agents, as well as some
contact info. ​Tax records, ownership history, mortgage documents, utility payments,
warranty deeds, and deeds of trust​ can shed light on who’s actually purchasing or paying
to maintain properties.
d. (These documents, their public availability, and their processing will vary from county to
county. Figure out how businesses are licensed, properties are purchased, and buildings
are managed where you’re working, then go from there.)
e. Background ‘em.
5. Think beyond tenants.
a. Contractors, inspectors, and business partners (like landlords who sell property to or buy
property from a developer) may provide important context. Keep an eye out for
contractors or business partners who say they’ve been burned.
b. Inspection records, citizen service bureau complaints, and building permits​ can indicate
whether a property has consistent troubles, whether construction work was completed
legally, whether the building’s in good condition … and sometimes even put you in touch
with the companies and people who are doing business with your landlord-developer.
Concerns Worth a Story
Legal Issues
Does the landlord follow local landlord-tenant law? Does a landlord abide by fair housing law? The answers
to these questions might not be straightforward. It’s good to understand the law for yourself, but legal
experts can make or break a story related to these issues.
Gray Areas
Does the landlord seem to take advantage of gaps in local or federal laws? Or do they seem to push
tenants to do things that aren’t legally required, like agree to lease alterations? If a landlord purchases a
building, do tenants find themselves locked out, treated poorly, or harassed after refusing to comply with
new leases or community rules?
Straight-up Scams
Does the landlord take money from tenants, pay taxes late, provide poor service, go awol for weeks at a
time, never return security deposits, neglect to compensate contractors, sell buildings to other landlords at
inflated prices?
Broader Trends
Are illegal or “extralegal” tactics commonly used by landlords and developers in a city, a neighborhood, a
community? Who lets it happen, and why? Who suffers?

