Housing Crisis
•

In New York, our largest affordable-housing stock is regulated. So we chose to look at
regulated housing. In your city, you might decide to look at certain neighborhoods considered
to be low-income, or in neighborhoods that are gentrifying.

•

Often when you look at that housing, patterns emerge: The same landlords own dilapidated
buildings. The same landlords buy crummy buildings, aiming to kick out the tenants and hike
the rents. Gaps in enforcement mean that landlords don't repair buildings.

•

Start at the beginning: Who owns what? Who regulates what?

•

In New York, for example, the city’s Department of Buildings regulates construction. The
city’s Department of Housing Preservation and Development regulates things like hot water
and heat. The state’s Division of Housing and Community Renewal is supposed to oversee
regulated housing. The city’s housing courts handle lawsuits over poor conditions and
evictions. In other words, it’s very, very confusing. In confusion, predators do their thing.

•

In between agencies, gaps in enforcement can occur. Look for past audits of these agencies.
Talk to advocates. Look for where problems can be.

Identifying owners
Through Housing Preservation and Development, we were able to get a database of addresses
and owners. There was just one problem: None of the data was standardized. So Sarah Cohen
spent months trying to match officers and addresses, ultimately coming up with landlord network
IDs. These were essential for finding patterns and characters.

Department of Buildings ideas
•

Look for how building permits are handled, especially if construction is booming. In New
York, for example, we have something called “self-certification.” This means that architects
and engineers can simply say something will be built according to code without inspection.
This is dangerous for obvious reasons.

• In older buildings, look for how firms handle asbestos
removal, lead paint and dust.

• Look at how building inspectors handle complaints. For
instance, in New York, complaints were dismissed if
inspectors showed up twice and weren’t allowed inside.
• Look for patterns with engineers and architects, people
who keep showing up.
• By looking at DOB records for mega-landlords, who
owned more than 50 apartment buildings, we found
architect Ken Hudes. Then we looked at lawsuits….

…which sometimes include the most unexpected things.

PUNISHMENT!
•

In New York, for example, the most common punishment is the voluntary surrender of city
self-certification privileges.

•

Ken Hudes gave his up in March 2015; his partner, Jonathan Miller took over, then gave his
privileges up last August, when Anatole Plotkin took over. In November, Hudes recovered his
privileges.

•

None of them ever faced any discipline from the state, which licenses engineers and
architects.

Housing Court ideas
•

Find out how eviction cases are handled in your city, and who does evictions. In smaller
cities, these will likely be filed in civil court. In larger cities, these will often be filed in a
separate housing court.

•

Despite the importance of shelter, these courts are often at the bottom of the rung in terms
of judges, lawyers and society. The records are often on paper.

•

Look at service, and whether the possibility of sewer service exists. Look at how servers are
regulated.

•

Look at legal mills, and law firms that churn through cases.

•

Look at the tenant blacklist, and how it hurts tenants in your city.

•

Look at evictions, and how they are the entryway to homelessness.

How we did the story
•

Sarah Cohen got a data snapshot of five years from housing court, or more than a million
records. With that, she was able to identify things like sanctions, problems with nonmilitary
affidavits and harassment cases.

•

But the data had limits; way more work was needed.

•

We focused on two main owners and buildings. One owner, the Orbach Group, had a high
rate of holdover lawsuits—filed against tenants who allegedly broke lease rules—and had cut
its number of rent-stabilized apartments drastically. We looked at the second owner, at the
historic Dunbar Apartments, because we pulled on a thread: A colleague had a tip about a
bad nonmilitary affidavit in a court case.

•

And then we started pulling court files, both in federal court and housing court…..and more
court files….which is how we found Neri Carranza.

Neri Carranza moved into her home on West 109th
Street in 1956, when she was 32. In 2010, the new
owner of her building, the Orbach Group, started trying
to evict her. We first found her through a federal lawsuit
filed under the fair debt collection practices act.
We had three questions:
Was she still alive? Where was she? And was she lucid?

Spreadsheets!
•

We had our frame. But we needed to identify patterns.

Keeping track of cases

Document Cloud to the rescue

Anything interesting?

Service by Superman

Nonmilitary affidavits are a federal requirement.

Howard Belfer said he talked to Edward
Robinson in December 2015.

But Edward Robinson had died. In 1993.

His son Raymond was actually evicted.

Who was actually gone?

Eye on Story
• So many documents! So many spreadsheets! So much to juggle!
• We could have done these stories in a million ways. We knew our
material; we knew that we could have used many examples for every
theme we wanted to illustrate.

• Commit to your characters, and cut the superfluous.
• If you are doing system stories, make sure your lead examples, and your
thru line, are not the worst-case scenarios. The stories are more powerful
if they are typical, and more fair.

Want to discuss? Get me @kim_barker or
kim.barker@nytimes.com

