How editors or supervisors can manage
database reporting efforts
1) Numbers are not stories, or investigations. Don’t allow staffers to seduce
you with promises of a great investigative piece based solely on some nifty
database they’ve obtained or can create. Ask plenty of hard questions when
a CAR project is proposed. What is this data going to reveal about the issue?
How can we use it to make the reader understand the situation we want
to illustrate? What is there to investigate beyond the numbers?
2) Make sure staffers have done some reporting before you begin a database
project. Reporters should learn as much as they can about the issue,
including a conversation with the official record keeper of the agency or
organization, so you’re not just blindly requesting any records it might have.
They also need to determine how records are kept, whether they are on
paper or computer, what software format computer records are kept on,
what information is contained in each individual record, whether there is
any special coding of the records and whether the records will accurately
reflect situations the newspaper is trying to analyze.
3) Get involved early in discussions with reporters and the database or CAR
editor about the data and how they intend to use it. Make sure they’ve
requested all appropriate records from an agency and inquire about
whether they will need comparable data from other agencies or for a
particular span of time. Make sure the methodology is sound.
4) Treat data like you would any “source” a reporter quotes in a story. Be
skeptical. Look for inconsistencies. Just because a record exists in your
database doesn’t mean it actually happened. Make sure reporters or the
database editor develop a test to check the accuracy of the data. Review
the results with reporting staff to see if it makes sense based on your combined
experience. If you “fact-check” stories when doing projects – such as
line-by-line editing – be just as diligent with the data.
5) Try and do the work in-house when building a database, if you can, preferably with
the reporting staff. Doing the data entry themselves gives reporters familiarity with the
information they will need during the reporting and writing stages and makes it easier to
spot trends or meaningful elements in the data. It also provides consistency in the way
data is entered should there be a need to interpret how a record should be entered in
the database. No matter how the data is entered, check and double-check the work.
6) Data is addictive. Know when to stop. Just like you make decisions about when the
reporting on a project has reached “critical mass” and you have enough material to
publish a story, establish a threshold for the data analysis.

7) Be careful downloading information from the Internet. It’s not always the “freshest,”
most accurate information an organization has. Sometimes it’s just plain wrong. Get the
raw data whenever possible.
8) Show the methodology and results to the targets of your investigation when you are
confident in the analysis – usually at the same time reporters start their target
interviews. Invite them to the newsroom and give them the opportunity to pick apart your
work and make suggestions on how the analysis
can be improved, or why the analysis doesn’t tell the whole story.
9) Share the wealth. Make the data available to your entire newsroom. A good database
has a lot to offer long after the project is over. Crime, health care, property tax and
campaign finance databases are particularly good for sharing throughout the newsroom
and online for readers.
– Mark J. Rochester,
Senior News Director_Investigations
The Detroit Free Press

