Getting data into Excel
Lauryn Schroeder
lauryn.schroeder@sduniontribune.com
619-293-1372

These class notes are available at ​http://bit.ly/IRE18-Excel
Working with data is just like interviewing a live source – but better. A data source cannot lie (at least
in the same way) and it has no opinion. The answers you get will be based on facts.
Unfortunately, datasets don’t always come in an interview-ready format. There are three common file
types that usually require a manual import into Excel.

HTML DATA:
Sometimes a list or dataset is published online without a download option, and copying and pasting
directly from the website can be a data-cleaning nightmare. Thankfully, Excel allows you to extract
those HTML tables with a few clicks.
Go to ​http://bit.ly/ire-html-example​.
You should see the main data page for the Florida Department of Education. (Most Florida Ed data
are available for download, but for this exercise, pretend downloading is not an option.)
Leave all of the fields blank and click the “Submit” button to get a list of all schools.

You should see a full page of school data. If that doesn’t work, try this link: ​http://bit.ly/FL-schools
Copy the URL in the address bar and open Excel. Click on the “Data” tab at the top. On the left side,
click “Get External Data” and select the “From Web” option. (Icons and their locations may vary,
depending on your version of Excel.)

A “New Web Query” window will pop up. Paste the URL of Florida schools in the address bar and hit
Enter. It should bring up the same information we saw in our browser with one difference: yellow and
orange arrows like this
throughout the page. Click on the arrow nearest to the data you want to
import and select “import.”

Next, it will ask you where you want the data. This usually defaults to the cell you last selected but if
the field is empty, type in =$A$1 and click OK.

Voala! Your data should be clean and ready to analyze.
HTML Pro Tips:
1. When using the “From Web” tool, your data and the website share a live connection. This
means your data will change if the website’s information changes. Sometimes that’s a useful
feature. Other times it will mess with your analysis. To remove the connection, highlight the
entire worksheet, and click “Connections” under the data tab. Select any connections listed in
the top window and click “Remove.”
2. The “From Web” function can only bring in one page at a time. If your HTML table is split up on
several pages, you will need to manually enter the URL of each page to get all your data into
Excel. ​Import.io​ can automate these queries for you and the first 500 pages are free.

PDF DATA:
The worst. A headache. Cometdocs and Tabula to the rescue.
Open the “neiss-pens-pencils” .pdf file in the class folder. Some .pdf files are created as a flat image,
so before we try to extract any information, we need to make sure our computer recognizes the text in
our table.
To check, try and highlight any of the words on the table. If it highlights, celebrate. Your .pdf file has
gone through “optical character recognition” software. If it doesn’t, Adobe and other online tools can
do this for you.

Sometimes the stars align and you can copy and paste directly into excel from a .pdf file. In our case,
copying and pasting would create this:

No thank you.
We’re going to use CometDocs first. Anyone can register for a free account and IRE members get a
free upgrade to premium. (Email ​cometdocs@ire.org​ to get access.)
Login and click the green “Upload” button on the upper left side.

Browse for “neiss-pens-pencils.” Click on the “Convert tab” and click and drag the pdf file into the
empty box below the tab. Next, select the type of conversion you want. In this case, we want to use
“To Excel (xlsx).” Click the green Convert button and download your new Excel file!

Tabula is another scraping option. It’s free and allows you to choose what will be extracted from a
pdf, as opposed to CometDocs, which takes everything.
Open Tabula. A browser window should appear with the Tabula home page. Browse for your file and
click Import.
Now you can click and drag over the sections you want to extract manually. For tables that span
across several pages, use the “Repeat this Selection” option at the lower right hand corner of any box
you create.

Tabula Pro Tip:
1. Sometimes highlighting everything gives you a messy output. Manually selecting each column
and extracting them one at a time CAN be a way around this. Both options (cleaning or
selecting columns one at a time) are time consuming but the ladder is less painful.

TEXT DATA:
Text files will be “delimited” or “fixed-width.” In a delimited file, each line represents a single row in the
data, and all of its associated fields are separated by a delimiter, such as a comma, tab or space.
Our first instinct is to double click on those delimited or fixed-width files to open them in Excel but that
can cause a lot more problems later, or gives you something like this:

Here’s how we fix it. Open up Excel. Select the “Data” tab and choose to import external data “From
Text.” Browse for the file “OPD_Crimes.csv” and click import. The text import wizard should show up.
Since this is a .csv, it’s more than likely going to be delimited by a comma. (Sometimes the separator
can change, depending on the Excel version.) Either way, make sure delimited is selected first and hit
next.
Now we need to select the type of delimiter. Excel allows you to see how the different delimiters
impact your data. For example, select semicolon.

You should see that it shows us a sample of the top rows and that a semicolon delimiter successfully
separates the columns. Hit next.
Now it will allow us to select the format of our columns. Select the “Case Date Time” column and
make sure the format is date instead of general. Then hit finish.
Similar to importing from the web, it will ask you where you want the data. This usually defaults to the
cell you last selected but if the field is empty, type in =$A$1 and click OK.
Delimited files are very similar. Open another Excel workbook and click import data from text again.
Browse for the file “debtfix.txt” and click import. Now, instead of selecting delimited, choose fixed
width on the first page. This will allow you to manually select where you know the columns should
break.
Double clicking on a column will remove it if you accidentally place a break in the wrong spot. Click
next.
Choose the proper formatting for the cells, ensuring that any numerical columns with a leading zero
are in a text format, not “General,” so the leading zero is safe.

Formulas:
Merging cells together (with a space to separate)
=I9&" "&I10&" "&I11
Average(C2:C52)
Sum(
Min(
Max(

