TIPSHEET - Before you ever begin your analysis
#NICAR19
MaryJo Webster, Star Tribune, @MaryJoWebster
Jaimi Dowdell, Reuters, @JaimiDowdell
Rob Barry, Wall Street Journal, @rob_barry

RESEARCHING YOUR DATA:
Be a reporter and research the data you’re requesting. Tell government officials that you want to
talk to the “data person” about the data -- be clear that it’s off the record and just for your own
knowledge. Entice them to participate by saying you want to make sure the request is as easy
as possible for everyone involved -- especially them.
If you can get beyond a phone call, ask if you could come to their office and have someone
show you the data and walk through the record layout.
Find out why the agency must collect the data in the first place. Often, there is a law that
mandates the data exist. That law will typically explain how it should be maintained and what
information must be included. Reading the law can give you a better understanding of the scope
of the data.
Figure out how the agency is obtaining the data. If they collect the information using forms,
either paper or online, make sure you look at those to see how they are asking questions. If
data is already publicly available, doublecheck the public fields with the list of information
collected to make sure nothing has been withheld from the public version.
Some agencies are sticklers for getting a written/formal request first. If that’s the case, then
include a sentence requesting a phone call to discuss the request before they proceed. Tell
them outright in your letter that you broadly worded this request because you don’t know
enough about the data and that a phone call would help clarify things.
Find government reports, other news articles, possibly even academic studies that used the
data you are requesting. Hunt for a methodology that might help shine light on any details about
the data that are good to know.
Find the authors of those reports or others who have dealt with the data. Ask them about the
data. What problems did they encounter? What advice do they wish someone had given them?
See if you can find a former employee of the agency who handled the data. Talk to them! They
might be able to help you craft your request.
Think about anywhere else you could get this data. Is there a federal agency that also collects
it? Anywhere else? Be creative.

Page 1 of 3

QUESTIONS TO ASK ABOUT THE DATA:
• What’s the official name of the database?
• What software is it in?
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Do you have a standard process for exporting data for other public requests or
for making reports? Or would you have to create a new export process?
What does each record represent? (one incident? One inspection?). This is
important to know because sometimes it’s not what you’d expect. For example,
sometimes fire department response data has one record for each piece of
equipment sent to the scene.
Can they send a copy of the record layout ahead of time?
How does the data get in there? Typed by a clerk? Entered by whoever is reporting the
information to the agency?
How many years’ of data is in there? (sometimes old data isn’t transfered to new data
systems)
If you need data that goes farther back in time, is there a way to get that?
Other scope questions -- such as whether there’s a reporting “threshold” that means
some things are in there and some are not? (i.e. crash data often only includes injury
and fatality crashes; maybe “serious” damage crashes); What geography does it cover?
Were there any big changes to how the data is collected or what is collected in recent
years?
Be sure to ask about specific fields of information you know you want. Also ask them if
that field is consistently filled in.
Are there any fields that would be redacted because it’s considered private/non-public?
(Social Security numbers, etc)

What do you use the database for? Are there any reports that are routinely
generated based on this data? Do you do any analysis? (this question is good for
finding out whether materials exist that you might be able to use to double-check
your own findings or to get some basic summary analysis, if that's all you need)

OTHER TIPS:
If you are making a really big request, try asking for a small chunk of the data first so that you
have time to see if it’s going to serve the purposes you need. This could help you avoid wasting
an agency’s time and resources on a big data dump that turns out to be a dud.
Perhaps even be forthright with them and tell them what you’re trying to do -- ask if they think
you are heading down the right path (This is tricky and not always a good idea)
Are there any records that would be withheld altogether? (i.e. in MN police are allowed to
withhold salary records on undercover detectives; MN birth records on children born to unwed
mothers who didn’t authorize the record to be made public can also be withheld)

BULK FOIA TIPS:
Be sure your requests are identical for each agency
Use a spreadsheet or similar tool to track progress
Tell the agencies you are asking for data from multiple places
Page 2 of 3

WORDING YOUR REQUEST:
Wording on your request is crucial. Avoid terms like “list” or “report”, if you want structured data.
Make it clear you want structured data and perhaps even tell them what software you will be
using it in.
If you are getting multiple years of data and you want it all in one file, tell them that in your
request.
If it’s a relational dataset, let them know it’s ok to provide the data in multiple files. (MaryJo has
encountered agencies that assumed she wanted one big flat file – and charged a huge amount
to merge the data)
Always include a sentence encouraging them to contact you if they have any questions or
concerns about your request. Request they contact you via email to keep a paper trail. But also
include your phone number, just in case.
Include the name of the person(s) you talked to at the agency…. “Based on my conversation
with person X, I understand the data can be exported…..”
Always ask for any documentation that you’ll need to understand the data such as record layout,
code sheets, etc.
Request all the years available even if you think you don’t need them. It’s useful to have for
comparison and chances are you’ll end up requesting it later anyway.
Include a sentence that says something like, “If there will be any cost associated with my
request, please provide, in writing, an estimate of the cost and time involved prior to filling my
request.”

RESOURCES:
FOIA Machine- https://www.foiamachine.org/
Committee for Freedom of the Press - Open Government Guide
https://www.rcfp.org/open-government-guide/
--https://www.cjr.org/united_states_project/open-government-guide-rcfp.php
Find your state agency/local organizations
Lots of good tipsheets at IRE, https://www.ire.org/resource-center

Page 3 of 3

