Tipsheet: What coding language should
I learn?
Slides from the NICAR19 presentation are ​here
Languages
●

●

●

●

JavaScript:
○ Uses: News app development, interactivity
○ Strengths: Very expressive, flexible, does a little bit of everything. D3.js is used
as an industry standard for data visualization.
○ Weaknesses: Very expressive, flexible, not necessarily “one way” to do things.
Changing very quickly at the moment, so can feel like you’re always one step
behind.
Python:
○ Uses: Web scraping, data analysis, news app development
○ Strengths: Versatile in that it can be used for many tasks via use of different
libraries.
○ Weaknesses: Not great for mapping, plotting or visualizing data (although there is
a new library out that’s promising). \
R:
○ Uses: Data analysis, exploring data visually, generating publication-ready viz
○ Strengths: Great for creating static visualizations, has statistical functionalities
built in, the “​tidyverse​” is a whole set of packages that make data analysis a lot
more intuitive
○ Weaknesses: Not great for creating interactive visuals, doesn’t do well with
memory management, was developed by statisticians (meh)
SQL:
○ Uses: Data management/analysis, especially with large data sets
○ Strengths: Syntax is similar to English, making it slightly more accessible to learn
than other languages; Analyzing and cleaning large databases
○ Weaknesses: Primary functions are data analysis and management, so turn to
other languages for other purposes

Resources
You’ll have questions. Here are some places to find answers.

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

Stackoverflow​: Think of it as Google for broken code. It’s basically a form where coders
post their errors and people submit answers. There’s a decent chance that whatever you
are having trouble solving, someone else has asked and there’s an answer out there.
News Nerdery Slack​: Email the contact at newsnerdery.org and ask to join the News
Nerd Slack. There are a bunch of channels specific to each type of coding language, a
general #helpme channel that is very active and people are always quick to answer
questions. It had saved my ass many times. There’s also a #job-postings channel where
jobs are posted every day and a #career channel for advice on salary negotiation,
raises, etc. It’s a wonderful resource and people are very responsive to new coders.
GitHub​: You’ll probably hear this mentioned a lot during the conference. GitHub is
Google Docs for code. People can post code publicly, suggest changes to code, or copy
others public code and build off of it. www.github.com.
The R Inferno​: ​“If you are using R and you think you’re in hell, this is a map for you.”​ Goes
through a lot of gotcha’s about the language and syntax
http://www.burns-stat.com/pages/Tutor/R_inferno.pdf​ (and for a more introductory
version, see: ​https://www.burns-stat.com/documents/tutorials/impatient-r/​)
“What’s the best way to learn the programming language R? (Preferably, for
free)”​: Great Quartz article by Dan Kopf that provides various learning resources for R
https://qz.com/1464525/whats-the-best-way-to-learn-the-programming-language-r-prefer
ably-for-free/
Learn Python the Hard Way​: ​https://learnpythonthehardway.org/
Khan Academy’s SQL sequence:
https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-programming/sql
JavaScript: Interactive Data Visualization for the Web:
https://alignedleft.com/work/d3-book

