How to Teach
Yourself to Code
Scott Pham - BuzzFeed News
C.J. Sinner - Star Tribune
NICAR 2019

You feel ready to make the leap to code but feel a
little intimidated or are having trouble ﬁnding the
time to learn a new skill.
Let's talk about the challenges to learning code and
how to overcome them.

Scott’s story
- Studied English at liberal arts college, planned to be in public
radio
- Content Director public radio station in Missouri
- Digital Editor for investigations team at Bay Area TV station
- Started taking online courses through Ed-X, Coursera
- First Python, then JavaScript, old NICAR tutorials
- First data job: Center for Investigative Reporting/Reveal
- Now: BuzzFeed News

C.J.’s story
- Studied journalism at large public university, college
newspaper, internships all as reporter
- First job: Online Producer for newspaper in North Dakota
- Columbia U., with focus on interactive design, front-end code
- Multimedia Producer in Twin Cities, ﬁnding mentors
- Community groups, affordable in-person classes on
JavaScript, programming concepts, SASS
- Star Tribune, asked for data to be part of job, now learning just
enough of a language to be dangerous

How to choose what to
learn ﬁrst?

Where do I start?
-

Don’t think about it too much
You don’t have to become a pro at the ﬁrst thing
It’s okay to change your mind or switch
Lots of ways to solve a problem or build the thing
Learning how to learn gets easier, but never stops
Your ﬁrst steps determine very little!

How to self-direct a
learning path?

How do I ﬁgure out what to do ﬁrst, second, third ...
- Once you learn the basics of coding, start making
stuff ASAP
- Choose your next steps based on problems and
opportunities:
- “I’d like to add interactivity to this chart, but I
don’t know how!” - or - I know enough code to make things interactive.
What do I do now?

How to ﬁnd help in
supportive communities?

What if I have questions?
- Journalism-focused groups: Lonely Coders Club,
NICAR Listserv, News Nerdery
- Meetup groups in your area: Women coder groups,
data visualization groups across industries
- Hackathons: Great for seeing how programmers
solve problems, get to have a win at the end
- Colleges/Universities: Audit classes, GIS
departments, free community courses/outreach

How to ﬁnd the time?

How do I sell this to my boss?
-

Set expectations with your supervisor
Vocalize intentions to hold yourself accountable
Don’t let your “invisible” work stay invisible
Look for opportunities where no one would
challenge the need for something extra/efﬁcient
- Partner with a coworker as an example to others,
which creates demand for more
- Sometimes it does mean nights/weekends

How to survive the
‘Desert of Despair’?

Source: Why Learning to Code is So Damn Hard

Is it this hard for everyone?
- Yes! Learning is hard. You’re not special, and we
mean that in the nicest way :-)

TIPSHEET:
bit.ly/NICAR-teach-self-code

