After a disaster: Long-term reporting on floods, fires and other
emergencies
We’ll talk about databases and documents you can use to cover natural and unnatural disasters
before, during and after they occur, and strategies for identifying long-term issues after the initial
incident.

Rebecca Hersher, NPR
Before
● Contact local and state agencies and find out how they manage their data collection and
public communications. For example, if flooding is predicted for later this week in Normal
County, State, get in touch now with the following agencies and ask how they ​gather
information​. Do they have a public tipline? Do they have people in the field during the
storm? Do they have weather monitors or flood gauges, and how do they access the
data from those instruments? Is any raw data available in real-time?
○ Local floodplain manager
○ State Department of Natural Resources
○ City/County Health Commissioner
○ County Sheriff’s office
○ Regional office of the National Weather Service
○ Army Corps of Engineers (levees, dams and locks)
●

Ask local, state and federal agencies how they’ve ​shared information​ during past
disasters. Is the city health commissioner in personal contact with the regional EPA? Is
local Fire & Rescue in touch with the Department of Homeland Security? Remember to
ask whether information is flowing​ both ways​. Often information is flowing one direction.

●

Ask the local fire department and flood control district for maps showing areas of highest
risk for riverine flooding, storm surge and fire.

●

Read up on climate change.
○ Talk to climate scientists about any “attribution studies” that have been done for
past storms. Solidify your understanding of what is and isn’t generally attributable
to climate change so you’re ready to write true sentences during a future
disaster. If you’re confused, call a scientist and make them explain it to you over
and over.
○ The ​World Weather Attribution​ project and the ​Fourth National Climate
Assessment​ authors are a good place to start.

●

●

●

Check for chemical facilities in the area. The EPA has ​this map​. This is the ​NYT version
with a floodplain layer.
○ The Houston Chronicle built ​this tool​ for looking at Risk Management Plans for
individual facilities. You can also look up ​other documents​ related to hazardous
materials.
○ Contact the ​Local Emergency Planning Committee​ and ask about their
emergency response plan in case of a leak, explosion, etc.
○ Check out Lisa Song’s tipsheet for resources that will help you understand when
a chemical release is hazardous to public health (EPA ​Iris database​, CDC, etc.)
Don’t assume that local emergency officials, elected officials, or even company
spokespeople know whether pollution is dangerous! Check for yourself.
■ Consult with a process safety expert or industrial chemist: ​Texas A&M
Process Safety Center​ and ​Wharton Risk Management​ center are good
places to start.
Check out the ​Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety ​working papers for
different types of disasters.
Come up with a plan with editors, researchers and other reporters who cover disasters in
your newsroom. Who will cover what general topics during disasters of different types?
How will information flow? Are we using Slack or WhatsApp? Who will create the Google
Sheet to keep track of casualties and evacuation orders?

During
●
●
●

Back up information to an external hard drive. You may not have internet access.
Download Google Maps for the area you’ll be in. You may not have reliable cell service.
Take driving seriously.
○ Don’t multitask in the car.
○ Use your car to its fullest potential: bring an inverter to charge electronics while
you’re driving.
○ If you have a pickup truck and you’re covering a flood, invest in a couple gas
cans. But don’t poison yourself by putting gas in a closed vehicle.

●

Don’t be that jerk who drives into a disaster area and asks for bottled water. Bring your
own water and snacks.

●

Keep track of evacuation orders, but don’t assume that people are leaving/have left an
area that’s under mandatory evacuation.
○ Don’t enter private property without permission.

●

Gather demographic data. The ​Census FactFinder​ is a good place to start. Remember
that disasters do not affect all demographics equally. Are there people who live outside
cell service? Are people living in mobile or modular homes? Are there residents without

access to transportation? Are there residents who are dependent on home medical
equipment or prescription medications? Don’t assume that the people who made it to a
shelter or hotel are representative of the entire affected area.
●

Talk to shelter physicians and nurses about what they’re seeing.

●

Keep track of confirmed casualties, destroyed or damaged buildings and people
reported missing. A offline Google Sheet is one good way to organize what you do and
don’t know. Share your document with editors/researchers/other reporters working on
the same story in your newsroom so everyone is on the same page.
If you’re stuck in bumper-to-bumper evacuation traffic, consider doing some interviews
out the window.

●

After
“After” looks a lot like “before.” In fact, there are arguably only two statuses for a disaster
reporter: ​Disaster Is Happening​ and ​Disaster Is Not Happening.
Go back to your ​Before​ checklist and start asking for post-disaster data. Here are a few
examples of information that is particularly get-able in the days and weeks after a disaster:
● National Weather Service stream gauge data
● National Response Center​ oil and chemical spill data (lags a couple days, usually)
● DigitalGlobe or other satellite images
● Medical Examiner or Coroner’s office for casualty reports
● Flood Control District post-disaster maps
● FEMA reports on damage and claims
You can also use FOIA after a disaster.
● 311 calls (good for mass pollution events, often there’s an audio recording)
● 911 calls
● Communications between different agencies. Eg. regional EPA and state Department of
Environmental Quality
● Communications between representatives of individual industrial sites and local
emergency managers

Eric Sagara, Big Local News
(this tipsheet also at ​https://gist.github.com/esagara/47ebb8b83e06eea787ea6e4da41e0c08​)

Before
General tips
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

Get to know the GIS specialists and other data wonks working in your at the city, county
and state level. These guys will be incredibly busy during a natural disaster and for
weeks afterwards - they essentially become first responders. Developing a relationship
beforehand can help you get access during these busy times. You should look for
contacts in the county Office of Emergency Services, city and county planning
departments and state agencies such as the Department of Public Safety, Department of
Forestry, etc.
Also get to know other types of sources - especially ones in the fire department. Fire
departments have already conducted threat assessments and know where the areas of
concern are within their jurisdiction. Speaking with them early will help you better report
out a situation as it unfolds.
Try to identify how data is passed around during disaster response. Multiple agencies
will respond to larger incidents and they need to share data. Often this is done through
an FTP site. Learning how that happens can make it easier to get data at a time when
you can't reach your sources. Also take the time to learn more about the data, people
may not be available to answer questions during a disaster.
Keep an eye on what academics and other researchers such as risk analysts in the
insurance industry (think CoreLogic) are doing in this arena. Their research can prove to
be a great source for stories.
Back up your data locally on a laptop and/or external hard drive. Don't assume that you
will have power and access to the Internet.
Come up with a flexible plan of what you will do as a disaster unfolds and for the first
couple of weeks afterwards. Pitch this to your editors and make sure they know what you
can bring to the table with your unique skill set. Often newsrooms are in an "all hands on
deck" mode during a disaster. You could get reassigned to some other task unless you
make it clear what you plan to work on and the value it has to your newsroom.
Look at building tools such as NJ.com's​ ​power outage tracker​ that can both help your
reporting and be deployed quickly to the public when disasters occur. Consider archiving
the data so you can compare power outages over time and between disasters.

Documents you should look for

●

●

General Plan: ​Take a look at your county's general plan. The general plan is a blueprint
for growth and development within the county. Take the time to go back and read
previous versions/revisions of the plan. You may be able find areas where development
restrictions have been loosened, placing homes and residents at risk during a disaster.
Community Wildfire Protection Plan: ​A CWPP outlines what parts of a community are
at risk during a wildfire and what steps need to be taken to mitigate those risks. Many
counties, cities and even neighborhood associations have developed plans with their
local fire departments.

Data you should collect
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Parcel maps: ​Parcel maps are typically released as shapefiles. They contain
geographic information about the shape, size and location of each parcel in the county.
Generally they also include information on the parcel's assessed value and what taxation
districts it belongs to. It will also contain a unique ID for each parcel used to join to other
tables. It is best used with two additional tables (listed below).
Ownership data: ​This data is meant to work with the parcel maps listed above. It
typically contains information on parcel owners - name and contact information. This is a
great people locator tool, but it also helps during a disaster.
Improvement data: ​Another table meant to work with parcel data. This will include
information on improvements - buildings and swimming pools for example. It can include
information such as year built and building materials used.
Zoning maps: ​These maps lay out where you can build and how. You can learn about
restrictions on housing density, building materials and building methods - such as flood
mitigation requirements. Previous versions of this data can also reveal where restrictions
have been loosened.
Building footprint data: ​This is often the holy grail when it comes to mapping out the
effects of disasters. Parcel and zoning data tell us a lot, but the physical location of
buildings within parcels and zoning areas are not immediately apparent. Many localities
have their own building footprint maps. Microsoft has developed a​ ​national dataset​ that
they have released to the public. However, keep in mind that building footprint is typically
developed by aerial sensors or by what is visible from the roadside. There can be gaps
and inaccuracies due to factors such as tree cover for example.
Hazard maps: ​Look for spatial data on​ ​flooding​,​ ​landslides​,​ ​earthquakes​ and other
disasters. Keep in mind that some states, such as​ ​California​ and​ ​Oregon​, may develop
their own maps for disasters such as wildfires. Academics and other researchers may
have developed hazard maps of their own.
Elevation data: ​This is a handy dataset to have on hand when covering many different
types of natural disasters. It can be used to generate topographic and 3D maps. The
National Elevation Dataset​ is a great national resource, but many states and localities
have their own data based off of LIDAR scans.

Wildfire specific data
●

●

●

●

Silvis Lab Wildland Urban Interface data: ​The WUI is where homes have been built
next to or within forested areas, creating a greater risk of fire starts and a higher
probabality for the loss of property and life. This dataset, developed by the​ ​University of
Wisconsin Madison​, is available for the lower 48 states in a shapefile or geodatabase
format. It lays out where the WUI is and provides numbers on population and housing for
those areas. Each shapefile contains three different vintages of data - 1990, 2000 and
2010 - so you can track growth in WUI zones.
Land cover data: ​The​ ​National Land Cover Database​ can give you information on the
predominant types of vegetation throughout the United States. It is often used to identify
the types of fuels that a wildfire will consume. Some states, such as​ ​California​, have their
own versions of this data.
Fire history data: ​There are two national sources of historic wildfire data. The​ ​Federal
Wildland Fire Occurence Data​ contains information on federal wildfires from 1980 to
2016. This dataset is updated on a regular basis, but does not contain information on ~1
million fires that occurred on state and local lands. The second database is the​ ​Spatial
wildfire occurrence data for the United States​. It covers wildfires on state, local and
federal lands from 1992 to 2015. It is not clear if it will be updated. States also track
wildfires and their data may be more complete than national sources.
Big Local News wildfire data: ​Big Local News has compiled a​ ​database of large
federal wildfires​ based off of daily situation reports. It covers fires that occurred between
2014 to 2017 and contains detailed information on the number of buildings threatened,
damaged or destroyed as well as the number of injuries and fatalities. It also contains
estimates on wildfire acreage and suppression costs.

During
Safety tips
Covering disasters as they unfold can be dangerous. Here are some general safety tips to keep
in mind when out in the field. This list is by no means exhaustive, caution must be exercised.
●
●

●

Never drive/walk through flooded areas. As little as six inches of moving water can be
enough to pick up and float a vehicle downstream.
Know where you are going and how to get out. Having an escape route in mind is
always a good idea. Having more than one route is even better. Also keep in mind where
the nearest place with power and Internet is, this is invaluable when having to file on
deadline from the field.
Back into parking spaces and make sure your vehicle is pointed towards an escape
route. Do not block other vehicles, especially emergency services vehicles. Also try to
keep your vehicle in sight at all times. You never know when you will have to leave in a
hurry.

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

Look where you are walking, erosion is a problem in most disasters and loose ground
can lead to falls or worse. If covering a wildfire, never step in white ashy spots. Those
indicate a stump fire and stepping on one can lead to your foot sinking into a hole of
burning embers. Keep landslides and rockfalls in mind when walking below hills and
ridges.
Stay wary around trees. Their root systems could be compromised, leading them to
topple well after the disaster has passed. Dead branches can also get caught up in tree
canopies and hang there until a gust of wind knocks them free. First responders call
these "widow makers."
Keep an eye on wind patterns, especially when covering wildfires. You want to know
when the wind shifts and starts blowing a fire in your direction.
Carry plenty of drinking water. Access to potable water can be hard to find.
Carry extra chargers/battery backups for your phone and laptop. Charging mobile
phones is now so common after a disaster that special mobile units are deployed to offer
the service to afflicted residents.
Wear appropriate clothing. Federal guidelines for wildfire footwear call for all-leather
boots with lug soles, an eight-inch ankle and no metal in the sole or toe. These are
probably not a bad pair of shoes to wear regardless of the type of disaster. Also consider
having a hard hat or helmet as well as eye protection on hand.
Avoid walking on private property without a homeowner or guide with knowledge of the
property. You don't know what the condition of the property is or what was on the
property prior to the disaster. It may look safe to walk on the exposed foundation of what
used to be house until you discover the property had a basement.
Keep in mind that disasters beget other disasters. Aftershocks, flooding, landslides and
mudslides are all common following disasters - even wildfires.

General tips
●

●

●
●

●

Get to know the​ ​Incident Command System​. Most localities will implement this system
during large-scale disasters where multiple agencies are involved in the response.
Federal authorities will bring in an Incident Command Team when they take over
disaster response. These teams have been used in wildfires, hurricanes, floods, Sept.
11, both space shuttle disasters and even managing the Super Bowl.
Monitor websites dedicated to tracking disasters. This includes sites like the​ ​Advanced
National Seismic System​ for earthquakes and​ ​Inciweb​ for federal wildfires. Many states
will also have their own tracking systems.
Monitor weather conditions. The​ ​National Weather Service​ and​ ​CoCoRaHS​ are good
sources.
You may want to​ ​monitor air quality​, especially when covering wildfires. Scientists and
researchers are getting more and more concerned about the health impacts of wildfire
smoke.
Monitor the​ ​Google Crisis Map​. Google has done a decent job of monitoring disasters
and you can often find additional data you wouldn't know about otherwise. For example,

●
●
●

Google posted aerial images of Hurricane Sandy's aftermath along with damage
estimates of individual buildings in the weeks following the storm.
Monitor social media feeds.
Keep an eye on the developing needs of your community. Are there gas shortages? Are
people having trouble finding relatives? Maybe you can build a tool to help.
If evacuations are ordered keep an eye on shelters. Many times shelters are operated by
the​ ​American Red Cross​. You can track these shelters online and see information on
their capacity. These shelters often act as a one-stop shop, survivors can charge their
phones and meet with insurance agencies there. However, I've found that many
residents prefer to stay with nearby friends or relatives. In this case check for emergency
animal shelters. You will find families dropping off pets or livestock and checking in on
them. This has been a good source for survivor interviews.

Documents you should look for
●

●

Incident Action Plans: ​These plans are issued daily during large-scale disasters,
especially ones managed by federal authorities. They contain information on recovery
and response efforts, detailing who is going to be working on specific problems in
different areas of the disaster. It may be difficult to gain immediate access to these
plans. Many officials have been warned off providing these plans to the media because it
contains sensitive information such as cell phone numbers for crew leaders. Some
reporters have abused this in the past by using these numbers to contact crews as they
are working.
Daily Situation Reports: ​In the federal government these are known as SIT-209
reports. They outline current conditions as well as future threats. They also typically
contain information on the number of buildings affected by the disaster and the number
of casualties or injuries. They can also have information on the number of people
responding, the equipment being used and the estimated cost of response efforts. Keep
in mind these numbers are estimates and can fluctuate.

Data you should collect
●
●

●

Incident specific maps: ​This includes flood extent maps (I don't have a good source for
this, sorry) and maps tracking​ ​wildfire progression​.
Incident specific data: ​Keep a tally of buildings lost and fatalities. Think about what
other data sources you want to track and do so - this includes weather conditions,
evacuations, stream gauges, etc. This data is often archived online so you may not need
to actively track/collect it.
Names and contact information: ​Keep a running database of victims, survivors, family
members, first responders and government officials. This can be helpful for future
reporting efforts.

After
General tips
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

Begin monitoring damage estimates. These figures can fluctuate on a daily or even
hourly basis.
Keep an eye on infrastructure such as pipelines, transportation routes, water mains, etc.
Look for subsequent events such as post-fire flooding, landslides, mudslides and
aftershocks.
Keep looking for potential new data sources. Disasters generate a lot of data and not
only during the initial response. Academics and researchers also tend to produce new
data following an event.
If you haven't already, begin collecting data on previous disasters that can be used for
comparison purposes.
Disaster recovery can often be more expensive than the cost of the initial response and
is often overlooked by the media. Consider keeping a running tally of the disaster
recovery. This can be difficult because there are many factors here - economic costs,
long-term health consequences, subsequent disasters, etc.
Monitor the rebuilding process. Often times authorities will accelerate the permitting
process. They do this so people can get back into homes as quickly as possible, but
what shortcuts are being taken and what is being left out of the process?
Keep an eye out for people looking to profit from the disaster. This includes all manner of
scam artists, but also developers looking to come in and flip damaged properties at a low
cost.

Documents you should look for
●

●
●

●

●

After action reports: ​This includes reports from individual departments as well as any
sort of task force such as BAER (Burned Area Emergency Response) teams that go in
and assess damages and potential future threats such as erosion and flooding.
Investigation reports: ​Look for any sort of investigative report that outlines why the
disaster occurred (wildfires specifically) and any sort of flaws in the response effort.
Lessons learned reports: ​Sometimes departments or agencies will put together a
report on what they learned during the initial response to a disaster. These can be a gold
mine for reporters. A national example is the​ ​Wildfire Lessons Learned Center​.
Planning documents and memos: ​Are local authorities revisiting or considering
changes to their development policies following a national disaster? These documents
may help you find out.
Economic impact reports: ​Disasters that destroy or damage a lot of property will
severely impact the property tax base. Keep an eye out for any economic reports that lay
out the long term impacts of a disaster.

Data you should collect
●

●
●
●

●

Damage estimates: ​Municipalities and other local governments will begin carrying out
damage inspections at the parcel level so they can re-calculate their tax base. This is a
gold mine for reporters looking to show where the damage was the worst.
Satellite and aerial imagery: ​More on that below.
FEMA Aid:​ ​FEMA​ provides public and individual assistance to communities and
residents impacted by a disaster. This data is a trove for post-disaster reporting.
SBA Disaster Loans: ​The​ ​Small Business Administration​ provides financial assistance
to businesses impacted by a disaster, you should definitely have this data on hand and
update it continously.
Building permits: ​This is where you will capitalize on developing relationships prior to a
disaster. Monitoring building permits can give you insight into how the recovery effort is
progressing. It can also help you find bad actors looking to capitalize on the disaster.
This can also be a place where you can find flaws in the rebuilding process.

Using satellites to report on disasters
Satellites can be a powerful tool for reporting on disasters. However there are limitations such
as spatial resolution and revisit rates. Spatial resolution is the actual image resolution. Images
captured through the Landsat program typically have a resolution of 30 meters per pixel and has
a revisit rate of 16 days. In other words it returns to any given spot on Earth once every 16 days
and you won't be able to make out individual buildings at that spatial resolution. Some
commercial satellites have higher resolutions and lower revisit rates, but they lack in spectral
resolution (what bands of light they capture). This is not a huge deal if you are looking simply for
before/after imagery.​ ​However if you plan to do any imagery analysis to detect​ ​burn patterns​ or
flood extents, you will have to wait until a satellite with a larger spectral resolution such as
Landsat or Sentinel-2 can pass over the location to image it. This is also dependent on other
factors such as cloud cover or smoke.
Imagery from the​ ​National Agricultural Imagery Program​ is a great free source of high-resolution
imagery, but keep in mind the imagery is only collected for any given state once every few
years.
Obtaining the necessary imagery can be difficult. I recommend using​ ​Google Earth Engine​.
Google has collected pedabytes of satellite imagery - including Landsat and the European
Space Adminstration's Sentinel-2 satellite - and made it accessible to download and analyze
through both a Javascript and Python API. You will need Google Drive to download imagery.
Analsyis is carried out through a browser interface and Google will spin up a bunch of servers to
carry it out behind the scenes, making it much faster to process imagery than it would be on
your local machine. It is a very well​ ​documented​ product and has an active support community
as well. Learning either API can take some work, but there are a ton of tutorials online to help.

Incidentally you can access both the National Elevation Dataset and the National Landcover
Database through Earth Engine.
One great tool that was developed with Google Earth Engine is​ ​Google Timelapse​. There you
can see how development has grown and the Earth has changed in areas throughout the world
in an animated series of satellite images from 1994 to 2016.
Some private satellite companies provide imagery of natural disasters free of charge. They will
typically post imagery for both before and after the disaster. However this is limited by
environmental factors such as cloud cover and smoke. Two of the major providers are Digital
Globe, which provides free imagery at​ ​https://www.digitalglobe.com/opendata​ and Planet which
hosts data at​ ​https://www.planet.com/disasterdata/​. Make sure you check their terms of service
for information on how to credit them.
Lastly there is a lot to learn when it comes to working with satellite imagery. I've found NASA's
Applied Remote Sensing Training​ incredibly helpful. They host small workshops both online and
at conferences. Their goal is to train non-remote sensing professionals on how to work with
satellite imagery. Their online workshops are archived online so you can take any of them at
your own pace. The workshops cover everything from the basics of satellite imagery to
analyzing images for disaster response. There is also a workshop on creating your first satellite
image being held on Sunday at NICAR.

Lisa Song, ProPublica
Floods and hurricanes: useful databases and examples
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) stream gauges: thousands of gauges around the country
monitor “stage” (height of the water, in feet) and “discharge” (water flow rate, in cubic feet per
second). Use the NOAA site to search for specific locations:
https://water.weather.gov/ahps/forecasts.php
● scientists often prefer to use discharge data in their research, for for reporters and
readers, it’s the stage that matters. Stage tells you how high the water is, and a record
stage at a particular location means the river is higher than it’s ever been. The National
Weather Service provides context on historic stages and floods, for example:
https://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=oax&gage=mapi4
● some stream gauges measure just stage, or just discharge, and some do both. The U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers also has their own network of gauges, separate from the
USGS network
Coast Guard’s National Response Center: database of reported oil spills and chemical spills.
Data usually lags a few days behind, so you won’t see details of spills that occurred during the
hurricane until a few days later. The data isn’t comprehensive, but it’s a good indicator of the
scale of the problem.
● http://nrc.uscg.mil/
● example story: last map on NYT interactive on Hurricane Harvey
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/09/08/us/houston-hurricane-harvey-harzardou
s-chemicals.html?mtrref=duckduckgo.com
State databases: state environmental agencies often have better and more comprehensive data
than federal agencies. Data transparency and availability varies by state.
● Hurricane Irma and sewage:
https://newrepublic.com/article/144798/floridas-poop-nightmare-come-true
● Hurricane Harvey and air pollution from refineries and other plants:
https://www.texasobserver.org/early-shut-downs-upgrades-could-have-avoided-millionsof-pounds-of-pollutants-released-during-harvey/
● Hurricane Florence: hog farms and coal ash
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/09/13/climate/hurricane-florence-environment
al-hazards.html
Beach nourishment: costly process of replenishing beaches with sand after storms or erosion
● best public database: ​http://beachnourishment.wcu.edu/
● federal funding from Army Corps of Engineers and FEMA.
https://www.propublica.org/article/the-high-cost-of-preserving-vulnerable-beaches

Buyouts
● FOIA local governments for historic buyout data, and criteria for future buyouts. There’s
usually a surge of buyouts after a big flood or storm, but demand often exceeds
available funding:
https://features.propublica.org/houston-buyouts/hurricane-harvey-home-buyouts-harris-c
ounty/
● FEMA damage points after a storm: data is preliminary, but still useful for breaking news
● National Flood Insurance Program: severe repetitive loss properties. Contact Natural
Resources Defense Council.
https://www.propublica.org/article/hurricane-florences-surge-is-expected-to-hit-homes-th
at-already-cost-the-government-millions-1
Hazardous chemical disasters: oil spills, air and water pollution
After disasters, university researchers (as well as nonprofits/companies) may go out and collect
environmental samples for testing. There was a lot of air and water monitoring after Hurricane
Harvey, and some researchers let journalists tag along. It’s worth contacting local universities
(especially public universities) to see if any scientists are planning this kind of work.
Resources for exposure levels: health guidelines and standards
● https://www.epa.gov/iris
● California’s OEHHA: ​https://www.dtsc.ca.gov/SCP/upload/2-E-CA-RELs.pdf​ (acute,
8-hour and chronic exposure reference levels)
● CDC: mostly workplace safety exposure levels, but they have reference levels for the
general public too, for some substances
● Some chemicals are so obscure, we don’t have guidelines on what’s considered safe.
When disasters occur (like the coal chemical spill in Elk River, West Virginia in 2014),
scientists have to calculate a “safe” exposure level on the spot.
● Risk assessments and reference levels are often controversial--the process of setting
these guidelines involves subjective judgement at various steps. It’s entirely possible to
have public officials declare that everything is safe, while local residents continue to
complain of various symptoms. It’s never a simple story.
● EPA’s Scientific Advisory Boards: current and former members
● General tip: look for analogous case studies:
https://insideclimatenews.org/news/16032016/mercaptans-eight-mile

