NICAR 2019: Students’ roundtable
Kaitlin Washburn (University of Missouri)
Orla McCaffrey (The Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism)
Topics -Struggles with institutions taking us seriously, whether it’s our universities, government
agencies, businesses, sources in general
● How do we explain who we are? What happens when student journalist doesn’t cut it?
○ Depends a lot on who you’re talking to (some people feel less threatened by a
student; others don’t take you seriously; you’ll learn how to gauge this as you go
along)
■ Have a way of clearly explaining your purpose and if/where work will be
published.
Facing imposter syndrome and how to deal with it
● What does it look/feel like?
● Also, stigma surrounding our backgrounds
THIS DISASTROUS TWEET
https://twitter.com/TheoTypes/status/1102623219826245634
Balances (school, journalism, life)
● Dealing with burnout
Working with fellow student reporters
● What are challenges you’ve faced in collaborating on big projects or just related to
regular content production?
● How do you fit into newsroom hierarchy, and how to make the most out of your position,
whether you’re editor-in-chief or a contributing reporter.
● How to juggle the demands of the news cycle while planning larger, investigative
stories->best ways to assemble a team
Money, money, money
● Challenge of devoting so many hours to student media when you could be working
somewhere else for better (or any) pay.
● “You can have an internship, but you need to find your own money.”
Younger student reporters (freshman/sophs)
● Prepping for the internship search and how to deal with very low acceptance rates
● Focusing on the work you do→not whether the publication is brand-name
● Unpaid internships

How to pitch different outlets as a student reporter
● Connecting with editors online
○ Newsletters and spreadsheets that track what kind of pitches editors are looking
for
● Best practices for negotiating rates
○ $1/word is unrealistic these days
What to do after graduation… even though I have absolutely no idea
● Job? Internship? Fellowship? More school? Disappear to South America? Who knows!

