Shooting straight: How to use gun data and
documents effectively
NICAR 2019​ tipsheet
Daniel Nass, The Trace
Several federal databases and reports offer a partial picture of nonfatal firearm injuries in the
United States. Here’s a rundown of five of them, including the benefits and limitations of each.

CDC – WISQARS
https://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/nonfatal.html
The data: ​The national nonfatal injury estimates available through WISQARS are calculated
using data from a consumer product injury database maintained by the Consumer Product
Safety Commission.
Pros:​ Nearly 20 years of estimates are available through WISQARS. New estimates are
released with about a one-year lag.
Cons: ​WISQARS estimates ​have a high degree of uncertainty​, especially in recent years. If you
use them, be sure to include advanced statistics in your query.
Sample query

HCUP – Nationwide Emergency Department Sample (NEDS)
https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/
The data: ​NEDS contains national estimates of emergency department visits calculated from an
annual sample of more than 950 hospitals.
Pros: ​NEDS is the largest database of its kind and its estimates contain much less uncertainty
than the CDC’s. Many options for detailed queries.
Cons: ​No way to separate out fatal from nonfatal injuries. Most recent estimates available
online are from 2014.
Sample query

HCUP – National Inpatient Sample (NIS)
https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/
The data: ​NIS’s national estimates of inpatient hospitalizations are drawn from a sample of
4,500 hospitals.
Pros: ​Like NEDS, it has powerful querying options. (Both databases are accessed through the
same website.)
Cons: ​As with NEDS, fatal and nonfatal outcomes cannot be separated. Inpatient
hospitalizations make up only a small subset of firearm injuries.
Sample query

FBI – Crime in the United States (UCR)
https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/table-15
The data: ​The FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports program collects crime data, including aggravated
assaults by weapon type, from more than 18,000 law enforcement agencies.
Pros: ​CIUS reports contain actual counts, not estimates, of aggravated assaults by weapon
type.
Cons: ​Since not all law enforcement agencies participate in UCR, the numbers do not represent
a complete count. Non-criminal gun injuries (e.g. self-inflicted or accidental) are not included,
nor are assaults that aren’t reported to police. Incidents classified as firearm assaults don’t
necessarily involve someone being shot.
Sample data

BJS – National Crime Victimization Survey
https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=nvat
The data: ​The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ annual NCVS surveys a sample of Americans about
personal and property crimes that they experienced in the past year, and breaks down violent
victimizations by weapon type.
Pros: ​Estimates take into account crimes that weren’t reported to police. The survey underlying
the data is very detailed.
Cons: ​The survey is based on a small sample and as with WISQARS, the estimates can have
high uncertainty.
Sample query

Polly Mosendz, Bloomberg News
Story: ​https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2018-us-gun-imports/
Leverage the power of analysts:
-Industry analysts have often painstakingly put together the exact data you’re looking for,
or the at the very least they’ve cleaned it.
-A variety of financial firms have analysts covering the firearms industry, including
KeyBanc Capital Markets, Aegis Capital, and Cowen.
-There are also firearms specific researchers, such as Small Arms Analytics
Ask the ATF for favors:
-The ATF has field offices all around the nation, each of which has a special agent in
charge, most of which have specialty attorneys on staff, and, of course, lots of agents.
Chat up the public information officer. Make a friend. Get to know who inside the field
office knows what you need to know.
-Ask the ATF to run custom searches for you and then be patient. Very patient. This is
usually done out of headquarters and can take a long time. This can be particularly
helpful when you’re trying to get clarity on an existing dataset. The answer might be “we
don’t have more granular data than what you’ve seen” but it can be worth a shot.
-Do not underestimate their willingness to help you: ATF headquarters allowed GQ to
make a documentary about their tracing center in 2016.
Press release digging:
-There’s no magic database detailing every instance of gun companies donating to the
NRA and its cause, but there are press releases. The companies often willingly disclose
donations of cash and goods on their websites.
-Check out the NRA-owned publications, which mention major donations as well. The
NRA-owned publications often get access to these companies that the mainstream press
is unable to.
-Subscribe to Shooting Wire, an industry newsletter that makes note of these donations.

Anthony Cave, KERA News
The TSA publishes their firearms found in carry-on baggage data every week:
https://www.tsa.gov/blog/tags/week-review
Our story:
https://www.keranews.org/post/gun-discoveries-are-surging-airports-and-texas-leading-way
-

My colleague, Luis, used an OCR called tesseract:
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tesseract/tesseract.pdf

But it doesn’t have to be a deep dive either:
https://www.chron.com/national/article/TSA-recovers-26-firearms-in-15-different-airports-129167
85.php
Other guns-related data sources:
-

FOIA OSHA for lead violations at gun ranges (ask for the inspection summary, which
lists the type of citation and the proposed fine)

-

File public records requests for missing/stolen agency property (guns are almost always
a line item) with your state and local governments/police departments.

-

I’ve always wondered about guns found at the bottom of man-made lakes once they’re
drained. Maybe check-in with police dive teams about lifting prints/what they find when
they drain lakes?

