Using Public Records Laws
to Get Data

Katie Townsend – RCFP Legal Director
March 8, 2019

The Federal Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA)
• 5 U.S.C. § 552
• Provides a statutory right of access to
“records” in the possession, custody, or
control of federal executive branch
“agencies”
• An agency is not required to create new
records to respond to a FOIA request

FOIA v. State
Public Records Laws
• Every state and D.C. has adopted its
own public records law.
• State laws can vary significantly
(different procedures, exemptions,
etc.)
• The basic structure of state public
records laws & federal FOIA is the
same.

Electronic Freedom of Information
Act Amendments of 1996
•

Defines the term “record” to include “any
information that would be an agency record
subject to the requirements of [FOIA] when
maintained by an agency in any format, including
an electronic format.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(f)(2).

•

Requires agencies to “provide the record in any
form or format requested . . . if the record is
readily reproducible by the agency in that form or
format.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(3)(B).

New York’s Freedom of
Information Law (FOIL)
•

Defines “record” as “any information kept, held, filed,
produced or reproduced by, with or for an agency . . . in any
physical form whatsoever . . . .” N.Y. Pub. Off. Law § 86(4).

•

“When an agency has the ability to retrieve or extract a
record or data maintained in a computer storage system with
reasonable effort, it shall be required to do so. . . .

•

“Any programming necessary to retrieve a record maintained
in a computer storage system and to transfer that record to
the medium requested by a person or to allow the
transferred record to be read or printed shall not be deemed
to be the preparation or creation of a new record.”
N.Y. Pub. Off. Law § 89(9).

California’s Public Records
Act (PRA)
•

Defines “public records” as including “any writing containing
information relating to the conduct of the public’s business
prepared, owned, used, or retained by any state or local
agency regardless of physical form or characteristics . . . .”
Cal. Gov’t Code § 6252(e).

•

Defines “writing” as “any handwriting, typewriting, printing,
photostating, photographing, photocopying, transmitting by
electronic mail or facsimile, and every other means of
recording upon any tangible thing any form of
communication or representation, including letters, words,
pictures, sounds, or symbols, or combinations thereof, and
any record thereby created, regardless of the manner in
which the record has been stored.”
Cal. Gov’t Code § 6252(g).

California’s Public Records
Act (PRA)
•

Any agency that has “information that constitutes” a nonexempt
public record that “is in an electronic format shall make that
information available in an electronic format when requested by
any person and, when applicable, shall comply with the following”:

•

“The agency shall make the information available in any electronic
format in which it holds the information.”
Cal. Gov’t Code § 6253.9(a)(1).

•

The agency “shall provide a copy of an electronic record in the
format requested if the requested format is one that has been used
by the agency to create copies for its own use or for provision to
other agencies. The cost of duplication shall be limited to the direct
cost of producing a copy of a record in an electronic format.”
Cal. Gov’t Code § 6253.9(a)(2).

California’s Public Records
Act (PRA)
•

BUT “the requester shall bear the cost of producing a copy of
the record, including the cost to construct a record, and the
cost of programming and computer services necessary to
produce a copy of the record when . . . [t]he request would
require data compilation, extraction, or programming to
produce the record.” Cal. Gov’t Code § 6253.9(a)(2)(B)(2).

•

AND an agency is not required “to release an electronic
record in the electronic form in which it is held by the agency
if its release would jeopardize or compromise the security or
integrity of the original record or of any proprietary software
in which it is maintained.” Cal. Gov’t Code § 6253.9(f).

California’s Public Records
Act (PRA)
•

Requires an agency to make a determination “within 10 days
from receipt of the request” and permits the agency to extend
that time period for no more than 14 days in “unusual
circumstances.”

•

Defines “unusual circumstances” to mean the following, “but
only to the extent reasonably necessary to the proper
processing of the particular request”:

. . . “The need to compile data, to write programming language
or a computer program, or to construct a computer report to
extract data.” Cal. Gov’t Code § 6253(c)(4).

Tips for Requesting Data
• Be as specific as you can be about what you are asking for.
(Under federal FOIA, your request must be specific enough for
a government employee familiar with the subject area to
locate the records with reasonable effort.)
• Consider making preliminary requests if necessary to help you
identify the records you want.
• Specify in the request the electronic format(s) that you want
the records to be in.
• Also ask for records that will help you understand
and interpret the data (e.g., data dictionaries).

Challenges: Segregability
•
•

Datasets that contain a mix of exempt and non-exempt material can
pose practical and legal challenges.
Sander v. State Bar of California
– UCLA law professor sought individually unidentifiable California
bar exam data to study the effects that race-based preferential
admission programs have on higher education
– To comply with the request, the State Bar would have needed to
anonymize an existing database.
– The Court of Appeal held that agencies “cannot be required to
create a new record by changing the substantive content of an
existing record or replacing existing data with new data[.]”
– The California Supreme Court denied review in November 2018

Legal Resources
• Reporters Committee Legal Defense & FOIA Hotline:
https://www.rcfp.org/legal-hotline/
hotline@rcfp.org
• Reporters Committee Open Government Guides:
https://www.rcfp.org/open-government-guide/
• FOIA Wiki
https://foia.wiki/wiki/Main_Page

