#NICAR19 Tipsheet
Finding the Story: Using DNS Search for Investigative Journalism
Hands-On Training
Farsight Security, Inc.
Dr. Paul Vixie
This is a brief introduction to Farsight DNSDB® for investigative reporters.
The Domain Name System (DNS) is the infrastructure of the Internet. As a result, almost every
action online leaves a digital trail of DNS assets.
Persons or Entities of Interest often will use multiple domains and websites to remain undetected
or mask the scope of their digital footprint. They may also share or reuse DNS assets i.e. same IP
address, same Netblock, or Nameservers
By searching – or querying -- a specific domain name or IP address using a historical Passive
DNS database, investigative reporters can identify subtle relationships among other DNS assets,
from IP addresses to domain names to mail to file to web servers. This information can be used
to confirm existing evidence or provide new insights for a story.
Using Farsight DNSDB® reporters can:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Confirm a Breaking News Story
Advance a Broadly-Covered Media Report
Uncover Latent Relationships among Domain Names, IP Addresses, Other Infrastructure
Gain Evidence to Evaluate the Objective Credibility of Sources

About Farsight DNSDB®
Farsight DNSDB® is the world’s largest historical passive DNS database with over 100 Billion
DNS records, indexed, dating back to 2010. Passive DNS is made from publicly available
information. Access to Farsight DNSDB® is available via an API Key. #NICAR19 DNS
workshop attendees used the API Key with DNSDB Scout for Google Chrome Extension or
Mozilla Firefox. Information about how to setup the key using DNSDB Scout can be found here.
The Key is available to attendees for 30 days and you can make up to 100 queries (or
searches) a day. To extend beyond the 30 days, interested parties should apply for a Farsight
Journalism Grant.

Hands-on Exercise
For this hands-on exercise, we focused on the above #3 capability – uncovering latent
relationships among DNS assets including domain names and IP addresses. In this exercise, we
examined the Koch Brothers organization’s digital footprint.
I. After identifying three known Koch Brothers-affiliated groups – Freedom Partners, Americans
for Prosperity, and the Libre Initiative – we first searched Google for the street address of one of
the organizations mentioned, Americans for Prosperity.
We found: 1310 N Courthouse Rd #700, Arlington, VA 22201
Then, we searched that address to identify other organizations using it too, and uncovered 10
other organizations, including https://roadtorepeal.org and https://utahscorecard.com. Was this
all the organizations affiliated with this domain name? Let’s use Farsight DNSDB® to confirm.
2. We decided to find additional organizations associated with Americans for Prosperity by
searching the organization’s IP address in Farsight DNSDB®.
First, we inserted its domain, americansforprosperity.org, into Farsight DNSDB®.
After identifying the current IP address [35.239.158.15] for https://americansforprosperity.org,
we clicked on the IP address to find other domain names associated with that same IP address.
3. Then, we did another “pivot” – after using the historical passive DNS database to identify a
previous IP address [104.198.161.160] for the domain name[americansforprosperity.org], we
searched DNSDB using that IP address and were able to identify 145 more sites/domain
names associated with this organization.
Farsight DNSDB® enables investigative reporters to search and “pivot” among other DNS
datasets including a variety of DNS records i.e. A, TXT, CNAME, MX, NS. You also can use
the tool’s “Time Fencing” capabilities to search when a domain name or IP address is “first” and
“last seen” in the historical passive DNS database. This data can be used to confirm other
information you may have uncovered during an investigation.
Resources
Grant Program for Investigative Reporters
DNSDB® Scout Users Guide
DNSDB® Scout
Blog: What is a Bailiwick?
Blog: A Quick Overview of the Top Seven DNS Records
Blog: RRSet and RData Demystified
Contact
Have questions? Contact Karen Burke at kburke@fsi.io.

