When the data talks (but the sources won’t)
Tips by Sarah Rafique for NICAR 2019

Problem: Can’t talk to someone about the data?
Solution No. 1: Before you do anything else, question the data to help verify the accuracy.
Some ways you can do this is:
● Request everything, not just what you think you’ll need.
● Specifically, ask for all rows and columns in the dataset. This will give you a clearer
picture of the data and ensure you’re not missing an important aspect while conducting
your analysis.
Example: Was the $100 million incentive for an 85 mph speed limit on SH 130 worth it?
(KXAN News)
●
●

INSTEAD OF: Asking for the number of speeding violations during the last 5 years,
broken down by year
REQUEST: Every speeding violation during the last 5 years, including but not limited to
date, location, alleged speed, accident, and any other field maintained by the agency as
part of data collection on violations.

Why?
Having the entire dataset of speeding violations will allow you to conduct a more accurate
analysis by determining this like:
● Did violations occur on the highway or frontage road?
● Was the limit actually 85 mph when speeding occured?
Solution No. 2: Question the data and never assume the information the agency gave you is
complete or the whole picture.
Example: An analysis of the data showed an unexplained drop in the number of speeding
violations. When a PIO won’t talk or answer questions about the data or your analysis, try
getting technical with them. Explain to them exactly how you filtered each row and column (or
what SQL/other query you wrote) and they’ll more than likely pass your question along to their
agency’s data folks and you’ll get a better response..

Problem: Can’t get anyone from the agency you’re investigating to grant you an interview.
Solution No. 1 : Seek out experts in the field. This includes:
● University professors
● Researchers who work directly with the agency or individual who won’t grant an
interview
● Other reputable individuals who may have knowledge of the topic
Solution No. 2: Build other sources outside the agency and find people who used to
work for the agency, department, individual, etc. that you’re investigating
● FOIA a list of current and former employees
● Once you make contact with an employee ask them for any others who may talk
● Become a social media sleuth (if you’re not already)
○ FamilyTreeNow, TruePeopleSearch, Pipl, advanced Google search, local
county appraisal district, crowdfunding websites, Glassdoor, Facebook,
LinkedIn, etc.
Solution No. 3: Reach out to lawmakers
● Elected leaders could have access to information you don’t and may be willing to
share that information with you
● Contact a senator whose district is impacted by the issue or a representative who
filed legislation on the topic
Example: TxTag Troubles: Nearly $1 billion in collection fees added to toll
customer accounts as billing woes continue
This investigation revealed more than 2.2 million Texas toll accounts had a bill sent to a
collections agency, who added nearly $1 billion in fees to drivers’ accounts (including this
driver below who had more than $27k in administrative fees).

RESULT: Following that investigation, a
Texas law went into effect capping toll
users’ late fees at $48 a year, but the
state’s transportation agency would not
answer questions about what would
happen to individuals with thousands of
dollars in outstanding fees.
A lawmaker asked the state agency a
similar question during a House
Transportation agency, which lead to a
breaking news story about the state
waiving $1.3 billion in fees.

Problem: None of your methods are working!
As a last resort, conduct an unscheduled interview at a public meeting or location where the
subject you need to speak with will be.
Remember these tips:
● Only do this after you’ve made several documented attempts to interview the source.
● Make sure the subject knows the topic of the unscheduled interview beforehand to
ensure you get useful answers instead of a “no comment” or “I have no clue what you’re
talking about.”
● Always be professional and respectful.
Questions?
● Contact me at Sarah.Rafique@kxan.com
● Twitter: @SarahRafique
● Facebook: /sarah.rafique22

