Demographic Map Workshop Tutorial
Demographic information can add critical context to any story. When paired with location, it can help
explain why things happen where they do. This session will explore visualization- and analysis-ready
datasets available to use in your stories. You’ll also see how to quickly find authoritative content in
ArcGIS Online, run powerful spatial analyses, and create responsive web apps to support your reporting.
In this tutorial, we’re going to look at rates of Internet connectivity among Hispanic households and the
impact on educational attainment and median household income in areas without Internet access.

Log In
This section will detail how to login to your account in ArcGIS Online. For the purposes of this tutorial,
we’ve already created a log-in for you to use. Upon entering the classroom today, you should have
received a slip of paper with an account name on it. If you did not receive a slip, please alert the
instructor.
1. Open Chrome and navigate to www.arcgis.com
2. Click the blue “Sign In” button.

3. For Username, enter the name on the slip of paper you were given. It should look something like
“CAR19Workshop_UserX” (the X will be a number from 1 to 36). For password, enter
“CAR19User”. Click “Sign In”.

1

Meet the Map Viewer
This section introduces you to the Map Viewer in ArcGIS Online, an interactive interface for authoring
maps. You’ll spend most of your time working with the Map Viewer.
4. Click “Map” from the top navigation bar to open the Map Viewer.

5. Pan and zoom around the map using either the embedded map controls or your mouse. Click in
the upper Search bar and type “Newport Beach, CA.”
6. By default, the Topographic basemap shows a variety of features from roads and waterways to
parks and points of interest. Click the “Basemap” button to see other basemaps. Click “Imagery
with Labels” to switch to a high-resolution imagery basemap.

7. Zoom in to see the detail offered by the Imagery with Labels basemap. Since we’re interested in
mapping demographic data, let’s choose a neutral basemap that will provide some context
while letting the data tell the story. After you zoom back out to a regional extent, select the
Light Gray Canvas basemap. Your map should look something like this.
2

Add and Style Data
ArcGIS Online lets you work with data from numerous sources. In this section, you’ll add an ACS layer
from the Living Atlas, Esri’s curated collection of authoritative data.
8. Click the “Add” button (next to Basemap) and select “Browse Living Atlas Layers.“

9. In the Search box, type “ACS Internet Access by Age and Race Variables” and hit enter.

3

10. For this tutorial, we want the boundaries layer. Click the “+” icon in the bottom right of the
entry that says “ACS Internet Access by Ace and Race Variables – Boundaries” to add the data to
the map.

11. Your map will update to show the new layer. This layer is a multi-scale layer, meaning it shows
different data at different levels. Zoom out until you see the county-level data. After you’ve
explored, zoom back in toward Los Angeles county so you can see the tracts. Your map should
look something like this:

4

12. Click the “Details” button and then click the “Content” button to see the layer you’ve added.

13. The grayed-out entries represent the county- and state-level data included with this layer. We’ll
be working at the tract level for the rest of this exercise. To begin styling your data, hover over
the Boundaries – Tract entry in the Table of Contents and several contextual buttons will
appear. Click the one that looks like a circle, square, and triangle to open the “Change Style’
pane.

5

14. The Change Style pane shows the current attribute being displayed, as well as the drawing style.
ArcGIS Online uses a technique called Smart Mapping to recommend the best drawing style for
the data you’re visualizing.
By default, this layer is displaying the “Percent of Population 18 to 64 Years in Households with
No Computer” attribute using a choropleth renderer. Click “Select” under “Counts and Amounts
(Size)” to see how this data would appear as graduated symbols instead.

15. In this exercise, we’re interested in Internet connectivity rates for Latino households. Let’s
change the map to reflect this attribute instead. Under “Choose an attribute to show,” click the

6

dropdown and select “Hispanic or Latino Populations in Households that Have a Computer
without an Internet Subscription.”

16. Now that we’ve selected the attribute, we can style the map. While ArcGIS Online chooses
graduated symbols as a default, it’s difficult to see much distinction at this scale. Click “Select”
under “Counts and Amounts (color)” to change to a choropleth style.

7

17. This is a better view of the data, but it’s only displaying raw counts. We can normalize this data
and tweak the style to better tell the story we’re interested in. Where you previously clicked
“Select” to activate the “Counts and Amounts (color)” style, click the “Options” button.

18. This pane lets us normalize the data, change the drawing theme, and adjust symbology. Let’s
start by normalizing the data. Click the dropdown next to “Divided By” and select “All Hispanic
or Latino Population in Households that Have a Computer”.

19. This produces a ratio, which lets us target tracts have a higher percentage of Latino households
with a computer but no Internet access. While continuous colors work well for many cases, let’s
classify the data to make it easy to see how the colors relate to the various values. Click “Classify
Data” and then choose “3” classes.

8

20. ArcGIS Online selects natural break points in the data as a default view. In this case, the bottom
break is very close to the dataset average of 0.1 for this variable. Let’s adjust the class break to
hit that value. Click “0.14” next to the bottom class break and enter “0.1”. Alternatively, you can
drag the handle to set the value that way.

21. The map updates as you adjust the break points in real-time. Now let’s update the colors. Click
“Symbols” to open the color options for this layer. By default, ArcGIS Online recommends a set
of color ramps that have been optimized for this basemap. Click any color ramp you like and
click “OK”.

9

22. Click “OK” on the Change Style dialog to set this updated symbology for the map and click
“Done” on the following pane.

10

Save the Map
Since ArcGIS Online is browser-based, it’s easier to navigate away from the page and lose your work
than you might think. This section walks through saving your map.
23. Click “Save” on the toolbar.

24. Metadata in ArcGIS Online is entirely user-driven. If you want people to find your content, tag
and document it accordingly. If you want to keep things under wraps, you’re welcome to
describe your map any way you like. One thing to keep in mind is that your map stays private in
ArcGIS Online until you share it. So even if you document the map well and save it, it’s still
private.
Enter a title and tag for your map (these are required). You can also enter an optional summary
and save to a specific folder of your account (right now you’ll only have a single folder available).
Click “Save” when you’re done.

Filter Your Data
Sometimes you only want to work with a subset of a dataset. ArcGIS Online lets you define filters on
your data based on the values and relative to one another. In this section, we’re going to filter the tracts
layer to focus on Los Angeles County.
25. Hover over the tract entry in the Table of Contents and click the yellow icon with the filter on it.

11

26. Click the first dropdown and select “County.” Click the blank cell and type in “Los Angeles
County”.

27. Click Apply Filter. Your map should look similar to this.

Edit Pop-Ups
ArcGIS Online provides a lot of customization options for your pop-ups. This section describes how to
edit pop-ups, including the use of a custom Arcade expression.
12

28. As a Living Atlas layer, this dataset already has a preconfigured pop-up. Click any feature on the
map to open the pop-up. It will look something like this:

29. The pop-up reports data for several attributes related to the tract we clicked. In this case, the
pop-up still references the initial variable the layer displayed when we first added it to the map.
To change the pop-up, hover over the tract entry in the Table of Contents and click the ellipses
that appears. Then click “Configure Pop-up”.

30. ArcGIS Online provides options for setting the title, main content, and any multimedia (charts or
images) for your pop-up. In this case, the layer is already using a custom attribute display that

13

we’ll edit. However, before we do, we need to write an expression to capture the percentage of
Latino households that lack Internet access. Click “Add” under “Attribute Expressions”.

31. Arcade is a scripting language that lets you do a ton of interesting things, from conditional
formatting of your pop-ups to on-the-fly calculation and analysis. In this case, we’re going to
write a simple equation to report the percentage of Latino households without Internet access.
Click “Feature: Census Tract 201” to expand the feature globals.

14

32. Scroll through the list and click the blue text under “Field: Hispanic or Latino Population in
Households that Have a Computer without an Internet Subscription”. The global gets added to
the expression editor.

33. Find “Field: Total Hispanic or Latino Population in Households” and click the blue text there to
add that value to the editor as well.

34. Click in the expression editor to write an expression to generate the percentage. Your
expression should read “($feature["B28009I_005E"]/$feature["B28009I_001E"])*100”.

15

35. Click the “Test” button to validate your expression. If the table returns a result with a number,
your expression works as expected.

36. Give your expression a name and then click “OK”.

16

37. You should now see your new expression listed under “Attribute Expressions.” To include this
expression in the pop-up, click the “Configure” button.

38. The Custom Attribute Display dialog lets you write your own narrative pop-up using basic
formatting options or HTML. Start by highlight the text in the pop-up and deleting it.
17

39. Click the small “+” icon next to the font size dropdown to open the field selector. Scroll to the
end of the list and select the attribute expression you just wrote in the previous steps.

40. Similar to the Arcade Expression editor, the field name appears in the box to the left. We can
now craft a pop-up that will give readers some helpful context. Click in the editor and write the
following sentence:
“{expression/expr0}% of Latino households with a computer in this tract do not have an Internet
subscription.”
41. We can make that value stand out in the pop-up with some basic formatting. Highlight
{expression/expr0}% and bold it. You can also change the size to “Medium”.

42. Click “OK” to close the Custom Attribute Display editor and click “OK” on the Configure Pop-up
pane. Click a feature to test your new pop-up. It should look something like this:

18

43. Save the map again.

GeoEnrich Your Data
ArcGIS Online includes powerful analysis tools directly in the browser. In this section, we’re going to use
GeoEnrichment to append additional data to the data we’re already working with. For this story, we’re
going to add in data related to incomes and educational attainment to see if there’s a relationship with
low Internet access.
44. Hover over the tract entry in the Table of Contents and click the button that looks like a small
map.

45. Click “Data Enrichment” and then click “Enrich Layer”.

19

46. GeoEnrichment allows you to append demographic data to any shape or scale of geography. To
get started, click the green “Select Variables” button.

47. Esri carries more than 13,000 variables for the US down to the block group level that can be
appended to any shape or scale of data. Feel free to click around the different categories to see
what data is available. When you’re ready, click in the Search bar and type “median income”.
Then hit enter.

20

48. The Data Browser returns 29 different variables with “median income” in them. Click the arrow
next to “2018 Income (Esri)” to expand the category. Click the checkbox next to “2018 Median
Household Income (Esri)”.

49. Click the ellipses next to “All Variables” to go back to the main page of the Data Browser. Search
for “bachelor degree” and then hit enter.
50. Check the box next to “2018 Education: Bachelor’s Degree (Esri)” to add this variable. You
should now see two selected variables.

21

51. Click the “Apply” button to close the Data Browser.
52. On the Enrich Layer pane, accept the rest of the defaults and click “Run Analysis”
53. ArcGIS Online will now generate a new layer that appends the two variables we selected to the
existing layer we were using. You should see a new item in the Table of Contents.

54. To confirm the variables were included, hover over the new layer and click the table icon.

55. Scroll the very far right of the table to see that the new variables we selected were indeed
added to this dataset.

56. Close the table and save your map again.
22

Publish Your Map as an Interactive App
ArcGIS Online provides several application templates that add additional UIs onto your map. In this
section, we’ll publish the map to the Basic Viewer remplate and walk through how to embed the app on
your news site.
57. Toggle off the new layer you added in the Table of Contents. Only the initial layer you’ve been
working with should be turned on.

58. Save your map again.
59. On the toolbar next to “Save,” click the “Share” button.

60. To enable the public to see your map, you must share it. Until you share your map in ArcGIS
Online, content is always set to private. Click the “Everyone (public)” check box. When you do
this, ArcGIS Online will realize the geoenrich layer we created also needs to be shared. Click
“Update Sharing” on that dialog when it pops up.

23

61. Click the “Create a Web App” button.
62. The template selector opens. Feel free to browse the templates to see what they look like.
When you’re ready, either navigate to “Basic Viewer” or search for it. Click on “Basic Viewer”.

63. Click “Create Web App”.
64. Provide a name a title for your app. By default, it uses the same information you entered for the
web map. When you’re ready, click “Done”.
65. The builder for the Basic Viewer app will open. This interface lets you configure the app to best
suit your needs. Each app has a different configuration experience and options. Click in the box
under “Application title” and enter “Internet Connectivity”. Click “Save” and you’ll see the title
update in the preview pane.

24

66. Click the “Options” tab.

67. You can toggle on various options, but in this case, we want to be sure to provide a Legend in
the app. Under “Toolbar Options”, click the check box next to “Legend.” Scroll down and under
“Specify active tool at app startup”, select “Legend” in the dropdown.

25

68. Click “Save” to write the changes to the app. Then click “Launch”.
69. The app opens in a new tab. Feel free to play with the app to see how the various tools work.
Your app should look something like this.

26

70. If you want to emebed this app into your news site, simply copy the URL and paste it into the
highlighted section of the HTML code below. This code invokes an iframe that embeds the app
and is very similar to the code used to embed YouTube videos in most sites.
<iframe width="100%" height="800px"
src="https://mediaprogram.maps.arcgis.com/apps/View/index.html?appid=e848f7cb46394786
9789733387e106a3" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

You’re Finished!
Thanks so much for joining our session today. If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to reach
out to media.help@esri.com and we’ll do everything we can to help out.

27

