The wonders of CDC WONDER:
Analyzing birth and death data
NICAR 2019
Newport Beach, Calif.
Paul Overberg
The Wall Street Journal
@poverberg
poverberg2@gmail.com
This handout is a quick introduction to CDC WONDER (wonder.cdc.gov), the portal built by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention to allow public access to data from U.S. birth and death certificates. It also lets you to query the
national cancer registry and other data sets, but those are beyond the scope of this handout.
This handout will start with a general walkthrough and then step through a couple common, specific queries on death data
that a local journalist might ask of WONDER.
Before you start:​ Read the clickthru agreement. Or did you already click without reading it? Bad idea! This is a legal
contract. Unlike the endless legalese of software licenses, it’s short and clear. More importantly, you’re committing your
newsroom to its terms. Make sure your editor and lawyer agree. Using this tool means you accept limits on your freedom
to ask questions and to use the answers. You agree not to try to find any person using this data and you agree not to
publish totals or rates based on nine or fewer people. (The tool suppresses such totals.) Remember: By using this tool,
you’re not giving up the right to find people independently using “standard journalistic means,” the phrase that newsroom
lawyers write into customized versions of such agreements when you get into the world of researcher agreements required
to analyze person-level health data.
This leads directly to how we should think about framing queries. If we get too specific, we’ll hit the wall of suppressed
results. So think about queries that slide along three dimensions in the data:
-- Spatial. If you want just one county’s results, you can get them.
-- Temporal. If you want data for every year -- or every month in a given year -- you can get it.
-- Categorical. If you want data for a very narrowly defined group of people or cause of death, you can get it.
But you can’t get county-level data every month for just Hispanic men in their 70s who die on weekends of heart failure.
Like the remodeling contractor says: “I can do this job quick, cheap or well. Pick any two.”
So if you need county-level data, you may need to broaden the types of people, the conditions or the time frame. The
simplest way to do this is to group years, starting in pairs.
But if you can open your net to include several counties, such as an entire metro area, you might be able to get annual
data without hitting the suppression wall. In the same way, if you can settle for 10-year age groups, or if you don’t need a
breakdown by sex or race, you can get data for more specific causes.
“Detailed Mortality” or “Compressed Mortality”? Which do I
want?​ Both include all of the underlying death certificates, but the
latter offers fewer options for filtering and displaying totals. You

can group by month of death or by single year of age with detailed mortality, but not with compressed mortality.

For reasons I’ll show later, let’s start by clicking on “Detailed Mortality.” Here’s the top of the page:

Helpfully, WONDER says this is ​Section 1​ and that we want to organize our results. So if you tell WONDER to group by
states and by years, your results will show Alabama totals for each year from 1999-2017, then Alaska totals for
1999-2017, etc. If you don’t want to see every category in a group, don’t worry. Down below, we can tell WONDER to
filter results.
(Some people think it’s more logical to first select ​what​ they want and then organize ​how​ they want to see it, but
WONDER works the other way. If you’re one of those people, just do ​Section 1​ last.)
Click on the dropdown and you’ll see that we can ​group by​ various geographical options (region, state, county), by year
of death, by sex, race, etc. The sequence of your grouping choices sets up how the results display. Unlike some web data
portals, WONDER doesn’t let you pick a category to group data by columns – it’s not a cross-tabulation tool. That makes
it simpler to program and use. Instead, it simply displays totals and rates for whatever row categories you have chosen to
group by.
Note the tabs. Once we click any of the “Send” buttons, the “Results” tab will come forward. To refine a request, just
click on the “Request form” tab again. The “Map” and “Chart” tabs are worth exploring once you master the basics of
querying the data.

Scroll down to ​sections 2 through 6
and you’ll see the many options to
filter​ results. Here’s part of the
geographical section (at right).
Note the “+” signs next to categories,
like state names in ​Section 2​. Those
signify underlying detail, which you
can access by clicking on a category
and then the “Open” button at the
bottom of the box.

Try it with a state and you’ll see that the page reloads, displaying a list of the state’s
counties. Holding down the Control key (Command key on a Mac) lets you highlight
multiple states, all of whose counties would display when you click “Open.”
This is using the default
“Browse” tab. For a state with a
few counties, this works fine.
But for a state like Texas, it
might be easier to click on the
“Search” tab to pick counties
scattered among its list of 254.

Unless you’re analyzing urban-suburban-rural differences, you can ignore the urbanization choices.
Section 3​ is pretty self-explanatory, but remember that these are all still filters. If we choose “15 to 24 years,” “25 to 34
years” and “35 to 44 years,” we’ll only see one row of results – totals for people between 15 and 44 years -- unless we
chose “Age” as a grouping variable back in ​Section 1​. Conversely, we can just leave “All ages” highlighted and pick
“Age” as a grouping variable to get totals for each age group, or even by single year of age.
The same applies with years in ​Section 4​. Note: If you’re studying a small area or a very specific cause of death, you may
need to combine several years of data into one row to keep from hitting the suppression wall.

Scroll down to ​Section 6​. This is the key section, and the most complicated one:

Stay with me here!​ (This panel will look slightly different if you’re using “Compressed mortality.”) ​There’s a lot
going on here, so let’s take it a step at a time. By default, WONDER offers (above) a list of the chapters of the
International Classification of Diseases, 10th Edition. You may need that much detail, but let’s start more simply. Click on
the radio button labelled “ICD-10 113 Cause List.” This is a much-simplified version of those codes (below).

Scroll the list and you can see that you can choose a grouping like “Accidents (Unintentional injuries)
(V01-X59, Y85-Y86),” or any of its subcategories, alone or in some combination. If you’re just learning how
death data is categorized, this layout can be helpful.

Journalists often use two other options
in setting up ​Section 6​. Choosing
“Injury Intent and Mechanism”
produces a very different way to look at
the options. This lets you separate
suicide from homicide and each by the
manner in which the person died. This
is particularly useful for analyzing, for
instance, types of suicides by age and
sex. It also lets you see how many are
“Undetermined,” which can be a
significant portion in some areas.

Finally, the choice of “Drug/Alcohol
Induced Causes” is a simple way to get
totals and rates on that common cause
of category of deaths.
A note about drug overdoses: If you’ve
covered the opioid epidemic, you may
have heard that some district attorneys
have begun charging drug dealers with
homicide when their customers die of
overdoses. It’s important to remember
that WONDER data is based on death
certificates, not police or grand jury

charges. Death certificates reflect the medical judgment, such as it is, of the doctor or the local government
official, typically a coroner. Coroners’ qualifications and experience vary widely. A coroner may be a skilled
pathologist or a local funeral home director. ​This is important to remember in analyzing death data.​ It’s also
important to remember that a coroner may have had no medical training but knew the dead person’s entire life
history, including what his parents and grandparents died of.
Which drug overdose deaths should I count? ​To match CDC’s reports, use this list:
X40–X44, X60–X64, X85 and Y10–Y14
Source: ​https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr67/nvsr67_09-508.pdf

Exercise 1
Let’s work through a simple exercise. We’ll use Ashtabula County, Ohio, mostly because its population is about
100,000 people. This will let you make easy mental comparisons to places that you cover based on population
size. This is important because we’ll be sliding along those data dimensions I mentioned earlier, trying to wring
as much data as we can from this tool.
Step 1.​ In ​Section 1​, click on the dropdown next to “Group Results By” and choose “Year.”
Step 2.​ Scroll to ​Section 2​, scroll down the list
of states. Click on “Ohio” and the click
“Open” on the button below that box.
You’ll see the page reload and a list of Ohio’s
counties will appear. Click on “Ashtabula
County” and you’ll see it replace “Ohio” in the
selection box to the right.

Ignore all of the other choices and just click the
nearest “Send” button. This accepts the defaults
and gives us a year-by-year list of deaths, the
estimated total population and the crude death rate
(deaths per 100,000) for Ashtabula County.
It looks like the death rate is rising slowly, which
might be a problem or it might just mean that the
population is aging, as it is around the country.
Older people are more likely to die. To factor out
age trends, click on the “Request Form” tab at
upper left, right next to the “Results” tab. Then
check the box labelled “Age Adjusted Rate” in
Section 1​.

Here’s the result:

It’s a little hard to see a trend just by scanning the
age-adjusted rate, so click on the “Chart” tab. The result
shows that Ashtabula County’s age-adjusted death rate
doesn’t really show a trend. (Click on the button labelled
“Chart Options” just below the chart if you want to tweak
the chart’s design.)

Let’s dig a little more into the county’s death rate.
Click on the “Request Form” tab again. Scroll down to
Section 6. ​Then click on the radio button labelled
“ICD10 113 Cause List” and when the page reloads,
scroll the list and click on “Malignant neoplasms
(C00-C97)”. This will give us the county’s cancer rate.
Click any “Send” button.”

It looks like the county’s age-adjusted cancer
rate is dropping, which would be good news.

But is it really? The number of people
who die of cancer each year has a random
component. Even though this is based on
all of the county’s death certificates – not
just a sample – we should not ignore the
randomness behind these numbers.
“Even health events that are based on a
complete count of an entire population,
such as deaths, are subject to random
variation because the number of events
that occurred may be considered as one of
a large series of possible results that could
have arisen under the same
circumstances,” as the Utah Department
of Health tells us in an excellent ​guide​ on
this subject.

Fortunately, WONDER makes it easy to judge this. We can ask it to show us how much that age-adjusted rate varies each
year simply due to probability. In statistical terms, we’ll ask WONDER for the 95% confidence interval for the
age-adjusted rate. Click on the “Request Form” tab and in ​Section 1​, click on the checkbox next to “Age Adjusted Rate”
that’s labelled “95% Confidence Interval.” Here’s what we get:

Each rate comes with a parenthetical range of values. For 2017, the age-adjusted cancer rate of 193.2 per 100,000 has a
95% confidence interval from 169.4 to 217.
What does this mean? This is the range that could be expected to result simply due to the laws of probability.
Circumstances that produce a death rate of 193.2 per 100,000 could also produce a rate of 195.7 or 189.6 or similar
values. If we could model the circumstances many times, the value of 193.2 would occur most often. Slightly larger and
smaller rates would occur slightly less often, and the frequency of these values would tail off based on their difference
from the original value. With enough values, the average of the results would create the well-known bell-shaped curve of
the normal distribution.
The 95% confidence interval tells us the range into which 95% of these many values would fall. Put another way, 19 times
out of 20 (95%), the death rate could be expected to fall in this range. (And 5% of the time, it would fall outside that
range, out on the tails of the bell-shaped curve.)
In this case, we can see clearly that what seems to be a pretty steady downward trend isn’t quite that clear. The rate for
2017 is definitely down near the bottom of the ranges that were recorded a decade earlier and we could write about that
with reasonable clarity. But the trend in recent years seems to have flattened, suggesting cautious wording.

To show WONDER’s limits, click on the “Request Form” tab again, scroll down to ​Section 6 ​and on the cause list, scroll
10 lines below “Malignant neoplasms” and click on “Malignant neoplasm of breast (C50).” Click “Send.” Result:

Here we’ve hit that suppression wall that I mentioned above. Notice that 2014-15 aren’t shown. WONDER will let you
see a placeholder value and the population estimate for a suppressed category – helpful if we’re downloading – but not the
actual number of cases or rates. What to do? You have several options. One would be to simply treat it as a missing value.
Another would be to assume the value is 5 – the midpoint of the range – and footnote this assumption in any material that
you publish.
Finally, you might consider whether you can revise your request to get the
raw number of cases up over 10. In this case, it would be tedious but
possible to the years into pairs and report biennial totals and rates.
This would take a series of queries. First, we’d choose “County” under the
“Group Results By” option in ​Section 1​. Since we’re only specifying one
county, that’s all we’d get. And in Section 4, we’d hold down the Control
key (Command on a Mac) and click”2016” and “2017.”

The result would be a single row, the result for the 2016-17 period.
Then repeat these steps for each of the
preceding two-year periods that you want to
include.

You can also see that if we’re counting something that produces fewer than 20 deaths, WONDER labels the result
“Unreliable” and doesn’t calculate any rate. That’s because with such small totals, a different kind of statistical math
comes into play, one that’s not based on the normal distribution. You could use the totals and population values that
WONDER supplies to calculate your own rates, but don’t try to interpret changes in them as trends.

Exercise 2
Let’s try another exercise​. This one will show you the importance of age-adjusted death rates. If you’ve got some
selections made, click the “Reset” button in the upper-right corner of the Request Form tab. This will let you start over.
Step 1​: In Section 1, click on the dropdown next to “Group Results By’ and choose “Year.”
Step 2​: Just below the grouping options, check the
box labelled “Age-Adjusted Rates.”

Step 3​: In Section 2, click on “Connecticut.”
Step 4:​ In Section 6, click on “CD00-D48 (Neoplasms).” Then click any of the “Send” buttons.
Here’s what we get:

You can see that Connecticut’s cancer rate has dropped 13% in 18 years, from 213.9 per 100,000 to 189.8 per 100,000.
This is good news. But this understates the actual improvement. Connecticut’s population is aging, and older people are
more likely to be diagnosed with cancer than young people. What would have happened if the state’s population had not
aged? That’s what age-adjusted rates tell us. In this case, the age-adjusted rate dropped 36%, from 196 per 100,000 to
143.7 per 100,000. That’s almost three times the change in the crude rate. Age-adjusted rates help us make better
comparisons, like inflation-adjusting monetary amounts when we make comparisons that are more than a few years apart.

But what is an “age-adjusted rate,” exactly? It adjusts crude rates for each year to show what they would be if the actual
age makeup of the population in that year were to match the makeup of a standard population. WONDER reports your
query criteria at the bottom of every results page, and there it is:

At the bottom of ​Section 1​ on the request form, there’s an option labelled “Additional Rate Options.” Clicking on the “+”
sign next to it reveals other ways to adjust rates. The National Center for Health Statistics switched in 1999 from the 1940
population to the 2000 population as its standard for age-adjusted rates. The National Cancer Institute uses the 1970
population.

By checking the box labelled “Use non-standard rates,” you can even use subgroups as a customized denominator in
calculating a rate:

This would be helpful if you want to use a more recent base year than 2000, which might be important for a
group whose are profile is changing rapidly, such as Hispanics. This option would also let you use the age
makeup of a certain geographical area, such as Upstate New York or the Mississippi Delta.

To save your WONDER-ful work:
-- Click on the “Save” button in the upper-right corner of the Results page. This saves a copy of the query to
WONDER’s archive. Then you can bookmark the page. Using that bookmark will recall the results from
WONDER (after you once again agree to its terms of use). This is helpful if you’re helping a colleague or just
setting up some query templates.
-- Click the “Export” button in the upper-right corner of the Results page. WONDER generates a plain text file
of tab-separated values, followed by the terms of the query. You can save this and open it with many analysis
programs including spreadsheets, database managers and statitsitcal analysis software.

Finally, some caveats about WONDER:
-- ​All data is dirty.​ The National Center for Health Statistics does plenty of checks and editing of data
submitted by the states, but there are limits to what it can do. Do some research on how death certificates are
filled out in your state and particularly your county. Ask your county and state health departments about the
certification and training required, as well their editing and checking. The National Association of Medical
Examiners maintains a set of ​standards​ and offers a searchable ​list​ of accredited facilities.
-- ​Consider the source​. Find a blank copy of the ​U.S. Standard Certificate of Death​. Print it out and post it.
Your colleagues may think you’re a bit macabre, but remembering how data goes into the system will help you
to analyze it when it comes out.
-- ​Cross-check if possible​. If your state’s public records law ​allows​ examination or copying of actual
completed death certificates, take advantage of that opportunity. Compare the actual death certificates for a
group of people with a tabulation of the same group in WONDER. You will surely get a richer understanding of
how best to write about the data, and you’ll probably get some other story ideas as well.

