QGIS I - workshop, Nicar 2019, Newport
Link to this document:​ ​bit.ly/qgis1_nicar
Daniel Dunford & Clara Guibourg, BBC Data Journalism Team
@DanielJDunford @cguibourg
QGIS is a powerful and complex piece of mapping software but
journalists can get excellent results from a couple of relatively simple
functions. It’s useful for data exploration as well as for producing data
maps for publication, and it’s open source.
These are the full follow-along instructions from the NICAR session with a worked example.
You will find the data and shapefiles ​HERE​ - download them before starting.
THEY SHOULD ALREADY BE DOWNLOADED TO YOUR NICAR LAPTOP.
What you are aiming for by the end of this tutorial is a plot of all the power stations in
California, laid over some county-level data on the electricity consumption per county.
It will look something like this:

Opening QGIS
Download QGIS: ​https://qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html#
There are lots of versions as it is frequently updated. You can choose between the latest or
earlier ones that are more stable.
The version we are using here is ​QGIS 3.2​. It’s not the latest version but should be robust.
TIP​ Be aware that QGIS projects are not always backwards-compatible so when you update,
you may have to rebuild old projects.
Finding your way around
Your QGIS should look something like this. It may not be exactly the same, depending on
the edition and whether the panels and toolbars have been moved around but it should have
these functions. The version for Windows looks slightly different.

You need two basic ingredients for most QGIS maps 1) a ​shapefile ​which is the map on which you will display your data.
2​) a ​data file​, usually a CSV, which contains the information you want to display
(There are other options - for example you can bring in a highly detailed aerial photograph)

Adding a shapefile
When people talk about a shapefile, or you go looking for one, you actually need a collection
of files which all correspond to each other. They are often found in zip files.
If you have not already done so, go to the ​folder for this workshop​, find the sub-folder called
CA_counties ​and download all the files in there. They are California county boundary files.

There are eight files which all start CA for California. Tiger is just the name of the US Census
Bureau service from which we downloaded the data.
The extensions tell you what type of file they are. They include
●
●
●
●

.shp ​the geometry drawing file. It's a "​vector​" file
.dbf​ a database file with all the text based information such as the name of a
county or the ID code
.shx​ an index file which ties the two together
.prj​ contains the projection information

IMPORTANT​: You need to keep these files in a single folder so QGIS can reference them
and they must all keep the same prefix as each other - eg. CA_Counties_TIGER2016.
Go back to QGIS and click Layer > Add Layer > Add Vector Layer from the menus along the
top of the page. It is usually the top option and the icon looks like a V.

Browse to the folder we were just looking at and select the shapefile itself
CA_Counties_TIGER2016.shp

Hit ​open ​and you should see a map forming and you have a layer in your layers panel
TIP Y
​ ou can also ​add a shapefile by d
​ ragging and dropping from the folder
Save your project!

TIP​ QGIS works in projects which are temporary arrangements of the files which you have
told it to look at. This means that if you move or rename a file then it will no longer appear in
your QGIS project. For this reason it is a good idea to keep your files for a map all in one
folder. Your map is not a permanent object until you export it in some form. Beware having
some files on pen drive only!
Finding your way around the shapefile
You should have now have a map of all of the counties in California.
You can easily zoom in, either with the mouse wheel when the touch zoom button is
selected (PC only) or with the other zoom buttons at the top.
Avoid using the trackpad on a Mac as you will skeeter all over the place.

Pan

​to grab and move around

Zoom​

use in normal way or draw rectangle of the view you wish to zoom to

Full extent​

is useful if you get lost in the map. It resets to the original view

Previous & next​

zoom levels step you back/forwards through previous views

Notice as you zoom in and out the lines stay crisp. That's because a vector file is generated
mathematically, rather than being an image. So in theory you could magnify this to any size
and it would stay true.
This also means that you can project the map in different ways - ​more about projections
here​.
To make California look the correct shape, from the main page click the button next to
Render in the bottom right corner. That will bring up a search box. You can search for

different parts of the world, or if you try 42308 it should bring up NAD27 / California Albers.
Click ​Apply ​and ​OK.
You might notice your map changing shape slightly - check that the northern border is not
quite a straight line.

TIP I​ f you have a very detailed shapefile and moving around is slowing you down, toggle off
the render button at the bottom right, perform your move or zoom, then switch it back on. It
means QGIS is not trying to constantly draw.
Identify features

This button
or a point.

is ​identify features​, which reveals the information attached to an area

If you click on one of the counties you will see the ​Identify results panel​ open. ​On some
versions this is a tab, with the Layers panel, on others it is a separate floating panel.

The panel shows the information which the shapefile already holds about this county​: the
county name, and it has a field called GEOID which is an ID number that will be important
later.
Attribute table
We can look at this information another way by viewing the attribute table. It will show all the
data in the shapefile as a table with, in this case, one row per county.

Styling
We’re going to add some data to this map before we style it up, but you can change the
colour of the map without doing this if you want to.
Double click on the layer name in your Layers panel and it will bring you up a menu (or right
click and select properties).
Select the second item: ​Symbology

If you click Pick Colour you can choose a colour from the page. If you click Choose Colour
you can type in a hex code - a hash followed by a six character code which identifies a
unique colour.
Several ways to change the colour ● Simple: the dropdown next to Colour gives you recent and standard colours
● Full: clicking on the colour itself, gives you a full range of options.
● Or click on simple fill and you can also change the colour there
TIP​ When you use QGIS regularly you can set your own colour palettes and save them as
style files which can be shared with colleagues or reused by you. Eg house mapping style,
political parties' colours.
Choose one which you like, hit apply and OK
Save your project
ADDING DATA
There are two main ways of adding data - adding point data and joining area data.
Your data needs to be a ​delimited text file​ - most often this will be a CSV file. You can't
import an excel workbook.
In your data:
● Make sure your first row has column headers.

●
●
●

●
●

Keep column headers short - and some versions of QGIS need single words
without spaces (use underscore).
Do not have notes in columns, it should just be the data.
Try to make sure that your data is as clean and consistent as possible,
sometimes text in a numbers column can mean QGIS thinks the whole column is
text.
Keep symbols out of the data - eg don't have 100% in a cell, just use 100.
It’s better to not have comma separators for thousands - QGIS sometimes.
interprets eg. 1,234,567 as a string, whereas 1234567 would be recognised as a
number.

Adding area data via a join
Now we will look at the first key way of entering data - joining it to your map.
We do this by using a common ID shared by the shapefile and the data, and we will display
the results by county. Often called a heatmap but it's properly called a ​choropleth​.

●
●
●
●
●
●

Find the ​Add Delimited Text Layer ​button, below where the Add Vector Layer one
was
Browse to find ​california_electricity_by_county.csv
It’s a CSV so keep that button checked
Discard 0 lines and the first record has field names
Click detect field types so it will treat your numbers as numbers rather than text
There is nothing inherent in the file which tells you how to map it straight away so
choose ​No geometry

You get a preview of the data - it shows various the amount of electricity used each year ​per
county​, in millions of gigawatt hours, broken down by residential and non-residential use.
●

●
●

First column is the county FIPS code (​Federal Information Processing Standard)​ that’s what we are going to be using to join the data to the shapefile. Every county in
the US has a unique one and they will always be five characters long.
○ The first two digits identify the state (06 is California), and the following three
identify the county within the state (091 is Sierra County and 003 is Alpine
County, etc.)
County name
Data columns - electricity used for residential purposes, non-residential, and the total
used per county.

Hit ​Add

Joining data
We’ve now imported the data and you will see it in the Layers panel on the left-hand side.
But nothing will show up on the map until we integrate the data with the shape file. We do
that with a join - merging the datasets on a shared value across both, in this case the FIPS
code.
If you right-click and select Open Attribute Table from the dropdown, you’ll notice that the
leading zero from the FIPS column may have disappeared. QGIS does this when you import
data because it thinks eg. 06031 is a normal number and should be 6,031. Annoyingly, this
means it won’t match our shapefile anymore. We can fix this by opening the Field Calculator,
the abacus icon in the top right >

●

When you’ve got your Field Calculator open, paste the following line of code into the
expression box:
if(length(to_string("FIPS")) < 5, concat(to_string(0), "FIPS"), "FIPS")

○

●
●
●

That converts our FIPS column from a number to a string (a text field), and
adds a zero to the front of every value that is less than five characters long. In
this case that’s all of them, because all California’s counties have leading
zeros, but doing it like this ensures that it will still work for a dataset with every
US county.
You’ll also need to select ‘​Text, unlimited length (Text)​’ from the ‘Output field type’
dropdown, or it will turn it back into a number and take the zero out again.
And write something in ‘Output field name’ - that’s going to be the name of our new
corrected column. We’ve called it ‘FIPS_zero’.
Then click OK.

Now your attribute table should have a new column at the end called FIPS_zero, where all
the values are the same as FIPS but with a zero added on in front. Now we can finally style
the map up!
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

In your layers panel, double click on your ​shapefile ​(CA_Counties_TIGER2016)
Go to ​joins
Click the green plus at the bottom
Join layer - ​california_electricity_by_county
Join field​ - this is where you have to tell it which column to use from the ​data layer​ the new ​County code ​column I called ​FIPS_zero​.
Target field​ - this is the corresponding column in the shapefile. It's called ​GEOID
Click OK

Now hit apply and OK.
Nothing has changed.... or rather it ​looks​ ​as though nothing has changed but if you use the
identify features ​button again, this time you will see that it gives you some extra fields in
your results panel which come from the data so we know the join has worked. You could
also check the ​Attribute table​ for the shapefile layer and see the new columns.

Styling the area data
This is where you will tell the shape file how to display the data it now contains
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

With your shapefile still highlighted in your layers panel, double click and open Layer
properties > Symbology
Pick the third dropdown option: ​Graduated
Column​ - it offers you the columns which it thinks are numbers.
○ NB: if you hadn't have done the join, it would not see the options starting
california_electricity... in there as your shapefile wouldn't know about them.
You can choose whichever column you like, the eg we are using here is the Total
electricity used:​ california_electricity_by_county_Total
Colour ramp​ We’ve used “YlOrRed”, from the All colour ramps selector, but there
are lots of options in there
Mode​: This is where you decide on a way of splitting it up - see below for more info
on these options. It defaults to ​Equal Interval​, but this sometimes doesn’t work if the
data has very different extremes​. W
​ e’ve gone for ​Quantile (equal count)
You can set how many different colours you want either with the ​+​ and ​-​ buttons or by
changing the ​Classes ​selection. It defaults to five which works for us.
Hit Classify, Apply, OK

Now your map should colour up and look something like this, depending on what options you
chose.

TIP​ It sometimes can be hard to find data with geographic codes already attached. Often it
will have county name but not the code. You may have to do some wrangling to get your
data in a format which can join to your shapefile. It is sometimes possible to join on name
but really not recommended as punctuation and abbreviation etc can cause problems. Eg
"City of London" is the same as "London, City of" but QGIS won't spot that.
Changing the break points
Experiment with the other breaks by opening up the Layer properties menu again and
choosing one of the other options. They are all algorithms
●

●
●

Quantile (Equal count) ​- makes sure that there are the same number of counties in
each bucket. There are 58 counties and five classes, so you should get get 11 or 12
of each colour. If you add more classes you’ll get more detail.
○ This one is good for quickly making the map look interesting, but check that
your breakpoints aren’t odd as it can look purposely manipulated
Pretty Breaks​ - Creates recognisable class boundaries in whole numbers - see what
happens when you use it for this dataset
Equal Interval​ - creates classes which have the same range as each other. So in
this case, the lowest amount of electricity used in any county is 19m GWh and the

●
●

highest is 67,569m GWh. If you have 5 classes then they will each have a range of
one fifth of the difference = 13,510m GWh. Doesn’t make much sense for this data
but can be useful in other cases.
Natural Breaks (Jenks)​ - This tries to group data in clusters with the biggest
variance between the classes
Standard Deviation​ - This method will calculate the mean of the data, and create
classes based on standard deviation from the mean.

You can also edit the breaks yourself and make the classes bigger or smaller. And you can
edit the key separately to make it more human-readable.
We can edit these colours too by double clicking on the colour in the layers panel or in the
Layers properties>Style menu.
TIP ​As with the project itself, the join is temporary. If you delete the data layer, the join will
disappear. You can save the map as a new shapefile (using Save As) but be aware that your
column headers may change.
Adding point data
A second common form of data for mapping is point data using latitude and longitude.
Import the data in the same way:
● Add delimited text layer from the Layer dropdown again, and bring in
california_power_plants.csv ​- this is all the registered power stations in California.
● Keep all the options as default apart from this time we DO have ​Geometry definition
- because this data has something in it which means it could be plotted on a map: Lat
Long. Therefore ​Point coordinates ​is appropriate in this case.
● If necessary, use the dropdowns next to X field and Y field to tell it ​X field is
Longitude and the Y field is Latitude​. - they may already be filled in correctly but
this won’t always happen.
● Also check that the ​Geometry CRS​ is set to the default projection E
​ PSG:4326​.

MEGA TIP!​ - X
​ is LONGITUDE and Y is LATITUDE!
If you find all your points all bunched up in one spot or you map looks otherwise wrong,
check that you have the X&Y fields pointing to the right columns
Click Add​. ​Now you SHOULD have a whole lot of points on your map. Quite likely in garish
colours but as with the shapefile that is easy to fix using style.

You can use the ​identify features​ button to click on your circles - make sure you have the
data layer highlighted in your layers panel.
Right click in the layers tab and select ​Open Attribute Table​ to see the data as a table.

You will see details like the name of the power plant, a unique ID, the fuel they use, an
address, an operational status and a column called MW which is the amount of Megawatts
produced by the power station each year.
Categorising
One way of looking at point data is by using categories, and the Renewable_Energy column
is a good candidate for this because there are only three possible options - renewable (1),
not renewable (0) and not categorised (blank).
Go back to ​Symbology ​by double-clicking on the power plants layer, and this time instead of
Single symbol​ choose ​Categorized​.
Now go to the Column dropdown and you will see it offers you all the possible columns
which we just looked at in the attribute table
● Choose Renewable_Energy - you may have to scroll down to it
● Hit Classify and you should get three symbols with different colours and values
● Uncheck or delete the bottom one, that's no data.
Change colour
Just like with the map, the colours of these points are easy to change
● Either double click on the layer name to bring up the style panel again, then
change the colours in a similar way to the shapefile, by clicking on the symbol
and choosing a colour there. Note that there are preset colour ramps which you
could choose to use.
● Or you can double click on the symbol directly in your layers panel. This brings
you straight to colour editing that symbol.
● You can copy and paste a colour

Experiment with turning the categories on and off in the layers panel
Scaling the points
Another useful way of visualising point data is to scale the points according to a column in
the data. Let’s scale our power stations by how many Megawatts of power they produce.

● In Symbology, open the Symbol Selector by clicking the ​Symbol: Change…​ box

● Click the
button next to the size bar
● Select A
​ ssistant
● This brings up a second dialogue box with a dropdown to choose which column you
want to use to size the symbols
● In Field choose ​MW
● Set the values from 0 to 2393 - the highest MW value in our dataset
● And for scale method choose ​surface​, other options are radius, exponential or
Flannery​, which may be useful for other datasets
● Size from - experiment here. We’ve gone with 1-10
● Back in the main style menu it's also a good idea to make the symbols slightly
transparent so that they don't blot each other out. You can experiment with that on
the transparency slider scale, we’ve gone for about 60%.
● Apply and OK

Now you should have a range of dot sizes
Again zoom in and out to see how they change
Use ​identify features​ to look at some you are interested in
Note that you can end up with several points highlighted at once when you use identify
features. The expanders in the features panel allow you to look at each one.
TIP​ in some other versions of QGIS the option to scale by the value of a field is in an
advanced setting at the bottom of the style window
You should now have something which looks closer to a finished map:

Labels
To label your county map, either bring up the Layer properties menu again or use the ​abc
button on a yellow background

●
●
●
●

Choose Show labels for this layer
Label with - and choose what you want to show eg: Name, Values
You can change the font, size, colour - again you can match this to house style
Buffer tab can be useful to make the text stand out from the background

If you have chosen county names, it will make the map look a bit crowded, but you get the
idea. There are ways to manually change the placing - ​more details here
Saving as image and exporting
Simplest way of getting a map out is ​Project>Import/Export>Export Map to Image​ which
saves the main window as a png. Quick and easy but lacks the legend and is quite small.

Better option: ​New Print Layout ​- either select this icon from the top​
Print Layout ​below the Import/Export button shown above
It prompts you for a title and brings you to this window

●
●

Click ​Add map​
page.
Map will appear

,​ or click ​New

and then draw a rectangle with the cursor on the blank

● To add a title, click ​Add label
●

●

To add a legend and scale, click on ​Add legend​
and ​Add scale
and drop them where you want them
○ You can edit them, but if they look bad/don’t work, you can make your own
with the ​Add shape
option, combined with ​Add label
To edit any of your objects, go to​ Main Properties​ on the right hand side. You
can edit the text, set the font and colours

To export your map
●

Use the buttons at the top of the page or ​Layout > Export as

●

You can save it as a simple ​PNG image

●

Or ​export as SVG
similar

●

Or ​export as pdf

to save as vector graphic for Adobe Illustrator or

You're done!
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Useful data source links
California Open Data Portal
FIPS codes
US Census fact finder
Census ​Cartographic boundary shapefiles
Census ​Maps and data main page
Natural Earth​ - for lots of useful country files

