Housing
How data can inform one of the hottest topics
across the country
Slides: bit.ly/2XMrRH3

Google for the Arc server

“gis” “arcgis” “rest”
“services”
“sonoma county”

https://github.com/openaddresses/pyesridump

Open the inspector

Ask for imagery

DigitalGlobe is a great resource

Build your own dataset

OpenStreetMap
https://overpass-turbo.eu/

Build tools for your newsroom

Housing Investigations
Property tax data can beneﬁt many diﬀerent kinds of investigations
Property tax is an important local issue popular with readers
The gist (rarely this simple)...
-Governments determine how much they want to raise
-Assessor determines how much property is worth
-Taxes are distributed proportionally based on the value of property
Property tax systems are complex and vary widely from state to state

Housing Investigations - Assessment Rolls
Obtain from assessor, tax receiver or state property tax oﬃce
Tells you...
-Who owns all the property (critical for investigations)
-What the assessor estimates property is worth (wildly inaccurate in many places),
"estimated market value"
Knowing what an assessor thinks property is worth is critical for investigating the fairness of
a property tax system, but it's not the only record you will need...

Housing Investigations - Sales Data
Can be obtained from assessors, state property tax oﬃces or clerks/recorders
Sales prices are the best evidence of property value, IF they are “valid sales”
Assessor likely has already determined which sales are valid
Tells you the parties of the sales, sales prices and whether the sales are open market or
arms-length transactions
Sales data is incredibly important both for setting assessments and for checking the
accuracy and fairness of an assessment roll with a “ratio study…”

Housing Investigations - Ratio Studies
Sales ratio studies compare sales prices to assessments. Property that sold recently for $1
million but is assessed at $1.1 million has a sales ratio of 110 percent.
Can also be used to determine whether assessments are racially discriminatory.
You can request these or try to do your own. Also done by researchers sometimes.
Assessor should have these. If not, how do they know assessment quality? Your state
property tax oﬃce has probably done a ratio study of your area recently, as well.
The International Association of Assessing Oﬃcers — a GREAT resource — sets standards
for how studies should be done and acceptable ranges of fairness

Housing Investigations - Assessment Challenges
Property owners can argue — either by themselves or with the help of a law ﬁrm or other
taxpayer representative — that the assessor overvalued their property
When someone wins an assessment reduction, it can shift the tax burden to other property
owners. Tax shift reached nearly $2 billion over six years in my area.
Assessment challenge processes and rules vary from state to state, but usually starts with an
administrative board of appointees from which you can obtain data detailing each challenge,
including their outcome and whether a ﬁrm was used.

Housing Investigations - Challenges, Continued
Compare outcome of challenges to sales prices, maybe even do a ratio study of the
assessments before and after challenges to see if challenges make assessments more or less
fair and accurate.
Are members of the assessment appeals board recusing themselves when they have a
conﬂict of interest? How politically-connected are they?
Are politically-connected property owners getting larger reductions?
Are certain ﬁrms doing remarkably better than others? Are they politically-connected? In
my area, a group of ﬁrms contributed nearly $2 million to local Republicans who then
awarded reductions to two-thirds of challengers, earning the tax appeal ﬁrm industry more
than $500 million.

Housing Investigations - Exemptions
Can also shift the tax burden.
Exemptions take many forms, including senior citizens, veterans, home improvement, green
energy, volunteer ﬁreﬁghting, clergy, nonproﬁt, churches, HOMESTEAD
-You can use this data to identify sources for stories
May come with assessment roll data or may need to be requested separately from your
assessor or tax receiver

Housing Investigations - Exemptions, Continued
Check whether for-proﬁt businesses are operating from a property with a nonproﬁt
exemption
See if someone with a homestead exemption is voting elsewhere or listing their home for
rent
And so on, BUT look for loopholes in exemption manual obtained from state government
or your assessor (or look up the law that authorized the exemption)

Housing Investigations - Other Data
Census Bureau - You can do a quick look at tax rate disparities in an area with American
Community Survey data on tax bills and home values
Tax liens - Who is buying them? Are people losing their homes over a small lien?
SEC Filings - Are public corporations claiming their properties are worth a lot more than
they are assessed for in their ﬁlings?
ALSO...look at economic development tax exemptions, which may be known as PILOTs. Are
those properties getting assessment reductions in challenges? Are the business owners
politically connected?
Some other ideas

Lorie Hearn, inewsource — loriehearn@inewsource.org
Matt Clark, Newsday — Matt.Clark@newsday.com
Aaron Terrazas, Zillow — press@zillow.com
Jon Schleuss, L.A. Times — jon@latimes.com

Slides: bit.ly/2XMrRH3

