TIPSHEET: USING SURVEYS IN YOUR INVESTIGATIVE PROJECTS, NICAR 2019
Carolyn Thompson, independent journalist caroethompson@gmail.com @caroethompson
James Grimaldi of The Wall Street Journal; james.grimaldi@wsj.com
Chris Jackson of Ipsos; Chris.Jackson@ipsos.com
CAROLYN’S TIPS
Step 1: Deciding to use a survey
Consider why you think this is the best method. Is this a way to get information no one else
has collected? Can you get real-time data on a newsworthy issue? Can you crowdsource
info on a topic that’s broad and hard to digest? Can you use it to access people in remote
areas who aren’t possible to reach in person? Can you find victims/people affected by a
newsworthy topic?
Step 2: The distribution method
Once you’ve decided to use a survey, decide on the best distribution method of your
questions. You can use many methods, including distributing it on the Internet, through
social media or email, via landlines or mobile phones, or during in-person research.
Whichever method you choose, it’s important to consider the risks of skewing your results.
Are your respondents self-selecting? Are you randomizing the survey collection? Are you
unable to reach certain populations due to your method? Understand the limitations of your
method – for example dialing random numbers on landlines in the U.S. will inevitably miss a
core population who no longer have home phones, while using mobile phones in some
countries can skew the gender and rural/urban divide of results. Know who you are and
aren’t reaching through your method and ask yourself lots of questions about why you’re
willing to accept those limitations. Be prepared to defend your method. It’s okay to have
those limitations, but your reporting should be honest about them and you should be ready
to explain why you chose this model despite knowing its limits. Also consider the security of
your respondents. Are you ensuring their answers are anonymous if you’re promising that?
Step 3: Designing your questions
Look for other research existing in the domain – is it logical to model your questions after
research that’s already been conducted? Choose carefully how to frame your questions in
the most fair, clear and unbiased way, so that you aren’t leading your respondents. You can
create duplicate questions to help ensure the answers being collected are authentic, for
example asking both city and state, or rural/urban to confirm the responses match. Consider
including questions that allow for geolocating, which can be specific locations or something
that will allow you to do the geolocation, such as the name of the primary school closest to
their house.

Step 4: Storing the results
This is more important that you may think, as source protection is just as important in survey
research as it is with interviews. Consider how you’ll store the data and who will have
access. Is there any private information (such as phone numbers) that could jeopardize your
sources? Do you need to lock down the information you are sending to your editors?
Step 5: Interpreting your data
Get an expert on your side and run all the results and your analysis by them. This can also
be helpful during the process of designing questions to ensure you aren’t surprised by their
concerns or interpretation of the results. This is the point where it’s crucial to understand
how to present your results – are they representative? Are they not? How do you need to
explain what they show?
Step 6: Telling your story and visualizing it
Some stories don’t need a lot of numbers, even with the data you’ve collected.

TIPS FROM CHRIS
●

●

●

Should you use public opinion research in your reporting?
○ Answer this question, "I am trying to characterize the values, beliefs,
experiences, etc. of a large group of people and there is not existing data to
rely on." If yes, public could be a good tool for consideration.
How do you build a public opinion or survey?
○ Don't try to do it on your own. Many academics, research institutes, and
public pollsters would be happy to donate their time to support the public
good. Seek out one (or more) of them to collaborate and guide your
development.
○ Be flexible in approach, there is no one perfect way to collect public opinion
data.
Can you do public opinion on budget, deadline, etc?
○ Consider the audience you are trying to measure and if you can use low cost
or free tools to accomplish your goals.
○ Research organizations will often collaborate with media on original survey,
investigate partnership opportunities that reduce your overhead costs.
○ The length of time a public opinion program takes is directly related to its
complexity and rigor. You can get social media analytics in a matter of
minutes, a "quick turn" poll generally takes a week, and a rigorous population
survey can often take several months to fully implement.

TIPS FROM JAMES
1.

Consult with editors, lawyers and standards early

Not all editors are accustomed to this kind of reporting, so keep them informed. Check the
laws regarding spam and cold-calling, though you should be protected for news-gathering.
Review your internal guidelines and policies regarding this kind of work. We met with our
editors, the ethics editors in our Standards and Practices office and attorneys in our legal
department.
2.

Check to see what your internal resources are,

If your news organization sends out any kind of alert, it likely uses a robust email-sending
program that tracks bounces, opens and clicks.
Find out who runs it. We sought the help and support of our business side, which operates
our email programs
3.
Take advantage of free online services such as SurveyMonkey, Google surveys
If you don’t have access to a major email-sending program, you can try one of the free email
services.

