Always Appeal: Fighting
Public Records Battles

Katie Townsend – RCFP Legal Director
March 9, 2019

The Federal Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) & State
Public Records Laws
• FOIA provides a statutory right of access to
“records” in the possession, custody, and/or control
of federal executive branch “agencies.”
• Every state and D.C. has adopted its own public
records law. These laws can vary significantly.
• Different public records laws provide different
procedures and mechanisms for appealing.

FOIA Administrative Appeals
• FOIA requires agencies to make a “determination”
within 20 days following receipt of a request.
5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(A). This deadline may be
extended in “unusual circumstances” by no more
than ten working days. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(B)(i).
• These deadlines are *rarely* complied with.
• When an agency fails to comply with FOIA’s time
limits, you can seek immediate judicial review.
5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(C)(i).

FOIA Administrative Appeals
• FOIA requires that an agency notify you of its
determination and the reasons therefor.
• In the case of an “adverse determination,” the agency
must notify you of your right to administratively appeal.
• You must administratively appeal from an adverse
determination (exhaust administrative remedies) before
filing a FOIA lawsuit.
• The time period for you to appeal will vary by agency
(check the agency’s regs) but will be “not less than 90
days after the date of such adverse determination.”

FOIA Administrative Appeals
• KEEP EVERYTHING RELATED TO YOUR
REQUEST!
• Sample administrative appeals? Check out:
https://foia.wiki/wiki/Main_Page
• What can you appeal?
– Sufficiency of the agency’s search.
– Exemptions/withholdings.
– Segregability.

FOIA Administrative Appeals
• FOIA requires an agency to make a determination with
respect to any appeal within 20 working days after its
receipt. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(A)(ii).
• According to DOJ’s Office of Information Policy (OIP),
the average processing time for adjudicating appeals in
FY 2017 for all reporting agencies was 93.7 days.
• The average processing time for the agencies that
processed the most appeals in FY 2017 was 26.08 days
(DHS), 47.95 days (DOJ), and 177.21 days (DOD).

State Appeal Procedures Vary
• California Public Records Act (PRA): No formal
administrative appeals process.
• D.C. Freedom of Information Act (D.C. FOIA): A
requester may appeal a denial of access to the Mayor, but
an appeal is not required to pursue litigation.
• New Jersey Open Public Records Act (OPRA): The
requester may initiate litigation in state court or file a
complaint with the Government Records Council. GRC
decisions are binding, appealable to the
Appellate Division.

State Appeal Procedures Vary
•

Texas Public Information Act (TPIA): If an agency receives a
request for records that it believes are exempt, it must, no later than
10 business days after receiving the request, ask for a decision from
the Attorney General as to whether the information is exempt.

•

The Attorney General must issue a decision, in writing, within 45
working days. The agency is bound by the Attorney General’s
opinion unless it challenges it in court; it has 30 days from the date
of the decision to file a court challenge.

•

The requester can also challenge an adverse Attorney General
opinion in court. But, notably, costs and attorney’s fees may not be
assessed if the court finds that the agency acted in reasonable
reliance on a written decision of the Attorney General.

To Appeal or Not
to Appeal?

Source: Summary of
Annual FOIA Reports
for Fiscal Year 2017,
Office of Information
Policy, U.S. Department
of Justice

To Appeal or Not
to Appeal?

Source: Summary of
Annual FOIA Reports
for Fiscal Year 2017,
Office of Information
Policy, U.S. Department
of Justice

DHS Disposition of Appeals

To Appeal or Not to
Appeal?

Source: Department of Homeland Security 2017
Freedom of Information Act Report (February 2018)

FERC Disposition of Appeals

To Appeal or Not to
Appeal?

Source: Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Annual Freedom of Information Act Report FY 2017
(February 2018)

Other Options? Mediation?
• The Agency’s Public Liaison/Chief FOIA
Officer
https://foia.wiki/wiki/Agencies_Landing_P
age
• Office of Government Information
Services (OGIS):
https://www.archives.gov/ogis

FOIA Litigation
What: A federal lawsuit “to enjoin the agency from withholding
agency records and to order the production of any agency
records improperly withheld from the [requester].” In litigation,
the “burden is on the agency to sustain its action.” 5 U.S.C. §
552(a)(4)(B).
Where: The federal district court in the “district in which [you]
reside[], or [have your] principal place of business, or in which
the agency records are situated, or in the District of Columbia[.]”
When: The statute of limitations is six years; time period runs
from the date of exhaustion of administrative remedies.
(Remember you can always file another FOIA request.)

FOIA Litigation
Questions/Considerations:
- Do you need an attorney?
- Did the agency comply with FOIA’s
deadlines/make a determination?
- Timing.
- Likelihood of prevailing re: exemptions.
- Recovery of costs/attorneys’ fees. (Under
FOIA, the trial court may award attorney fees
to a plaintiff who has “substantially
prevailed.”)

