ALWAYS APPEAL
Write requests to win your appeals
● Do some basic homework. Describe the records you want, and be specific about where you think
the agency should look to find them.
Before you appeal
● Learn more: Most FOIA denials are little more than a form letter that doesn’t explain why the
government thinks the records are exempt. So ask.
● Maybe we can be reasonable? Federal agencies are required to have a designated public liaison. If
you have a specific reason the government’s denial was wrong, call and ask if they’ll take another
look.
Common appeals issues
Knowing a little about the legal framework for FOIA can go a long way toward making your appeal more
effective. Many of the law’s requirements aren’t intuitive. Some common stumbling points:
● No such records: When an agency says it can’t find the records, it’s usually not enough to say that
they obviously exist. The question for the appeals office is whether the agency’s search was
reasonable – did it look in the places where the records might be found, did it use the right search
keywords, etc. Your job is to persuade the appeals office that the reason the agency didn’t find
records is that its search was inadequate.
● Privacy: FOIA’s privacy exemptions (exemptions 6 and 7(C)) reflect a balance of people’s privacy
rights and the public’s right to know. If the balance tips toward privacy rights, the records are
exempt. The only public interest that counts is the interest in knowing what the government is up to.
Language you can use:
The agency erred because it failed to perform the balancing analysis required by the FOIA’s privacy
exemptions. The exemptions permit an agency to withhold records only when the public’s interest
in disclosure is outbalanced by an individual’s privacy interest. Kimberlin v. Dep’t of Justice, 139 F.3d
944, 948 (D.C. Cir. 1998). The public interest at stake is opening “agency action to the light of public
scrutiny” so that citizens can “be informed about what their government is up to.” Dep’t of Justice v.
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, 489 U.S. 749 (1989).
Had the agency weighed these interests correctly, it would have determined that the records should
be released in full. [Then identify the possible privacy interests named individuals might have in the
records you’ve requested and make your clearest argument about why releasing them will tell the
public something important about how well the government is carrying out its job.]
● Secret law enforcement techniques: Federal agencies use this exemption (exemption 7(E)) quite
broadly, including to hide techniques you have probably seen on TV. But courts have been clear that
it applies only to techniques that aren’t already common knowledge.

● Law enforcement investigations / Exemption 7(A): FOIA allows the government to withhold records
whose release would risk interfering with ongoing enforcement proceedings. Agencies have been
known to apply this exemption broadly, something the courts forbid.
Language you can use:
As to any records located in investigative files for pending investigations, the FBI may not assert
Exemption 7(A) without conducting a document-by-document review to determine whether release
of the records would interfere with ongoing law enforcement proceedings.
The United States District Court for the District of Columbia recently “remind[ed] the FBI of its
obligation to conduct record-level reviews at the administrative level before refusing to produce
records contained in its investigative files.” Tipograph v. Dep’t of Justice, 83 F. Supp. 2d 234, 236
(D.D.C. Mar. 18, 2015).
● Broad or burdensome requests: Agencies balk when you ask for lots things and will reject requests
they consider overly broad or burdensome. Basically, they think you’re making too much work. But
the law works differently — the relevant question is whether you have described the records clearly
enough that someone who knows what they’re doing could find them.
Language you can use
The agency’s response suggests that my request was too broad to undertake a search. I disagree. To
be valid, a request need only “reasonably describe” the records it seeks so that knowledgeable
agency employees will be able to determine “precisely what records are being requested.” Yeager v.
DEA, 678 F.2d 315, 322 (D.C. Cir. 1982). Similarly, an agency cannot reject a request on the grounds
that a search would be burdensome. And the fact that a request may yield a great many responsive
records is immaterial, so long as the agency can identify which records to produce. Id.
● Something they always forget — what’s the harm: The FOIA Improvement Act of 2016 added a
provision instructing federal agencies to withhold records only when their release would work some
foreseeable harm or is prohibited by law, not just because they may technically be exempt. Agencies
forget this — or at least don’t ever leave you a clue that they considered it.
Language you can use:
Even if records might otherwise be exempt, an agency may withhold them only if their disclosure
would actually harm the interests protected by the exemption, or if it is prohibited by some other
law. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(8). The Agency did not identify what reasonably foreseeable harm would flow
from release of the information withheld, nor did it consider a partial disclosure of the information,
taking reasonable steps to segregate and release nonexempt information. The agency’s failure to
meet the requirements of § 552(a)(8) requires reconsideration of its denial.
Where you can go to get help
● Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press: Publishes a guide to federal law,
https://www.rcfp.org/federal-open-government-guide, and to state open-records laws,
https://www.rcfp.org/open-government-guide.

● The Justice Department (yes, really): Publishes a detailed guide of to the federal law, and a
detailed breakdown on the exemptions, citing relevant cases: https://www.justice.gov/oip/dojguide-freedom-information-act.
● State press associations
● Law firms
● In-house counsel
Jason Leopold, BuzzFeed, jason.leopold@buzzfeed.com, @jasonleopold
Katie Townsend ktownsend@rcfp.org

