Life After FactFinder
The Future of ​data.census.gov
Tyson Weister
U.S. Census Bureau
tyson.weister@census.gov
NICAR Conference
Newport Beach, CA
March 9, 2019
Short link: [​http://bit.ly/2EXtUkm​]
Session intro: This coming summer, the Census Bureau plans to phase out its
workhorse search engine,​ ​American FactFinder​ and replace it with a new site,
data.census.gov​. The new site has been under development for a while, but it’s almost
ready for prime time now.
Ron Campbell and Angeliki Kastanis (co-panelists) shared helpful tips and tricks
through their live demonstration of data.census.gov. I will focus putting everything you
learned into context of the larger vision for data.census.gov and give you a sneak peek
at next month’s release.

A Single Platform to Access All Census Bureau Data
Though this session is focused on “Life After FactFinder,” please know that
data.census.gov is designed to be a single entry point into all of the Census Bureau’s
data, a vision much larger than a replacement of a single tool like American FactFinder.
Let’s take a closer look at what is driving all this change in the way you get data.
The Census Bureau’s mission is to serve as the leading source of quality data about the
nation’s people and economy. Though we’ve been collecting and processing quality
data since the first Census in 1790, we get a lot of user feedback that Census Bureau
data are not easy to find. Here’s a look at why:
Since census.gov launched in 1994, we have created hundreds of Census tools and
applications, some of which you have grown to know and love. But you had to know to
go to a separate site to access them and you faced a learning curve in discovering how
to use each one.

1

Image showing major events from the Census Bureau’s online history:

The vision for data.census.gov is to streamline the way you get data, so everything is
accessible on a single platform.
Benefits of this new vision in data dissemination:
● Simply your experience so you spend less time searching for data and more time
using it
● Take the best functionality of our current tools and apply it to all relevant data
● Reduce costs by delivering and reviewing the data one time instead of
duplicating this process across hundreds of apps
● Provide greater access to the API which powers the platform
You can access the platform now through data.census.gov, but the long-term vision is
to fully integrate it with census.gov. Eventually, you will access the search experience
through the single search bar on data.census.gov.

2

The Future of Accessing Data in 2019 – data.census.gov
The new platform on data.census.gov will be the primary way for you to access some of
the most popular Census datasets in 2019. Here are some key dates:
● Spring 2019: First data release exclusively on data.census.gov (Public Sector –
Census of Governments)
● Summer 2019: End of new data releases on American FactFinder
● Fall 2019: Major releases on data.census.gov for the 2018 American Community
Survey & 2017 Economic Census
You’ll really feel the transition with the major releases in September, but we hope you
take the time to get used to the new site before then and provide feedback by emailing
cedsci.feedback@census.gov​. We continuously improve the site based on user
feedback, and push changes live every 2 months. Now let’s take an early look at what
we will be releasing in April.

Preview the April Release
In early April, we are releasing updates to data.census.gov where you will experience:
1) Refreshed look and feel
2) Easier navigation
You will also see improved search, performance speed, accessibility, and more!
Refreshed look and feel –
You will see several enhancements including:
● Cleaner look with less wasted space
● Consistent visual experience with the rest of census.gov (e.g. colors, fonts,
button styles, etc.)
● Better display of small tables: Columns widths are now responsive to screen size
● Improved labeling: For example, the year and estimate type (1-year vs. 5-year)
are now displayed with the table title

3

Easier Navigation –
You will have the ability to access:
● Table controls more intuitively at the top of table (vs. left navigation panel)
● Change the year and dataset within the full table view
● Restore the original table layout
● Access geography profiles from the map view

Coming later – Download a table across years in a single bulk download

4

Tell Us What You Think
Our development depends on your feedback! Check out data.census.gov often, and tell
us what you think by emailing your comments to ​cedsci.feedback@census.gov​. Be sure
to let us know your feedback on the April release.

Stay Connected
Learn More​:
• Public Webinar (April 9​th​ 1-2pm ET): New Refresh of data.census.gov
census.gov/data/training-workshops.html
• Release Notes and Frequently Asked Questions
data.census.gov/assets/faqs-release-notes.pdf
• Get Email Notifications for Future Releases:
Email ​tyson.weister@census.gov​ with your request
Feedback:​ ​cedsci.feedback@census.gov
Questions:
Public Information Office
U.S. Census Bureau
pio@census.gov
301-763-3030

5

