Life After FactFinder
Inside ​data.census.gov
Ronald Campbell
NBC Owned Television Stations
ron.campbell@nbcuni.com
NICAR Conference
Newport Beach, CA
March 9, 2019
Short link: ​http://tinyurl.com/y5grqq8l
This coming summer, the Census Bureau plans to phase out its workhorse search
engine,​ ​American FactFinder​ and replace it with a new site,​ ​data.census.gov​. The new
site has been under development for a while – we discussed it at last year’s NICAR –
but it’s almost ready for prime time now.
The basic design is simpler than FactFinder’s. On the opening page one sees a search
box and a magnifying lens. Type a place or topic, and the site will finish it for you and
may suggest a topic.

When I typed ​Orange County​, the site suggested​ Orange County, California profile​.
Well, let’s take a look.

1

In addition to this snapshot at the top, the profile includes more than a dozen statistics –
an age profile, immigrants, health insurance, business establishments, disability,
language spoken at home. Each statistic comes with an on/off margin of error. Each
also lists the source; for example, the educational attainment statistics come from the
2017 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimate, Table DP02.
And it gets better. Several of these snapshots contain maps, putting the local statistic
into statewide context. You can export and customize these maps. Let’s look at the
foreign-born map as an example.

2

Click on the “Customize Map” button, and it opens in a new window with options to
change a lot of features. A caution here: Some of the options do not work. For example,
while it appears that you can change the geography from “County” (the default
geography) to something else, I’ve found that this merely puts lines on the map without
adding values; values representing the foreign-born population appear only when the
geography is set to County, at least for this map at this time. You also have to be careful
about changing the variable that you map; much of the time, the default choice is the
best choice.
I changed the number of classifications on the map below from the default, 5, to 6; I also
changed the palette to something brighter to show how the color scheme works.

This is all available through a basic search, simply by entering the name of a place and
looking at what pops up. But there’s another level of information available on the
opening page: Advanced Search.

3

If you hold your cursor in the search box, the “Advanced Search” box will become
visible. Click there, and a new page will open.

This page uses Boolean search terms to widen or narrow the scope of tables within
your grasp. With a blank slate, you begin with 2,153 tables and maps. As you add
conditions, the number will drop.
Suppose we want to know about educational attainment in Orange County. There are
several ways to find the answer, but let’s start by filling in the search form and then

4

using filters to narrow our range. We’ll put “educational attainment” (without the quote
marks) in the “exact word or phrase” box. That narrows our list of tables from the
original 2,153 to 72.
Next we go to the filters, highlight Geographies, click on State and select California; with
Geographies still highlighted, click on County, then on California again and in a new
pop-up select Orange County, California. At this point, just 65 tables are left.
Highlight Years and select 2017; 64 tables are left. Highlight Surveys and select ACS
5-Year Estimates Detailed Tables; 41 tables are left, down from the original 2,153. Next
to the Search Query is a “View/Edit” button; click on it and this is what you should see:

The typescript in gray is our query. The topic is “educational attainment”. The “y:2017”
means that the year is 2017. The “g:” followed by a bunch of numbers and letters is the
geographic code; the key part is the last five numbers, 06059, the FIPS code for Orange
County, Calif. The “d:” stands for the dataset, the American Community Survey.
Below that are each of the five elements of the query in plain English. We can eliminate
any one by clicking on the adjacent “x”.
To see where all this leads, click on the blue “View All Results”. The site returns
everything available on educational attainment in Orange County.

5

The site delivers us tables with side-by-side comparisons of educational attainment for
California and Orange County. We can scroll down the list of all 41 tables, pick any
crosstab we want (educational attainment by sex, by sex and age, by employment
status, by poverty status, etc.). We also can select maps.
Here for example is a portion of Table B07009, Geographic mobility by educational
attainment. It shows that people who moved from a different state in the past year
tended to be highly educated.

6

Suppose, however, that we want something specific - educational attainment for Orange
County’s large immigrant community. Despite its white-bread surfer image, OC is
majority minority, and more than a third of its residents are foreign-born. We can either
plow through all 41 educational attainment tables, or we can let the search engine find
what we want.
Click the back arrow to return to the Advanced Search page. In the “at least one of
these words” box type ​foreign-born​.
The Search query should now read:

7

This search produces just one result, Table B06009, Place of birth by educational
attainment. This is a crosstab of educational attainment by place of birth -- those born in
California, in other states, to American citizens residing outside the country and
foreign-born.
Here’s a snippet of the table showing the results for foreign-born residents of California
and Orange County.

Some cautions:
● The word search is buggy. In particular I’ve found that the “all of these words”
box can produce wildly inconsistent results from one session to the next. I
decided not to use that box in this presentation because I could not reliably
predict its performance.
● The filters are a work in progress but on the whole are better designed and
easier to use than those on American FactFinder.
● However, the Geographies filter, while better designed than FactFinder, is far
less capable. For example, it is impossible to capture all census tracts and all
places (cities and towns) within a given county by a single keystroke -- an easy
task in FactFinder. The Census Bureau is aware of this problem and is said to be
working to fix it.

8

