Life After FactFinder
Tips and Tricks for ​data.census.gov
Angeliki Kastanis
The Associated Press
akastanis@ap.org
NICAR Conference
Newport Beach, CA
March 9, 2019
Short link: ​http://bit.ly/2TsArLP
Session intro: This coming summer, the Census Bureau plans to phase out its
workhorse search engine,​ ​American FactFinder​ and replace it with a new site,
data.census.gov​. The new site has been under development for a while, but it’s almost
ready for prime time now.
While Ron Campbell (co-panelist) showed you how to look for data on a geography, I
will focus on some tips and tricks that can be helpful in finding data related to race and
ethnicity. I will also mainly be focusing on American Community Survey (ACS) data,
although other Censu data products will also be released on the platform.
A main focus for me to point out for people that work with data (even pros like you!) is
that definitions and categories in data are hard lines that someone has drawn - and they
could have been drawn differently. There are people behind the creation and
implementation of surveys - so always check in with yourself and note what
assumptions are behind the categories you are relying on and if they best fit your
needs.

Know Your Table IDs
One of my tips when searching for demographic data, especially if you work with ACS
data often and constantly use similar tables, just at different geographies, years or for

different population groups, is to keep track of your table IDs. There is a system in place
that can help you fine tune a search before you even navigate to the site.
If you navigate to the main ACS page (which I show you how to get to from
data.census.gov​ a bit later) ​https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/​, there are a
bunch of goodies on the left hand side that I will reference again later on. For now, we
will focus on how to understand the Table IDs found here: ​ACS table ID numbers
explained​.

As you expand each section, the mystery behind table names all but disappears.
Let’s choose a table to look at:
● First letter​: Let’s choose a Base Table - the most detailed data available
● Next 2 digits: Let’s look at the subject of “Hispanic or Latino Origin”
● Unique ID in subject: 001 is detail on specific origin, but we will look at 002
○ B03002: HISPANIC OR LATINO ORIGIN BY RACE
When you get to the search bar for ​data.census.gov​, you can just type in the Table ID
”B03002” and it will filter out all other tables on the site to get to the one you are
interested in. After you choose to look at the table, you can select the year and vintage
of the ACS survey most applicable to your needs in the dropdown menu. You can also

use the “Filter Results” button to select geographies for side-by-side comparisons, using
the same method that Ron walked through previously.

Filtering
When you click on “View Table and Customize” you can make some adjustments to the
table before you download it. You can add margins of error (possibly transpose the
table) or select the rows that are of particular interest to you. I usually download the
whole table so that I can ingest it into my data analysis workflow in a similar way each
time, but it can be useful if you know the data you are interested in keeping. For
example, let’s say you want to collapse the race and ethnicity categories so that they
are less granular. You can do that and download the collapsed table.

Clicking on “Filter & Sort” allows you to filter a column using a filtering expression, such
as keeping all rows with a number greater than XX. This can be useful if you are only
interested in looking at the largest MSAs by population from a population table, or the
implementation of some other cut-off point before downloading your table. This can be
helpful if you predominantly work in Excel and would rather download a limited table of
what you are interested in.

Race & Ethnicity
Another trick available when using Table IDs is that if there are iterations across race or
ethnicity for that specific table, those tables will also populate the table list and you can
download all of them at the same time. For selected ACS tables, you can add a letter to
the Table ID and get the same information for the nine major race and Hispanic or
Latino groups.

So, if we choose a table to look at:
● First letter: A Base Table
● Next 2 digits: The subject of “Poverty Status”
● Unique ID in subject: 001 is detail by age
○ B17001: POVERTY STATUS IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS BY SEX BY
AGE
● A-I is the race and ethnicity iteration
○ Keep in mind, tables `A`-`G` will include Hispanic or Latino households,
`H` will give you White, non-Hispanic households and `I` will give you
Hispanic households of any race
○ B17001D: POVERTY STATUS IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS BY SEX BY
AGE (ASIAN ALONE)
● For selected tables, you can also add PR to get a table that is specific to Puerto
Rico
○ S0601PR: SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TOTAL AND
NATIVE POPULATIONS IN PUERTO RICO
Although you cannot set them up side-by-side for comparison, you can download all the
iterations at the same time on the left hand side. “Select Tables to Download” and then
select each table that interests you.
Another trick when working with ACS demographic data as it pertains to subpopulations
by race or ethnicity is to be aware of the granularity available in the data. There are
certain tables that are available for 416 (!) iteration groups. These include an iteration
for the:
● total population
● all race alone groups
● race alone or in combination groups
● Iterations are also available for a number of ​multiple race combination groups​.
On ​data.census.gov​, you can select groups of interest and set them up side-by-side for
view and downloading the table.
The site was a little fussy, but I was able to get there by going to main page and
selecting advanced search:
● The table we will be looking at is the Selection Population Profile tables (​s0201​).
● Enter s0201 in topline
● Then scroll down to filter by race and ethnicity
○ Two or more races -> Two races -> can choose combinations

○ Can compare fine-tuned groups instead of aggregate subgroups
● Selected Population Profiles are available from the ACS datasets only.
○ The profiles show social, economic, housing, and demographic data.
○ They are available for over a hundred race, ethnic, tribal, ancestry, and
country of birth groups.
○ These are generally only available for areas with a larger population, and
for population groups that meet a threshold for the geographic area.
■ For 1-Year estimates, the population group selected must have a
population of at least 65,000 nationally.
■ For 3-Year estimates, the population group selected must have a
population of at least 20,000 nationally.
■ For 5-year estimates, the population group selected must have a
population of at least 7,000 nationally.
○ FYI: 2017 ACS 1-year Selection Population Profiles are the only iterated
tables in data.census.gov right now, but Tyson did confirm last week that
there are plans to migrate the 5-year Selected Population Tables and
American Indian Alaska Native Tables from AFF to data.census.gov
(hopefully within the next year or so).

Behind the Scenes
So, lets navigate back to the ​main ACS page​ to unveil some other goodies about the
data tables that you just found on the new ​data.census.gov​ site. You can get there from
clicking on the source link below the main table of your choice - `Notes and
Methodology`. The work of data collection and the implementation of surveys is based
on people contacting people and asking questions. There are several things that can go
wrong in the process - data collection can also be affected by real world events. On the
left hand side, you can see several data quality measures for the ACS. You can find this
information for other Census products as well.
Let’s look at sample size. If you select “United States”, you can see in the footnotes that
some events have impacted the data collection, like the government shutdown in 2013
and a change in survey implementation in 2005. If you select “Puerto Rico” (a data tip
that always proves useful - always look at Puerto Rico), you can see that the Hurricane
Maria had an impact on data collection.

How does that affect the data? In some cases, the margins of error may be higher. In other
cases, some bias may be reflected in the final estimates, if the non-responding units differ from
the characteristics of the responding units. There is a whole portal that tells you how the data
were made and I suggest taking a look to see how reliable the data in your table really is.

Parting Thoughts
Searching and finding the table you want is just one piece of the puzzle. But it’s big obstacle to
overcome, so a well-designed, responsive, and flexible search site is a necessary tool to begin
your project. Just don’t forget to look behind the scenes and check assumptions after finding
what seems to be the “perfect table.”

