How to be a
FOIA sleuth
Investigative Reporters and Editors
Houston, Texas
June 13, 2019

David Cuillier
University of Arizona School of Journalism
Tucson, Arizona

David Cuillier, an associate professor at the University of Arizona School of
Journalism, is a former newspaper journalist and now teaches data journalism,
media law, and access to public records. He is president of the National Freedom of
Information Coalition, former president of the Society of Professional Journalists,
and co-author of The Art of Access: Strategies for Acquiring Public Records. Reach
him at cuillier@email.arizona, or on Twitter @DavidCuillier
Credits: These handouts are the culmination of 15 years of FOI training, starting
with the Society of Professional Journalists’ newsroom training program in 2004
with trainers Cuillier, Charles N. Davis and Joel Campbell. Some of this information
has been presented at a variety of conferences, including IRE, but this is the first
time it is all pulled together in one handout. Also, some materials below come from
“The Art of Access: Strategies for Acquiring Public Records,” by Cuillier and Charles
N. Davis (second edition out July 30, 2019).

How to become a FOIA sleuth
The stories
1. FOI laws in action

2

3. Classic 5 FOI stories

3

4. Records for your beat

4

5. Creating a document state of mind

10

6. Tapping into FOI research

12

Strategies for accessing records
1. Flow chart

21

2. Doing FOI when you are SOL

22

3. Planning your FOI order

23

Learn the law
Know the record
Order the record
4. Sample order letters

27

5. Overcoming denials

30

6. Eliminate copy fees

34

7. Psychology of FOI

35

8. Soft tactics and principled negotiation

36

9. Hard tactics

37

10. Top-10 meeting red flags

41

11. Data-driven news pegs

42

12. Data ethics checklist

43

13. Suing pro se

44

Resources
Access resources

53

Exercise your FOI muscles

58

1

FOI laws in action
Stories using public record laws
•

Hospital mortality rates: The Tampa Bay Times was a 2019 Pulitzer
finalist in investigative reporting for its investigation into increasing
mortality rates at Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital. They pieced
together the story using hospital billing data (also called discharge
data, administration data, or admissions data), filtering to heart
surgeries. Check out all winners/finalists at www.pulitzer.org.

•

Toxic classrooms: The Philadelphia Inquirer compiled 250,000 health
records to find toxic dangers throughout local schools, including mold,
lead dust, asbestos, and mouse feces. Database provided online for
parents to search their own children’s classrooms. Was a 2019 Pulitzer
finalist in local reporting.

•

Rural healthcare in shambles: Alabama Public Radio tapped into
various records, including census, scientific studies to show the
problems in rural healthcare, particularly in Alabama. The piece won a
2018 Murrow Award.

•

Drivers of death: In April 2002 KIRO-TV in Seattle reported that a
public transportation program for the disabled has covered up fatal
accidents. The reporters managed to obtain documents revealing the
flaws in the system -- incident reports, autopsy reports, wrongful
death lawsuits, trip reimbursement vouchers, etc. Another finding is
that many of the van drivers had extensive felony records.

•

Trail of dirty deeds: KSHB in Kansas City gleaned through property
records online in 2013 to find people who forged deed documents of
dead people to steal their homes, often without relatives even
knowing. The reporter simply compared signatures of public records to
uncover a problem that put any homeowner at risk. Legislation ensued
to protect homeowners. https://vimeo.com/82965018

•

Campus sexual assaults. In February 2010 the Center for Public
Integrity and a consortium of non-profit investigative reporting
organizations gleaned federal and local data to find that universities
routinely underreport sexual assault statistics and fail to adequately
pursue cases.

•

Government waste: The Los Angeles Times won the Pulitzer in 2011
for exposing corrupt officials in the small town of Bell, Calif., where the
city manager was making $1.5 million a year in total compensation.

2

FOI classic top 5 stories
Joel Campbell

1. Bus drivers. Get a list of bus drivers from your local school district
and compare the list to driving records our court records at your
county courthouse. While driver licenses are now off limits because of
federal law, many states still allow access to driving records including
DUI arrests. DUI convictions may also be available through local court
records. Or, get a list of all the sex offenders in your state and match
the list with school bus drivers. This kind of story can be done with just
about any list of public employees that are entrusted with children or
other vulnerable populations (e.g., daycare workers, nursing-home
workers). Often, public agencies don't do background checks on new
hires, even if they are supposed to by law.
2. Settlements. Check on claims and out-of-court settlements at City
Hall. Most claims and litigation with local governments never make it
to court. You should look at the kinds of settlements that your local
city is making with citizens. It’s usually surprising the kind of money
cities and towns spend each year on claims for accidents and injuries.
There are usually some pretty good stories buried in the information,
i.e. a woman fell through an open manhole or a kid was seriously
injured at a playground.
3. Budgets. Get a copy of the budget for the last five years. Whether it
is a school district, county or city budget, uncovering the largest
increases and decreases in budgets can lead to some great stories.
What’s tied to the 50 percent increase in the police budget or what
effect has a decrease in human service programs had in your area?
4. Crime. Get a copy of local crime statistics reports. Each year, police
agencies have to compile crime statistics. Take a tough look at
increases and decreases in crime. This record should lead to some
stories and trends, budgets and resources.
5.

Salaries. Ask for the salaries of all of the employees and officials in
the local county or city government. You might be surprised what you
find including high-paid political contributors and poorly qualified
people in top jobs. Stories about salaries and outside contracts of top
college coaches also make good stories.

3

Records for your beat
David Cuillier
Below are just some of the many different public records that are typically
available in most towns. Some are available online but many you have to
actively order.
Health and social services
•

Air quality. Air quality violators are fined by county and state air
quality departments.

•

Nursing home inspections. To identify unsafe nursing homes. Can
get comparisons nationally by Medicare at
http://www.medicare.gov/NHCompare/Include/DataSection/Questions
/SearchCriteria.asp?version=default&browser=IE%7C7%7CWinXP&lan
guage=English&defaultstatus=0&pagelist=Home&CookiesEnabledStatu
s=True.

•

Child-care complaints. To assess how well child-care (daycare) is
handled in your community and how well the government monitors
child care.

•

Coroners reports. Generally open to inspection to see the cause of
an unusual death.

•

Environmental. Toxic release inventory information provides what
bad stuff different companies and industry release in your community.
A good site to find that EPA information is at the Right to Know Web
site: http://www.rtk.net/. Government also monitors other
environmental hazards, such as leaking underground gas tanks.

•

Restaurant inspections. To make sure the public is protected from
unsanitary conditions at restaurants and other venues.

Education
•

•

Educational records. Anything related to the education of a student
is secret because of FERPA, except for directory information, including
name, year, home address, phone number, date of birth etc. (unless
the parent or adult student wishes the information to not be
disclosed). See
http://www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html. Also,
serious criminal incidents are public.
School test scores. To identify poorly performing schools. Check with
individual schools, school districts or the state board of education.

4

City Hall and state/fed
•

Abandoned buildings. Identify trends in deteriorating
neighborhoods.

•

Airport noise. Airports track noise complaints from neighbors when
jets fly low or are particularly noisy. Ask to see airport noise maps and
flight pattern maps.
Audits. To monitor problems in government agencies, particularly
financial woes. Look carefully to find any irregularities – often clouded
by vague terms and wishy-washy language. Ask to get more details.
Bridge inspections. To assess the safety of bridges in the
community. Inspection records are maintained by states and the
Federal Highway Administration
(http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/britab.htm - click on “Download NBI
ASCII files”).
Budgets. Detailed budgets are available before and after approval.
Can be helpful to see what departments are getting more money over
time and what areas are getting less funding. Get them from the
agency’s budget officer.
Calendars. To find out how top officials are spending their time. Look
at their calendars, or day schedules, to see who they are meeting with
and the extent of their workload. Should also be able to get travel
expenses. Order from the office you are interested in, such as the
mayor’s office if you want to see the mayor’s calendar.
Contracts. Allows you to find out who is benefiting from government
projects. Should include the amount agreed upon, the amount paid
(often more), who the money went to, etc. Contact an agency’s
business office.
Development. To identify development trends and potential building
that could impact the community or a neighborhood. Find out what
permits for development have been submitted and approved for an
area. Go to the city planning and development department to see
development plans.
E-mail. To monitor government function and make sure business that
should be conducted in public isn’t being handled secretly via e-mail.
Elections. To see who is funding candidates and campaigns. Federal
records are kept by the Federal Elections Commission.
Employees. To identify cronyism and find former employees. Order
employee names, titles and salaries. Employee home addresses and
home phone numbers, however, are generally not public.
Expense reports. To monitor government spending and see if
government employees are cheating the system. Check with the
business office of an agency. Can ask for credit-card logs as well.

•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•
•
•

5

•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•
•

Liquor licenses. To identify bars and restaurants that are nuisances
(have a lot of bar fights and problems for neighbors) and not following
liquor laws.
Licensing. The state monitors a variety of professionals, including
barbers, beauticians, accountants, appraisers, chiropractors, nurses,
Realtors, etc. See if a person is licensed or has had a license revoked.
Meeting minutes. To monitor city councils, school boards and other
government bodies. Meeting notices, agendas and minutes are almost
always public. Check with the clerk’s office at the respective agency.
Odor complaints. Most municipal sewage treatment plants track
complaints of their sewage stink, which enables people to identify
trends and know where not to buy a house.
Personnel records. Confirm whether someone is a public employee
and identify bad workers through disciplinary records. Not always
public in all states, so can be difficult to get, such as disciplinary
actions against teachers. Easier to get for high-ranking officials
because a greater public interest. Performance evaluations are public
in many states.
Pet licenses. To examine trends in pet ownership and dog bites.
Includes information about licensed animals (name, breed, last rabies
shot, etc.), as well as name of owner, address and phone number.
Property taxes. To assess whether everyone is paying their fair share
of property taxes and also to find who is buying what in the
community. Property tax records are public at county courthouses. You
can find out how much homes in your neighborhood are worth, what
they sold for, along with details, such as the homes’ square footage
and number of bedrooms.
Public records orders. To find what public records are being ordered
by businesses, citizens, government employees and journalists. Order
from the public records officer copies of the public records orders and
any log used to track orders.
Retention schedules. To find out what records an agency keeps and
when it purges them. Most public agencies have established retention
schedules to determine how long they will keep different records and
when they can get rid of them. Check with the individual agency to
find its retention schedule, usually held by a clerk or records officer.
Salaries. To find cronyism and disparity in pay. Names, titles and
salaries of public employees are almost always available. Also, get
overtime pay and actual pay (not just budgeted salary) to find janitors
who make more than the mayor. Also, a good way to find former
employees.
Street maintenance. Examine trends in bad streets and who gets
them fixed and who doesn’t. Check with your local street department.
Taxi inspections. To assess the safety of taxis check with the local
licensing agency.
6

•

•

Voter registration. To see whether people, particularly candidates,
have voted or lived in a community. Also to prevent voter fraud (can
check to see if dead people are voting). Voter registration records
include name, address, year of birth, party affiliation, and whether a
person voted in previous election (but not how they voted).
Zoning. To analyze growth planning and find who is benefiting by
development. Find out how land is zoned and what development is
possible. Also look at comprehensive plans, which map out the general

Cops and courts
•

•

•

•

•

Arrest reports. Verify the arrest of a specific person in connection
with a specific event. Available at local law enforcement offices,
usually from a public information officer or officer in charge. If the
case is still under investigation (someone’s still on the loose or they
haven’t forwarded the information to the prosecutor yet for potential
charges), then policy may keep some of the information secret if it
would harm the investigation.
Arrest warrants. To ensure fairness in the arrest of suspects and get
a lead on potential big busts. An arrest warrant is signed by a judge
authorizing the arrest of someone for probable cause. It usually allows
police to barge into a house and make an arrest when there is reason
to believe the person has committed a crime (drug house, homicide,
etc.). Often warrants have a lot of information because police are
trying to justify to a judge the need to arrest the person. These are
similar to search warrants, which also require justification and
approval by a judge. Warrants are usually made public once the
person is served (arrested or searched), or when it appears it won’t be
able to be served (the person skipped the country).
Autopsy reports. Confirm cause of death or circumstances of a
person’s death and evaluate the quality of medical examiners. Might
be closed in connection with pending criminal investigations or to
protect personal privacy.
Bankruptcy files. To identify trends in bankruptcies, spot fraud, and
find people with unfortunate financial pasts. Chapter 7 is a straight
bankruptcy and Chapter 11 is a reorganization that usually allows
them to stay in business. Businesses in bankruptcy lose a fair amount
of privacy as the files list assets, how they got into trouble and what
they intend to do to get back on their feet.
Civil lawsuits. To make sure civil cases are handled equitably and
disputes resolved fairly. When a person sues another person, the case
ends up in civil court. Examples of civil cases include malpractice, child
support, divorce, libel, paternity, property rights, restraining orders
and breach of contract. Superior Court handles big cases and
municipal courts (small-claims) handle the little things (like you see on
Judge Judy).
7

•

•

•
•

•

•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Claims. If someone feels a government agency owes them
compensation for damages (slipping on a sidewalk, hit by police car,
etc.), they often file a claim before filing lawsuit. Check with the risk
management officer or attorney for the agency.
Code enforcement. To examine trends and fairness in applying local
nuisance laws. Code enforcement records detail noise violations, illegal
businesses in residential zones, illegal dumping, huge signs, and other
problems.
Crime log. A barebones list of incidents, usually including address,
time/date, one-word description, and disposition. Also called a “police
blotter.”
Criminal records. To find trends in crime, monitor the criminal justice
system, and find backgrounds of individuals. Compilations of criminal
histories are closed in many other states, but you can get court
records from individual courthouses and piece together a history.
Court records. To find if someone has a criminal background or has
been sued in civil court. Also to monitor trends in a variety of criminal
justice issues, including crime, sentencing, racial profiling (speeding
tickets), and judge performance. In general, court records are public
unless they have been sealed by a judge for a specific reason.
Drug houses. Find location of homes that were once used as meth
labs or other clandestine drug labs. To identify trends in drug houses.
Can also see if any homes in your neighborhood had drug problems (or
a house you are thinking of buying). Provided by the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration.
Fire incident reports. To monitor fire departments and spot trends,
such as arson, dangerous homes, public buildings that are hazards,
etc. Check with the fire agency to examine incident reports.
Graffiti. Track decaying neighborhoods and hooliganism.
Jail records. The jail log is a list of people booked in the jail, including
name, time/date, and charge. More detailed information can be found
in the booking sheets. Also can get jail mugs and examine budgets,
jail population statistics, and overtime to monitor operations.
Lawyer discipline. To find lawyers who have been disciplined and
monitor the oversight of attorneys.
911 Logs. To spot trends in crime, medical calls and response times
by police officers and fire trucks. They typically list time/date, location,
call type and responding units.
Parking tickets. To identify parking scofflaws and trends and fairness
in ticketing (any special persons get their tickets waived?).
Probate. To make sure possessions are disbursed fairly and find
family members of the deceased. When someone dies and leaves
property or doesn’t have a will, it goes through probate – the
government has to figure out how to fairly divvy up the goods. Check
the courthouse.
8

•

•
•

•

Sex offenders. To find if sex offenders live close to vulnerable
populations. Note that a variety of studies have found registries to be
relatively inaccurate, so the person may or may not actually live where
the registry says the person lives.
Stolen vehicles. To identify trends in vehicle theft. Order stolen
vehicle data to analyze popular makes, models and locations of car
thieves.
Traffic accident reports. To find out dangerous intersections and
stretches of roads. You can analyze the federal Fatality Analysis
Reporting System data for every fatal accident in the nation going
back to 1975 (http://www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/Main/index.aspx).
Use of force. Look at how police use – or overuse – force during
arrests. Each time an officer uses a choke hold, gun, taser, police dog,
baton or other use of force a form is filled out.

Education
•

•
•
•
•

Corporate records. To spot connections between public companies
and identify key officers. The federal Securities and Exchange
Commission provides a wealth of information on public companies
online, including initial public offering files (Form S-1), quarterly
reports (Form 10-Q), annual reports (Form 10-K), and top officer
information (Form DEF 14A). Can search the clunky Web site
www.sec.gov or also search EDGAR (www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/srch-edgar).
Gas-pump inspections. To make sure gas stations aren’t cheating.
Incorporation records. To find out who owns a business. Look up
city business licenses at the finance department at City Hall. Find state
incorporation records at the Secretary of State’s Office.
Price-scanning inspections. To assess which stores might be ripping
off consumers. Find it at your state office of weights and measures.
Worker safety. To identify dangerous workplaces and trends in
workplace accidents. Look at the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration records at http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html.

Arts and culture
•

•

Census. Demographic data available down to the block group level
and over time can be used to analyze shifts in community
demographics, including in migration, income, race, education, gender,
and age. Challenging to burrow through the Census Web site
(www.census.gov), but it’s all there.
Nonprofit 990 forms. To make sure nonprofits are actually not out to
make a profit and just using 501c(3) status to avoid paying taxes. Also
can find a variety of information about nonprofits’ income, expenses
and officers through the 990 forms they file annually. To see 990
forms, go to www.guidestar.com. You have to register but most of the
site is free.
9

Creating a document state of mind
1. Follow the money. Ask for the detailed line-item budget, maybe as
an Excel file, that details all spending, not just total expenses and total
revenues. Look for other documents that might outline the details.
Where is that money going?
2. Map the activities. Now, map the agency to find out what it does.
Look on their websites and you’ll often find organizational charts that
can help jump-start this process. What sorts of documents might be
generated by the activities of this office? The mayor is awarding a
$100,000 grant to a local arts group. What questions does that raise in
your documents-driven mind? Look at blank forms that people fill out
to get a sense of what is kept.
3. Circle of light. If you are backgrounding a person, get a sheet of
paper or a white board and write the person’s name in the middle.
Around the name write down different roles the person has in life
(e.g., married person, business owner, driver, pet owner, property
owner, pilot). Then write down for each role the records available.
4. Look at records lists. Many public offices maintain an index of
records or retention schedule – a master list of documents routinely
filed. Also, ask for a log of previous public records orders. You’ll get a
sense for what kinds of records the agency keeps.
5. Train the agency. Get the agency used to you asking for records. Ask
for tame records, such as reports, expenses and contracts. Ask for emails of the mayor for the past week. Then work up from there. When
you find you really need those e-mail records they’ll be accustomed to
giving out that kind of information.
6. Blend in. Each week take a few hours to go to your agency and talk to
workers. Ask what they do, what they are working on, and what
records they keep.
7. FOI First on Fridays. Every Friday (or whatever day of the week
works best for you), submit a public records order. Track your orderss
in a notebook and follow up. Get in the habit of doing it.
8. Explain to the public. Get in the habit of explaining what records
your information is based on and how people can get them on their
own. Create a “Doc Box” for each story explaining the basics of the
record, what’s in it, and where to get it.

10

Backgrounding government
State and local agencies in most states are required to provide a records
retention schedule. Here are a few examples of how to background your
local government agencies to find out what documents they have that can
help you:
Go to the city and ask for the master index or retention schedule. Here’s a
sample list of records in San Francisco’s index:
Administration
Accident-Injury Reports
Administrative Files
Audit Reports
Budget Files
Check Payments
Conflict of Interest Form 700
Contracts & Grants
Discrimination and Harassment Complaints
Draft Contracts
Family Medical Leave Act Records
General Correspondences
Medical Information
Office Expenditure Documents
Payables (Invoices/ Vendors)
Payroll Reports/ Timecards & Related Documents
Personnel Files
Policies/Procedures
Purchase Orders (copy)
RFA, RFP, RFQ(s) & Records
Receipt/Deposits
Travel Request (copy)
Work Orders
Worker's Compensation Record
Just think for a minute about how many stories lie in this data!
Now that is thinking documents-first!

11

Tapping into FOI research
David Cuillier
Yes, academic research CAN be practical! On the following pages you will
find examples of research studies regarding freedom of information that
have useful applications for journalists. These are just a sampling of the
growing body of research accumulated in just the past 20 years.
Benefits to you
The studies below are just a small sample of the hundreds out there, and
can be used several ways:
•

Cite relevant studies in your request letters and appeal letters.

•

Use them to improve legislation in your state or in FOI lawsuits.

•

Contact the authors as sources when covering FOI issues.

•

Apply the practical techniques found through empirical research to
improve your odds at getting records when you need them.

Retrieving the papers
Some of the papers below you can get online for free (links provided). Some
you must retrieve through a publisher online. Here are some tips in
acquiring copies of the studies, often published in peer-review journals (and
therefore, ironically, difficult for the public to acquire):
1. Google the title and author. Often a link to the article comes up,
particularly if the author posted it on platforms that support open
access.
2. If the article is hosted by a journal that charges, consider paying the
fee to download it.
3. Avoid the charge by visiting a nearby university library or public library
to see if you can use their online databases to retrieve it for free
(and to look at further research!).
4. Google the author’s name and university to find an email, and then
directly request a free copy from the author as a PDF.
Tell us what you want studied
If you have ideas for future studies, that would help you do your job better,
let me know (cuillier@email.arizona.edu). Bridging the academic-practice
gap is essential if we are going to strengthen FOI and make the world
better!

12

FOI makes a difference
Studies to convince the public, sources and lawmakers that transparency
and records-based investigative reporting have concrete societal benefits!
•

Every $1 spent on doc reporting reaps $287 in societal benefits
Hamilton, J. (2016). Democracy’s Detectives: The Economics of
Investigative Journalism. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

•

FOI reduces corruption and improves financial management
Cucciniello, M., Porumbescu, G., and Grimmelikhuijsen, S. (2017). 25
years of transparency research: evidence and future directions. Public
Administration Review, 77(1), 32-44.

•

Records central to 90% of stories submitted to IRE contest
Lanosga, G. and Martin, J. (2017). Journalists, sources, and policy
outcomes: Insights from three-plus decades of investigative reporting
contest entries. Journalism, 19(12), 1676-1693.

•

Sex offender registries reduce relapse
Levenson, J. and Cotter, L. (2005). The effect of Megan’s Law on sex
offender reintegration. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice,
21(1), 49-66.

•

Transparency reduces drinking water health violations
Bennear, L. and Olmstead, S. (2008). The impacts of the “Right to
Know”: Information disclosure and the violation of drinking water
standards. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 56,
117-130.

•

Food safety records decreases consumer complaints
Almanza, B., Ismail, J., and Mills, J. (2002). The impact of publishing
foodservice inspection scores. Journal of Foodservice Business
Research, 5, 45-62.

•

Proactive release increases public confidence in Social Security
Cook, F., Jacobs, L., Kim, D. (2010). Trusting what you know:
information, knowledge and confidence in Social Security. Journal of
Politics, 72(2), 397-412.

•

Two-thirds of citizen record requests have a public good
Berliner, D., Bagozzi, B., and Palmer-Rubin, B. (2018). What
information do citizens want? Evidence from one million information
requests in Mexico. World Development, 109, 222-235.

•

Newspaper closures cause municipal bond spikes, raising taxes
Gao, P., Lee, C. and Murphy, D. (2018). Financing Dies in Darkness?
The Impact of Newspaper Closures on Public Finance.
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/WP44.pdf

13

Rating the states
Attempts to rate states’ transparency by looking at the laws, websites, and
asking experts. See how your state ranks.
•

Ranking the states’ compliance with FOI law
Cuillier, D. (2019). Bigger stick, better compliance: Testing strength
of public record statutes on agency transparency in the United States.
Presented at the Global Conference on Transparency Research, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, June 26, 2019. Available at bit.ly/FOIratings

•

State websites rated for proactive posting of financial records
Follow the Money (2018). U.S. Public Interest Research Group report
available at https://uspirgedfund.org/reports/usf/following-money2018

•

Journalists rate the states on their FOI laws and compliance
Center for Public Integrity (2015). How does your state rank for
integrity? Available at https://publicintegrity.org/accountability/howdoes-your-state-rank-for-integrity/

•

Brechner Center state FOI law ratings (ended in 2008)
Citizen Access Project (2008). Do you in the sunshine or the shade?
University of Florida Brechner Center for Freedom of Information.
Available through the Wayback Machine at
https://web.archive.org/web/20090402105406/http://www.citizenacce
ss.org/

•

Rating five legal provisions in state laws
Better Government Association and NFOIC (2007). States Failing FOI
Responsiveness, a report by Charles N. Davis and the National
Freedom of Information Coalition. Available at
https://www.nfoic.org/states-failing-foi-responsiveness

Request strategies
•

Formal letters 3 times more effective than informal requests
Worthy, B. John, P., & Vannoni, M. (2016). Transparency at the parish
pump: A field experiment to measure the effectiveness of freedom of
information requests in England. Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, 27(3), 485-500.

•

Legalistic letters faster and more productive than friendly
Cuillier, D. (2006). Honey v. vinegar: Testing compliance-gaining
theories in the context of freedom of information laws. Communication
Law and Policy, 15(3), 203-229.

14

•

Higher social status results in better response
Michener, G. & Rodrigues, K. (2015). Who wants to know? Assessing
discrimination in transparency and freedom of information regimes.
Presented at the 4th Global Conference on Transparency Studies,
Switzerland, June 4-6, 2015.

•

Requester with clout charged lower fees than average schmuck
Lagunes, P. & Pocasangre, O. (2017). Dynamic transparency: An audit
of Mexico’s Freedom of Information Act. American Development Bank
paper, IDB-WP-836.

•

Journalists get better response than average citizens
Darbishire, H. and Carson, T. (2006). Transparency and silence: a
survey of access to information laws and practices in 14 countries.
Open Society Justice Initiative. Available at
https://www.issuelab.org/resources/7736/7736.pdf

•

More specifics result in better compliance
Columbia Journalism Review textual analysis of 33,000 FOIA requests
https://www.cjr.org/analysis/foia-request-how-to-study.php

•

Custodians more helpful to those who are specific, sympathetic
Bush Kimball, M. (2003). Law enforcement records custodians’
decision-making behaviors in response to Florida’s public records law.
Communication Law and Policy, 8, 313-360.

•

Agencies more likely to respond if mention compliant agencies
ben-Aaron, J., Denny, M., Desmarals, B., & Wallach, H. (2017).
Transparency by conformity: A field experiment evaluating openness
in local governments. Public Administration Review, 77(1), 68-77.

•

Appeal letters cut loose records a third of the time
Bridis, T. (2018 March 12). U.S. sets new record for censoring,
withholding gov’t files. The Associated Press.
https://www.apnews.com/714791d91d7944e49a284a51fab65b85

•

Glomar responses creeping into state/local level (don’t let it!)
Wagner, A.Jay (2016). Controlling discourse, foreclosing recourse: The
creep of the Glomar response. Communication Law and Policy, 21(4),
539-567.

15

Context and justification
Remind the public and legislators why we have these laws, and why
transparency should be the default not a special right or extra benefit.
•

Congress intended records to be disseminated freely
Quinn, A. (2003). Keeping the citizenry informed: early congressional
printing and 21st century information policy. Government Information
Quarterly, 20, 281-293.

•

Copy fees recoup tiny percentage of costs – just .01 percent
Wagner, A.J. (2017). Essential or extravagant: Considering FOIA
budgets, costs and fees. Government Information Quarterly, 34(3),
388-395.

•

Many nations (not the U.S.) have declared FOI a human right
McDonagh, M. (2013). The right to information in international human
rights law. Human Rights Law Review, 31(1), 25-55. Available at
http://www.corteidh.or.cr/tablas/r30698.pdf

•

U.S. FOIA rated among weakest in the world (69th)
Global Right to Information Rating (2018). Access Info Europe and
Centre for Law and Democracy. Available at http://www.rtirating.org/country-data/ Also, see: Mendel, T. (2016). The fiftieth
anniversary of the Freedom of Information Act: How it measures up
against international standards and other laws. Communication Law
and Policy, 21(4), 465-491.

•

Not “media” issue; Only 2-14% requests submitted by journos
Kwoka, M. (2016). FOIA, Inc. Duke Law Journal, 65. Also, see: Silver,
D. (2016). The news media and the FOIA. Communication Law and
Policy, 21(4), pp. 493-514.

•

Corporate lobby carved out exemptions for own interests
Relly, J.E. and Schwalbe, C.B. (2016). How business lobby networks
shaped the U.S. Freedom of Information Act: An examination of 60
years of congressional testimony. Government Information Quarterly,
33(3), 404-416.

•

Transparency best when government leaders outline benefits
Williamson, V. and Eisen, N. (2016). The impact of open government:
Assessing the evidence. Center for Effective Public Management at
Brookings Institution.

•

FOI varies by community, regardless of law, based on culture
Grimmelikhuijsen, S., Porumbescu, G., Hong, B., and Im, I. (2013).
The effect of transparency on trust in government: A cross-national
comparative experiment. Public Administration Review, 73(4).

16

•

Communities with female mayors more transparent
Spac, P., Voda, P., and Zagrapan, J. (2018). Does the freedom of
information law increase transparency at the local level? Evidence from
a field experiment. Government Information Quarterly, 35, 408-417.

•

Larger cities better complyiance than small towns
Spac, P., Voda, P., and Zagrapan, J. (2018). Does the freedom of
information law increase transparency at the local level? Evidence from
a field experiment. Government Information Quarterly, 35, 408-417.

•

Communities with competing groups post more info proactively
Armstrong, C. (2008). Exploring a two-dimensional model of
community pluralism and its effects on the level of transparency in
community decision making. Journalism and Mass Communication
Quarterly, 85(4), pp. 807-822.

•

Agencies with online portals respond better than those without
Bizzo, E. and Michener, G. (2017). Forest governance without
transparency? Evaluating state efforts to reduce deforestation in the
Brazilian Amazon. Environmental Policy and Governance, 27, 560-574.

•

FOI laws can harm access, give officials reason to delay/deny
Camaj, L. (2015). Governments’ uses and misuses of freedom of
information laws in emerging European Democracies: FOI laws’ impact
on news agenda-building in Albania, Kosovo, and Montenegro.
Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, 93(4), pp. 923-945.

•

Some recommend scrapping FOI laws and starting over
Pozen, D. (2017). Freedom of information beyond the Freedom of
Information Act. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 165, pp.
1097-1158.

•

Centralization of info release through PIOs hampers news
Carlson, C., & Cuillier, D. (2017). Public information officers exert
increasing controls. Newspaper Research Journal, 38(2), 198-214.
See, also, https://www.spj.org/pios.asp#surveys

•

FOIA has so many problems many journalists don’t even use it
Bluemink, E. & Brush, M. (2005). A flawed tool: Environmental
reporters’ experience with the Freedom of Information Act. Society of
Environmental Journalists report, available at
http://www.sej.org/foia/SEJ_FOIA_Report2005.pdf

•

Half of reporters have never requested records, 17% don’t care
Cuillier, D. (2011 May). Pressed for time: U.S. journalists’ use of public
records during economic crisis. Global Conference on Transparency
Research, Newark, NJ.

17

•

Agencies more likely to deny minorities
Darbishire, H. and Carson, T. (2006). Transparency and silence: a
survey of access to information laws and practices in 14 countries.
Open Society Justice Initiative. Available at
https://www.issuelab.org/resources/7736/7736.pdf

•

Gov info crackdowns backfire, records pop up elsewhere
Hobbs, W. and Roberts, M. (2018). How sudden censorship can
increase access to information. American Political Science Review,
112(3), pp. 621-636.

•

FOIA lawsuits more than double in past 10 years
Mehta, C. (2018). FOIA lawsuits reach record highs in FY 2018.
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, Nov. 12, 2019.
http://foiaproject.org/2018/11/12/annual-report-foia-lawsuits-reachrecord-highs-in-fy-2018/

Record album
A variety of studies compare how the states handle various exemptions and
records. Use these to leverage better legislation or to fight against bad
proposals.
• Penalties vary widely in states, are weak and rarely enforced
Stewart, D. (2010). Let the sunshine in, or else: An examination of the
“teeth” of state and federal open meetings and open records laws.
Communication Law and Policy, 15, 265-310. See, also: Marzen, C.
(2017). Public record denials. New York University Journal of Law and
Liberty, 11, 966-1027.
• State copy fee provisions vary widely and arbitrarily used
Lee, T. (2016). Public records fees hidden in the law: A study of
conflicting judicial approaches to the determination of the scope of
imposable public records fees. Communication Law and Policy, 21(2),
pp. 251-279.
• How states handle access to economic development records
Edmondson, A. & Davis, C.N. (2011). Prisoners of private industry:
Economic development and state sunshine laws. Communication Law
and Policy, 16, 317-348.
• Records sent on officials’ personal electronic devices, by state
Senat, J. (2014). Whose business is it: Is public business conducted on
officials’ personal electronic devices subject to state open records
laws? Communication Law and Policy, 19, 293-326.

18

• Email records, by state
Youm, K.H. (2014). Access to email and the right of privacy in the
workplace. In Transparency 2.0: Digital Data and Privacy in a Wired
World, Davis C.N. & Cuillier, D. (eds). 97-114.
• Privatization of records through trade secrets, by state
Stewart, D. and Sanders, A.K. (2019). Countering the privatization of
public records: How trade secrets, purported competitive harm and
third-party interventions keep government business in the dark.
Presented at the National Freedom of Information Coalition summit,
April 12, 2019, Dallas, Texas.
• Private universities’ campus police records, by state
Moore, J. (2019). Out from the curtains of secrecy: Private university
police and state open records laws. Presented at the National Freedom
of Information Coalition summit, April 12, 2019, Dallas, Texas.
• SLAPP suits around the nation in a FOI context
File, P.C. and Wigren, L. (2019). SLAPP-ing back: Are government
lawsuits against records requesters strategic lawsuits against public
participation? National Freedom of Information Coalition summit, April
12, 2019, Dallas, Texas.
• Home addresses exempted in public record laws, by state
Gil, J.M. (2019). Privacy vs. transparency: Tracing home address
exemptions in state FOI laws. Presented at the National Freedom of
Information Coalition summit, April 12, 2019, Dallas, Texas.
• Access to legislative records around the nation, by state
Mulvey, R. and Valvo, J. ‘Opening the state house doors’: Examining
trends in public access to legislative records. Presented at the National
Freedom of Information Coalition, April 12, 2019, Dallas, Texas.
• Access to public university foundation records in the nation
Capeloto, A. (2015). A case for placing public-university foundations
under the existing oversight regime of freedom of information laws.
Communication Law and Policy, 20, 311-342. Reinardy, S. and Davis,
C.N. (2005). A real home field advantage: Access to public university
foundation records. Journal of Law and Education, 34(3), 389-420.
• How various states set up records ombudsman programs
Stewart, D.R. (2009). Managing conflict over access: A typology of
sunshine law dispute resolution systems. Journal of Media Law and
Ethics, 1(1/2), 49-82. Also: Stewart, D.R. (2013). Evaluating public
access ombuds programs: An analysis of the experiences of Virginia,
Iowa and Arizona in creating and implementing ombuds offices to
handle disputes arising under open government laws. Journal of
Dispute Resolution, 2012(2). Available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2440820
19

Public attitudes
Understand how the public views records and your/their right to access
them.
• Older, affluent, educated tend to support FOI more than others
Cuillier, D., & Piotrowski, S. J. (2009). Internet information seeking
and its relation to support for access to government records.
Government Information Quarterly, 26(3), 441-449.
• Liberal, skeptical and cynical more supportive of FOI
Cuillier, D., & Pinkleton, B. (2011). Suspicion and secrecy: Political
attitudes and their relationship to support for freedom of information.
Communication Law and Policy,16(3), 227-254.
• Those engaged in civic affairs more supportive of FOI
Cuillier, D. (2008). Access attitudes: A social learning approach to
examining community engagement and support for press access to
government records. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly,
85(3), 549-576.
• Heavy users of Internet for info-seeking supportive of FOI
Cuillier, D., & Piotrowski, S. J. (2009). Internet information seeking
and its relation to support for access to government records.
Government Information Quarterly, 26(3), 441-449.
• Those fearful of privacy invasion less supportive of FOI
Cuillier, D. (2004). Public support for press access declines as personal
privacy concerns increase. Newspaper Research Journal, 25(4), 95103.
• During times of mortal strife, death thoughts cause polarization
Cuillier, D., Duell, B., & Joireman, J. (2009). FOI friction: The thought
of death, national security values, and polarization of attitudes toward
freedom of information. Open Government, 5(1).
• Support varies by type of record
Cuillier, D. (2008). Access attitudes: A social learning approach to
examining community engagement and support for press access to
government records. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly,
85(3), 549-576.
• Focus on practical benefits to root out corruption
Rosenberg, L. (2018). Despite skepticism, voters believe government
accountability is possible. Open the Government. Available at
https://www.openthegovernment.org/2018/05/30/despite-skepticismvoters-believe-government-accountability-is-possible/

20

Access flowchart
Do your homework
•
•

Find exact record name, agency, person who has it
Review laws and relevant exemptions, if any

Access
denied, all
or in part

Ask
verbally –
nicely!

Told to submit
written order.
Submit letter

Access
denied, all
or in part

Get legal
rationale in
writing from
agency.
Verify validity
of exemption
with expert

Invalid
reason

Access
approved!

Access
approved!

Access
approved,
but with
outrageous
copy fees

No response,
blown off, or
stonewalled

Exemption
valid: Ask for
discretionary
disclosure or
seek record in
other ways

Challenge the decision:
• Apply negotiations and human strategies
• Formally appeal; consult experts and records ombudsman
• Go up the chain to elected leaders
• Enlist other organizations to apply pressure (e.g., SPJ)
• Report it; quote experts and focus on how it affects people
• Sue

21

Huzzah!
You get the
records!

Doing FOI when you’re SOL
1. Surprise yourself. Look at public records as birthday presents.
Because turnaround on orders can take days, weeks or months, (and
sometimes years), submit orders for documents that could yield a
good follow-up story or project. Then when you get a box in the mail
three months later it will be like opening a present. Squeeze those
record-based projects around the daily work.
2. Minimum story. When you submit a public records order, always
have a “minimum” story in mind – something you might be able to
produce fast, or a launching pad for a project. No use fishing for
stories with random records orders. That can waste time.
3. Keep order forms handy. Carry order forms and a copy of your state
open records law in your bag. Fill out orders on the spot if you are at a
city council meeting or at the police station.
4. Tracking system. Develop a good system for tracking orders. It can
be as simple as a binder with a sheet of paper for each order. Some
reporters use Excel. Every time something new happens with the order
(response from agency, your response back, etc.), note the date, who
you talked to, and what was said. Always agree to changes in your
order in writing, such as through e-mail exchanges.
5. Team up. Find someone else you can work with and team up.
Sometimes splitting the work can make things happen. Use Google
Documents or other similar programs to share your work and update
notes.
6. Build credibility. If you complete some record-based projects then
your boss is more likely to cut you more time to take on bigger
projects.
7. Get inspired. During lunch, visit FOI websites (see Access Resources
at end of handouts) to see the great work other journalists are doing
with documents. See the challenges they face. Even though it seems
like your viewers and sources might not seem to care about access,
know that you aren’t alone. There are others out there like you.

22

Planning your FOI order
Charles Davis and David Cuillier

Learn the law
Public records laws require government agencies to provide anyone
the right to look at a record (or pay for a copy) that is held by a government
agency subject to the law.
You can become fairly knowledgeable by reading a summary of the
state public records law provided by the Reporters Committee for Freedom
of the Press at: www.rcfp.org/ogg. See the resources listed at the end of
these handouts for guides in your state.
Here are some basics of access law:
•

No law requires an official to talk to you, but records laws require
agencies to let you see documents or data.

•

“Record” generally includes any format of recorded material, including
paper, audio tapes, video, data, e-mail, and even the electronically
embedded properties information in a Word file. Be creative.

•

Federal executive agencies (e.g., FBI, but not the Supreme Court or
Congress) are subject to the federal Freedom of Information Act. State
executive agencies, cities, school districts and other local public
agencies are subject state public records law. Be sure to know the
name of your state law, and don’t ask for a record from your local
school district based on federal FOIA.

•

Other laws may apply, such as the Family and Educational Rights and
Privacy Act for protecting educational records or the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act for medical records.

•

Some records may be kept secret if there is a law that says the record
may be kept secret, usually to protect national security, privacy
invasion, etc.

•

Some laws and agencies require a written order.

•

Agencies are required by law to respond within a certain amount of
time. They may provide the records, deny them in whole or in part
(legal reason in writing), or say they need more time.

•

Most laws are discretionary, which means an agency can give out the
information even if an exemption allows them to keep it secret.

23

•

Denials may be appealed to the agency. A person can also sue, in
some states recouping his or her legal fees by substantially prevailing
in court.

•

When in doubt, ask for the record. It is up to the agency to prove it is
secret, not for you to prove it is public.

Know the record
Identify exactly what you want to the best of your ability. Here are
some tips for finding the existence of records:
•

Check the agency’s website and see if the record is provided online. Or
perhaps information is provided online about the specific record.

•

Visit or call the agency and talk to a clerk or person who would know
what records are kept that would have the information you need.

•

Look for original blank forms that the agency keeps to know what
kinds of information is kept and how it is kept.

•

Look at an agency’s retention schedules or records indexes to find
what kinds of records are kept.

•

Ask to see the log of public records orders to see what other people
have ordered.

Order the record
•

Avoid fishing. Try to limit your order to what you really want. If you
simply ask for "all files relating to" a particular subject, you may give
the agency an excuse to delay its response, and you risk needlessly
running up search and copying costs. Do your homework. Go talk to
the agency first.

•

Get specific. Cite relevant newspaper clips, articles,
congressional reports, etc. If the records have already been
released, let the agency know the date, release number, and
name of the original orderer. If you are asking for a database,
talk with the techies ahead of time to know exactly what data
you are ordering and in what format. Tour the agency office and
ask about what they are working on and specific documents they
maintain.

•

Ask verbally. Ask for the record verbally in person first, if possible.

•

Be polite but persistent. The people on the other side of the counter
don’t come to work with horns and cloven hooves. They are people
too, and they are more likely to get you what you want faster if you
are nice about it, especially at the beginning.

•

Prioritize. Let the agency know if you'd like to receive
information in a particular order. Materials could be reviewed
24

and released to you in chronological or geographical order - or
you may simply not want to wait for all the records to be
reviewed before any are released.
•

Submit a written order. If you anticipate balking, bluffing, or
being passed around or put off, simply submit a public records
order letter, which starts the clock ticking and requires them to
act and stop passing you around or delaying. On the following
pages see a sample state public records order letter generated
from online order letter generators.

•

Choose your tone. Note the last paragraph of the order letter
that threatens litigation. Threaten to sue only if you are prepared
to do so and if they’ve indicated they will not cooperate. Also,
consider whether the wording may create defensiveness or
hostile undermining of your order (e.g., delays). Sometimes it’s
better to attract flies with honey than vinegar. But at other
times, coming in strongly and quoting the law can demonstrate
you are serious and know what you are talking about (research
indicates the threatening letter gets more agencies to respond).

•

Decide on your own transparency. Legally, you don’t have to
say who you are or why you want the documents. As a practical
matter, you’ll probably have to tell them your name and provide
a phone number so they can contact you. Also, some states have
different standards for commercial users, so you might have to
sign a statement saying you aren’t a commercial user (they don’t
consider journalists as commercial users). If you don’t care if the
agency knows why you want the information, feel free to tell
them. It’s likely to speed the process and they might offer other
information that you didn’t order. But if that would jeopardize
your investigation, then don’t tell them. If they ask, “Why do you
want that information? Are you going to air something
negative?” Just tell them, “I don’t know what I’m going to
produce until I gather all the facts,” which is true.

•

Go to the top. Sometimes going straight to the agency’s
lawyers or top officials speeds things up. Clerks sometimes deny
orders or stall as they try to make sure they don’t release
something that will get them in trouble. Once the agency
attorneys look at it and see it should be released, it often is.

•

Keep records of records. Keep track of every step of your
different orders. Keep dates, contact names, phone numbers and
try to correspond by email so you can have written records of
what was said to whom. Some orders can last years, so keeping
track of details can help.
25

•

Follow through. After you submit an order, always follow it
through to the end, especially if they provide the records, even if
months after you need it. Also, if denied initially don’t skulk
away cowed. If you have a legal right to the information keep at
it. How you treat denials will affect how agencies treat requests
in the future. Educate officials and get them in the habit of
providing information to you and the public. It’s part of their job.

26

Sample order letter: Friendly version

June 13, 2019
Mayor David A. Condon
City of Spokane
Spokane, WA 99201

RE: Public records order

Dear Mayor Condon,
I know you are busy, but I want to thank you in advance for helping me gather some
public records regarding email correspondence. I am writing to order a copy of all work-related
emails sent or received by you during the past three months, either on work-provided accounts or
other accounts (e.g., Yahoo, gmail) where you might conduct city business.
I would be happy to pay copying and postage fees and help in any way I can, but if the
cost is more than $5, please contact me and let me know. If the files are available electronically
and would be more convenient to copy and email, then that would great too.
I would very much appreciate a response by the end of the month, and if there is
information that I am not entitled to, please let me know. I understand that sometimes some
information doesn’t warrant disclosure for statutory reasons, and might need to be blotted out
while releasing the public part.
If there is anything I can do to help with the order, please do not hesitate to let me know
(email is the fastest way to reach me).
Thanks again for your help!

Sincerely,

David Cuillier
1212 Main St.
Spokane, WA 99201
517-555-1111
cuillier@email.com

27

Sample order letter: Neutral version

June 13, 2019
Mayor David A. Condon
City of Spokane
Spokane, WA 99201

RE: Public records order

Dear Mayor Condon,
Pursuant to the state open records act, I order access to and copies of all work-related emails sent
or received by you during the past three months, either on work-provided accounts or other
accounts (e.g., Yahoo, gmail) where you might conduct city business.
I agree to pay reasonable duplication fees for the processing of this order.
If my order is denied in whole or part, I ask that you justify all deletions by reference to specific
exemptions of the act.
Thank you for your assistance.

Sincerely,

David Cuillier
1212 Main St.
Spokane, WA 99201
517-555-1111
cuillier@email.com

28

Sample order letter: Legalistic threatening version
This letter is based on the Student Press Law Center letter available at www.splc.org/foiletter.asp. You
might remove the threatening paragraph toward the end.

June 13, 2019
Mayor David A. Condon
City of Spokane
Spokane, WA 99201

RE: Public records order

Mayor Condon,
Pursuant to the state open records law Wash. Rev. Code Secs. 42.56.001 to 42.56.904, I
write to order access to and a copy of all your emails for the past month regarding public
business from all email accounts, public or private carriers. If your agency does not maintain
these public records, please let me know who does and include the proper custodian's name and
address.
I agree to pay any reasonable copying and postage fees of not more than $5. If the cost
would be greater than this amount, please notify me. Please provide a receipt indicating the
charges for each document.
As provided by the open records law, I will expect your response within five (5) business
days. See Wash. Rev. Code Sec. 42.56.520.
If you choose to deny this order, please provide a written explanation for the denial
including a reference to the specific statutory exemption(s) upon which you rely. Also, please
provide all segregable portions of otherwise exempt material.
I would note that violation of the open records law can result in a fine — payable to me
— of up to $100 for each day that I am denied access. Litigation costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, may also be awarded. See Wash. Rev. Code Sec. 42.56.550(4).
Thank you for your assistance.

Sincerely,

David Cuillier
1212 Main St.
Spokane, WA 99201
517-555-1111
cuillier@email.com
29

How to handle denials
Charles Davis and David Cuillier

IF THE AGENCY SAYS…
"YOUR DESCRIPTION OF THE RECORD IS INADEQUATE"
This means you probably did not give enough specific identifying
information. Give the agency the benefit of the doubt and
rewrite your order. You can try to call or make an appointment
with the official processing your order to get more help.
"THE RECORD DOES NOT EXIST"
If you are reasonably certain the records you've ordered do
exist, and if your order letter was clear and informative, you
should try to do more research. Are there news reports,
congressional hearings or court records that describe the
information you want more clearly?
Rewrite your order, giving the agency more guidelines and clues
for where they might find it. Try to be as patient and
understanding as you can; some agencies are short staffed or
have disorganized data systems.
"SOME OF THE INFORMATION IS EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE,
SO WE WON’T GIVE YOU ANY OF IT"
The agency can't withhold an entire document or file because
some portion(s) of it is exempt from disclosure. The agency
must release any non-exempt material that can be reasonably
extracted from the exempt portion(s).
"WE CAN’T GIVE IT TO YOU BECAUSE AN EXEMPTION SAYS WE
HAVE TO KEEP IT SECRET"
FOIA exemptions are generally discretionary, not mandatory –
an agency is not required to withhold all information. Agency
officials can choose to waive the exemptions and release the
material, unless another statute specifically restricts that
disclosure. One exception is FERPA, but note that FERPA doesn’t
cover everything and they can release the records if identifying
information of a student is blotted out.

30

"OUR PROPRIETARY SOFTWARE DOESN’T ALLOW US TO COPY
DATA"
I don’t know of any software that can’t copy or export data.
Maybe it exists, but it must be rare. Usually the person saying
that is unfamiliar with the software and needs to confer with the
agency computer technicians. If, after talking to their techies,
they still stick to that story, find out the software maker and call
them up. No doubt the company will want everyone to know how
useful and versatile the software is and explain how to copy the
data.
"COPYING THE DATA WITH FIELDS REDACTED WOULD CREATE
A NEW RECORD, AND WE ARE NOT REQUIRED BY LAW TO DO
THAT"
It is true that most laws do not require government agencies to
create new records, only let you see or copy existing records.
But you aren’t asking for a new record – just a copy of their
existing records with some information redacted. It’s no different
from getting a copy of a paper file with some information (fields)
redacted with a black pen. Just because they blot out a name on
a piece of paper doesn’t mean it’s a new record. Same theory
applies to data. Copying data with some fields redacted, or even
combining fields from different databases, is not creating a new
record. It’s copying existing data.
"OK, OK. HERE IS YOUR PILE OF RECORDS. THAT WILL BE $1
MILLION, PLEASE."
Make them justify the expenses with a line-by-line explanation.
You might be able to narrow your order to get fewer documents
that would still serve your purposes. Arm yourself with what
other agencies charge for copies, including for computer
programming time. If many other agencies charge nothing or
very little, then make that known, including by writing a story
about it.
Look at the agency’s FOI logs to find out if others have been
receiving the same records. Ask for an extra copy. Ask for a
backup copy of their data if they make backups. Get an outside
expert to scrutinize their time estimates. The estimates are
usually inflated and unreasonable. See the handout on Lowering
Copy Fees for more tips on reducing copy costs.

31

"WE ONLY PROVIDE THIS INFORMATION TO RESEARCHERS.
YOU CAN HAVE IT IF YOU SIGN THIS CONTRACT WITH US."
Some agencies give information to researchers provided they
sign a contract with use restrictions, such as prohibiting
identification of individuals in the records. Few reporters are
willing to sign such agreements. The problem is you might want
to use the information for something else later and won’t be able
to. Also, fundamentally it designates journalists as above
average citizens with special access, and it creates a new
category of “public information.” Either it’s public or not. Some
journalists advise only considering such agreements when the
information is clearly not public but the agency is willing to
release it for your story.
"WE DON’T KNOW WHY YOU WANT IT OR HOW YOU MIGHT USE
IT. YOU MIGHT USE IT IN A WAY WE DON’T LIKE.”
Tough noogies. In most states a records order cannot be denied
based on who the orderer is or how the information will be used
(except in the case of commercial mailing lists in some states). If
they ask why you want the information you can tell them: “I
wouldn’t want to determine the story before I have all my facts.
I’m just doing my job at gathering information.” If you order
records routinely from an agency (weekly), then it will be no big
deal and they are less likely to question you.
"WE JUST DON’T WANT TO GIVE IT TO YOU"
The agency must explain its reasons, usually in writing, for
determining that an exemption applies to any particular
information.
•

You have the right to contest any exemption claim.

•

The exemptions must be narrowly applied, since the FOIA
was created to maximize public access to agency records

•

You can file an administrative appeal to a higher agency
official. And if this fails, you can file a lawsuit. The federal
court must conduct a full judicial review of the agency's
claims and it is up to the agency to justify its denial of
your order.

•

Even if the agency releases substantial portions of the
material you've ordered, you can appeal the decision to
"sanitize" the rest. You can also order a detailed
justification for each deletion.
32

•

You can ask the state public records ombudsman to step in
and try to mediate. The ombudsman has the authority to
look at records behind closed doors to see if the agency is
following the law (although the ombudsman has no
enforcement authority).

•

While you are haggling with the agency, try to get the
information from another agency. Some records are kept
by multiple agencies (for example, boating accident data
kept by state agencies and the Coast Guard).

•

Use principled negotiation and hard tactics, as detailed on
the following pages.

33

Eliminate copy fees
David Cuillier
Here are some tips for lowering or eliminating unreasonable fees:
1. Don’t ask for copies. Look at the documents for free if you can.
2. Narrow the order to just the few pages that you really need.
3. Ask for a fee waiver using the information for the public good (federal
FOIA also provides waivers for journalists).
4. Take photos, use a portable scanner, or even a photocopy machine.
5. Ask for electronic files on CD or e-mailed for free.
6. Ask the agency for an itemized list of expenses to justify the costs.
Here is what I consider reasonable: Add paper (.7 cents per page
based on a box of paper from Office Depot), machine depreciation (.2
cents per page based on a Xerox WorkCentre 5225 that costs $4,299
and produces 75,000 copies a month), and toner (.6 cents per page),
and you get 1.5 cents per page. Call it an even 2 cents per page.
7. Question high staff search fees – $100 per hour is equivalent to paying
someone $208,000 a year to make copies.
8. Order a copy of the contract the agency has with a copy company. My
employer pays a company less than a penny (.9 cents) per page to
provide the machine, service it and refill the toner.
9. Survey local agencies to compare costs and expose the unreasonable.
10.
Survey citizens to find out what they consider reasonable. Most
people will say 10 or 15 cents per page copy.
11.
If the unreasonable charge is for computer programming, call
the company that makes the software and ask them if copying data
should be time consuming. They often say it takes a few minutes.
12.
Publicize the unreasonable copy fees. Find out if an agency
provides free copies to lawyers or commercial orderers but
overcharges citizens. Contact elected officials. Cover it.
13.
Team with other orderers to share the bill. Order the order logs
to see who else gets records frequently from the agency.
14.

Ask an ombudsman or attorney general to talk to the agency.

15.

Sue or lobby for laws specifying reasonable fees.

34

Psychology of FOI: Social Exchange Theory
David Cuillier
Social Exchange Theory (Peter M. Blau, 1964), is often applied in survey
research for mail and phone surveys, as well as other purposes in
understanding how people decide in their minds whether to engage with
another person. People will respond to you positively if they are motivated to
do so by three factors they consider without even thinking about it:
1.

2.

3.

Increase rewards
•

Show respect in a positive way

•

Say “thank you”

•

Provide tangible rewards (information might be useful for
their own work, or to help inter-agency data transfer)

•

Say others are doing it (peer pressure; social validation)

Decrease costs
•

Avoid subordinating language. Don’t say they need to talk
to you or answer questions. Be subordinate (“Can I ask
you a favor?”)

•

Avoid embarrassing them

•

Make it appear short and easy (set up record release
schedule)

•

Make it easier to say “yes” than “no”

Build trust
•

Get to know the record custodians.

•

Backed by authority (“your boss said I could talk to you”)

35

Soft tactics and principled negotiation
David Cuillier
Below are tips for getting sources to comply with orders, based on the
theories and application of “principled negotiation.” These techniques are
advocated by such experts as William Ury, co-founder of the Harvard’s
Program on Negotiation and author of “Getting to Yes.” I suggest reporters
always approach their sources in this frame of mind. With enough practice
you’ll get a lot of agencies to comply without threats of litigation.
Argue interests, not positions
Argue for your interest (I wish to analyze ambulance response times to
find trouble spots), not positions (I want your database). If the agency
understands why you want the information they are more likely to be
cooperative. Of course, you are not obligated by law to explain that and you
might not want to tip them off. But in reality they can figure it out most of
the time so being up front is a good option. Then, they can argue their
interest (we don’t want to invade anyone’s privacy). You can work out a
solution when you understand interests. Positions cause both sides to dig in.
Allow face saving
If you box an official into a corner early on they might feel like they
have to stick to their guns no matter the cost, especially if they denied the
information in front of their superiors and subordinates. Talking with the
person informally first, before they commit to an action, gives the person
more leeway to agree to your order. Or, suggest the legal department
examine the issue and let them make the decision – that will relieve the
official of the shame of changing his or her mind (e.g., “sorry folks, I had to
say yes because the attorneys said I had to release it.”)
Use people skills
Allow officials to vent. Listen first, then repeat what you heard
(whether you agree with it or not). Use “I” statements, not “You”
statements. Talk to people informally side-by-side, not facing across a
counter, creating psychological “opposition.”
Apply negotiation jujitsu
Bend like the willow, don’t break like the oak. Invite criticism and
advice for how to analyze the information. If they say the record is a waste
of time then ask what record would be a better use of time. Use questions
instead of statements. Use silence after an unreasonable attack. Invent
different options and alternatives, and end conversations with a compliment.

36

Hard tactics
David Cuillier
Sometimes you apply the techniques of principled negotiation but an agency
just doesn’t want to play ball, or purposely chooses not to play fair. Then it’s
open season and time to apply hard tactics. Below are tips for getting
sources to comply with orders, based on the six elements of persuasion by
Robert Cialdini of Arizona State University. Also, other strategies are
provided for pressuring an agency to release records. Do not use these
techniques for evil. Only good.
1. Reciprocation
•

Rejection-then-retreat: Ask for a lot, then cut it in half. “Can I
see all your expenses in database format for the past 20 years? OK,
how about starting with just the expense reports for the past five
years?” The clerk will appreciate you for simplifying the order and
may reciprocate by working faster and being more helpful. Order
information that you can give up later, such as social security
numbers. If it lands in court a judge might want you to concede
something anyway. When it appears you are giving them something
then they are more likely to reciprocate.

•

Get-to-know-you stories: Don’t ignore newsworthy positive
stories. Occasionally government actually does something right. It’s
often useful to do a harmless newsworthy project first to get to
know people and build trust (e.g., analyze pet license data for a
feature on most popular dog breeds/names), then work from there.
When you do something positive to someone, psychologically they
feel obligated to reciprocate and help you out even more. But don’t
make up stories or get buddy-buddy. The public comes first.

•

Be a helper: Check in frequently after the order is filed and offer to
help to make their jobs easier. Offer to help copy data or provide
CDs for copying. They might not take you up on it but they might
appreciate the gesture.

2. Commitment and Consistency
•

Everyone happy: Ask, “How are you doing today?” When the
person says fine, then he or she is more likely to help you. People
don’t want to appear stingy when they are fine and you are not.

•

Commitment: Once commitment is made, people try to stick to it.
Get commitment verbally: “Do we have an agreement?”

37

•

Ratcheting (low-balling): Get a commitment for something
small, then it opens the door for getting a “yes” on something
bigger. This is the opposite of the reciprocation techniques. “How
about if I could see a copy of what a police report looks like. OK, do
you have what a case file would look like? What does it look like in
your computer system? Any chance I could just get an electronic
copy of your reports in Excel for the past year?”

3. Social Proof
•

Peer pressure: We follow what we see everyone else doing (e.g.,
canned laughter). This is most effective when people are uncertain
and when the reporter is similar to the person. “Boy, all the other
towns in the county provide this information. I wonder why it isn’t
open here?”

•

Patriotism: Focus on the importance of what they have to offer to
the community. That it’s their duty as Americans to keep
government open and transparent, and the community will
appreciate it.

4. Liking
•

Looks: As much as we hate to admit, people often make decisions
based on how a orderer looks. Dressing well helps; looking shady
usually raises suspicions and increases denials.

•

Similarity: Dress like your sources. Act like your sources. Talk
about similar interests.

•

Compliments that are sincere help.

•

Association: Disassociate yourself with negative media and people
who use information irresponsibly (spammers, identity thieves). Go
to lunch with people for a positive association with you and food.

5. Authority
•

Bigger gets better responses. Journalists from bigger media
have more “authority” and tend to get calls returned faster. If you
work for a smaller organization, consider teaming up with reporters
from other organizations. Cooperative orders can increase pressure
for release and serve everyone’s interests.

•

Titles have authority. Have the order letter co-signed by the
news director or, depending on the importance of the information,
the owner. Or have the organization’s attorney send it.

•

Government allies. Get people in government on your side to
back you up. Get to know the state attorney general, your state
records ombudsman, or others who might be respected in
government.
38

•

Shallow but effective. Symbols of authority are effective: titles,
clothing, automobiles. Even height conveys authority.

•

Cite the law. The law is authoritative, particularly if it has
penalties for noncompliance. Include the citations in your orders
and e-mails when you want to exert authority.

6. Scarcity
•

For a limited time only. What you are offering is limited. “I don’t
have time to wait until next week for you to check with the
attorneys on this. My deadline is in six hours. Either I get the
information or I’m going to have to produce a story for tomorrow
morning’s paper explaining that your agency is withholding it. I
would hate for you all to look like you are hiding something and are
bad officials when I know you aren’t. The public will appreciate it.”

7. Pound lawbreakers into submission
Sometimes you run across a few bad apples in public service (just
like there are some bad apples in journalism) who deliberately act
in bad faith and deny valid public records orders to hide corruption
or embarrassing facts. Remind them who’s boss (the public):
•

Go to the top. Go to the elected officials and ask them why the
agency is hiding information. Sometimes elected officials, especially
during an election year, would rather avoid a public battle with
journalists.

•

Cover it. Some journalists say it’s inside baseball but that’s hooey.
When an agency says “no” to you, they aren’t saying “no” to you.
They are saying “no” to the thousands or millions of people in your
community. Tell those people. Quote access experts and show why
the agency is breaking the law. You would produce a story if the
agency broke other laws, right?

•

Wave the flag. Use patriotism as leverage. Communists and Nazis
favor secrecy, not god-fearing Americans. Are your officials pinkos
and hate America, or are they good citizens?

•

Expose the deviant. Get the same information from other
agencies then ask the secretive officials why they are deviant.
Nobody wants to be an outlier.

•

Rally allies. Find people and groups who want the information and
go tell them about the secrecy. It’s even better if they are
influential business owners, contributors or active citizens. When
officials see it isn’t a media issue, and they fear the wrath of
constituents, they yield.

39

•

Heads on pikes. Put together a list of all the other agencies in
your state or elsewhere that lost public records battles and had to
pay tens of thousands of dollars in lawyer fees (including the
orderers’ fees). Show them the news articles that made the
agencies look bad. When officials see the very real drawbacks of
secrecy (heads on pikes), they might wave the white flag.

•

Bury them. If they deny your valid order and are being stubborn,
flood them with more orders. If they are trying to hide one record,
you can tell them that you wonder what else they are trying to
hide. Make it much more work to deny you records than to comply.
Wear them down.

•

Release the hounds (lawyers). Have your attorney write a terse
letter citing the relevant law. The letter, while perhaps unbudgeted,
can demonstrate you are serious and will pay off down the road
with more records.

•

Sue. Sometimes all it takes is filing a lawsuit and an agency will
cough up the information. In many situations you can recoup your
attorney fees, even if you don’t go to court. Check out the new
NFOIC litigation fund (http://www.nfoic.org/) that will cover
litigation to fight for records.

40

Top-10 open meetings red flags
Joel Campbell

1. Retreats. Just because a public body wants to meet at the beach for a
retreat doesn’t mean the open meetings law doesn’t apply.
2. Attorney-client privilege. Some public bodies try to skirt the open
meetings act by claiming attorney-client privilege, calling the attorney
into executive session when they want secrecy. Question such ploys.
3. Stealth agendas. If the agenda says minutes, old business, new
business, begin challenging the public body for more information. If
the agenda says the public body is closing the meeting to discuss
“personnel” ask for specific details about the meeting closure.
4. Boilerplate closures. In some states, city councils include an
“executive session” on their agenda as a matter or practice whether
they really need it or not. This encourages closed meetings and
violates the spirit of open meeting laws.
5. Electronic meetings. Some states allow meetings to be conducted
over the telephone or via video or audio conference. However, such
meetings usually require that journalists and the public can listen or
watch. Also watch for agencies conducting public business via e-mail.
6. No votes for executive sessions. Laws sometimes require that a
majority vote be taken to go into closed session. Keep public officials
honest and demand votes be taken.
7. Work meetings or committee of the whole. In some places,
public bodies hold regular “work sessions,” “committee of the whole
meetings” or “work meetings” before their regular meetings. These
often are designed to discuss matters informally and line up votes.
8. Vague times and locations. Some boards have attempted to
approve closed meetings for a non-specific time and location in the
future. In some cases these have been used to bring in candidates for
job interviews. Object to such tactics.
9. Get the meeting documents. Ask for the same information packets
the members of the board or council receive. These are public
documents and can help you be more thorough in your reporting.
10.
Diffuse the open meetings bomb. If a discussion scheduled
for a closed meeting looks like it might violate the law, make a phone
call before the meeting and try to persuade public officials to discuss
the agenda item in question in the open. Some states have FOI hotline
attorneys who may be consulted.
41

Data-driven news pegs
David Cuillier
1. Extreme. Find the biggest, smallest, highest, lowest, richest, poorest.
Example: Janitor makes more than the mayor through overtime.
2. The Letterman list. Instead of pinpointing the top or bottom, a
ranked list is provided for viewers online. This helps people find their
state, city, resident hall, football team, etc., on the list and see the
relation to similar units.
Example: Money magazine’s “100 Best Places in America to Live” list.
3. Year-to-year. Look for change in a unit from one year to the next.
Example: Auto thefts dropp 12 percent in 2014 as compared to 2013.
4. Long-term trends. Look at the big picture by examining units over a
long period of time, such as five, 10, 20 or 100 years. The numbers
work well in a line chart.
Example: Burglary rate has risen 36 percent over the past 20 years.
5. Individuality. Look for well-known people who might be of interest.
Example: Check databases of tax evaders, heavy water users or
deadbeat dads with the name of leaders to see if there is a match.
6. Linking. Link two different databases to see what matches come up.
Example: Link DUI records with transit drivers.
7. Counting. Add up numbers in a database to get interesting figures.
Example: Check the county dog-bite database to find out how many
people were bitten this year.
8. Grouping totals. Add up totals for different groups and rank them.
Example: Add up the political contributions given to the mayor by the
type of contributor and then rank them. Maybe developers gave the
most money.
9. Averages. Find the average or mean of a set of numbers.
Example: The average income of high school football coaches
compared to other teachers.
10. Comparison. Take local numbers and compare to state or national.
Example: Average GPA for athletes compared to universities
nationwide.
42

Data ethics checklist
David Cuillier
Here is a checklist to review when dealing with data (also, see the SPJ Code
of Ethics, http://www.spj.org/ethicscode.asp):
1. Is the database accurate?
Often an agency will provide data that have been compiled in a hurry,
changed from year to year, or just garbled. Take an excerpt of the data
and verify it is accurate. Clean it up. Some people say it’s OK to take
post government databases online raw, and if there are inaccuracies it is
the government’s fault. That is true, legally, but journalists have an
ethical duty to verify and publish the truth.
2. Did I analyze the numbers right?
When you get your findings, run them past the agency to see whether
they find errors. You want to give them the chance to reply, and they
can’t prevent you from publishing it. Don't provide the entire story to an
agency before publication, but it doesn’t hurt to present key findings.
3. Should I withhold some of the data from the public?
Just because we have a legal right to acquire public data doesn’t mean
we have to publish everything. We might get databases that include
home addresses. In some situations that might be important to publish
online (sex offender data). In other situations the harm in publication
might outweigh the benefits (database of child beauty pageant winners).
4. What would my mom/aunt/grandma/neighbor/child think?
Apply the sniff test to determine whether publication of the data might
evoke a public backlash that could lead to closure of the records. This has
happened many times around the country, particularly when data include
home addresses (concealed weapons permits) or other sensitive
information (911 recordings). People worry about privacy invasion and
will call for blanket closure of records. That doesn’t mean we don’t
publish data if they have any whiff of personal privacy. But if we do, we
must have a clear and defensible reason that we explain up front.
5. Am I pursuing data aggressively in the public’s interest?
A lot of journalists don’t report about denials because they say it’s inside
baseball, or a conflict of interest. However, it is the ethical responsibility
of journalists to fight for records on behalf of the public. Agencies aren’t
saying “no” to you – they are saying no to the thousands or millions of
fellow citizens. When government breaks the law (including the state
public records law), tell people.
43

Suing pro se
David Cuillier

You can do it!
Time and time again we have seen journalists and citizens denied
public record requests and left with no recourse other than to sue. Yet, how
many journalists – or journalism organizations – have the resources or
gumption to file a lawsuit? Unfortunately, very few, and research shows
fewer news organizations are willing to sue. The intimidation factor itself is
the largest barrier, and a lot of government agencies know that, following
the unwritten policy of only releasing sensitive records when a suit is
actually filed. You can stand up to that. Sometimes simply filing a lawsuit
will dislodge the records, and at minimum it makes for a good news peg to
expose unnecessary government secrecy. This handout will walk you
through the pro se (pronounced “pro say”) process of suing on your own,
and where you can get the resources to cover your costs. You can do it!
Using this guide
This is not to be considered legal advice, rather a starting point to
educate you about the process of suing for public records. If you need legal
advice, reach out to the resources listed at the end of this document. A lot of
this information is focused on federal FOIA, but the same principles apply for
suing a city or state agency under state public records laws. While the
process might seem daunting at first, it’s not rocket science. Here are overall
thoughts for starting out:
•

Realize this will be a long battle, but DON’T GIVE UP! A typical
FOIA case can last a year, or longer, especially if the
government intends to litigate, but don’t let this scare you. It
might not serve your initial daily story, but it will help you get
records in the future, and send a message to agencies
throughout your community that they can’t get away with
gaming the system when you request records.

•

Don’t take things personally. What the attorneys write in their
motions is part of their job. Don’t take their attacks personally
and you will do a better job at defeating them.

•

Realize you won’t win every time. Realize that there are indeed
some legal exemptions which might actually apply to the records
sought. Focus on your strong elements. Be willing to seek help,
or even cut bait if you have to. Don’t set bad precedent. Live to
fight another day!

44

Before suing
Make sure you crossed your t’s and dotted your i’s when it comes to the
initial public records request. It is better to fix any procedural errors that you
made prior to suing than worrying about having the government move to
dismiss the lawsuit after you filed.
Learn the law
•

Read resources that explain the public records law. For federal
FOIA, the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press has a
great guide at https://www.rcfp.org/federal-open-governmentguide, including sample FOIA request letters and appeal letters.
Reporters Committee’s Open Government Guide provides a good
explanation of each state public records law, as well.

•

Read the full text of the law and relevant court opinions.

•

Consult experts, such as your state press association or open
government coalition if it’s a state/local issue, or the Reporters
Committee if it’s a federal issue. Look for recent cases regarding
your specific record. See the list of resources at the end of this
handout.

•

If your case is a little fuzzy – no strong case law or precedent
established to support you, then you might consider going with a
professional attorney. The only thing worse than losing a records
lawsuit is setting bad precedent for everyone else. If the law is on
your side and recent rulings have strongly supported your position,
then proceed.

Know the agency rules
•

Each federal agency has regulations governing how to submit FOIA
requests, and state and local agencies usually have their own
processes. Follow the instructions. If you didn’t do so initially, go
ahead and submit a new request, under compliance with the
regulations. Then, wait the necessary time period prior to
continuing.

•

Your request should have also clearly stated it was a FOIA request
(if federal) or public records request (if state/local) and not
consisted merely of questions –agencies are not required to answer
questions, they provide documents instead.

Take good notes
•

Record everything you can during the request process, including
when you talk to people and what was said. Have it in writing (e.g.,
email), if possible.

45

•

Create a timeline so you are clear on how things progressed with
your request. Note when the agency has missed its deadlines.
Federal FOIA provides agencies with 20 working days to comply
with a FOIA request. There are exceptions to the rule, in cases
where “unusual circumstances” are invoked. In those
circumstances, the deadline is typically extended to 30 working
days. The timer starts when the agency acknowledges the request,
unless the agency takes longer than 10 working days to
acknowledge the request. However, if you sent the request directly
to the office responsible for the request (very unlikely), the timer
starts right away. Each state public records law has its own
timetable.

Clarify and ask for fee waiver
•

At the federal level, agencies are allowed to 1) assess fees for FOIA
requests and 2) request clarification for FOIA requests. You must
prove that there is justification for a fee waiver (waivers are
provided for the news media), or pay the fees. If you pay the fees,
the agency is still required to comply with the request within the
deadlines, unless you agreed to an extension or unusual
circumstances are invoked.

•

Agencies are also allowed to request clarification or narrow a FOIA
request. You should promptly provide the requested clarification. In
either of these cases, the agency “pauses” the clock until it receives
the clarification regarding the request or fees.

Inquire about a completion date
•

Attempt to work with the agency to get an estimated status date by
which it expects it will complete the request. Federal FOIA requires
agencies to provide an estimated completion date upon request.
Email a few times, a few days apart, requesting the completion
date. This is also a good step to show the court the agency is
engaging in bad faith, and that you were acting in good faith. This
will help when you try to recover fees in the future. However, don’t
let a date that is months away scare you away from filing the
lawsuit.

Appeal administratively
•

Research indicates that a third of the time an administrative appeal
will cut records loose, saving you the hassle of litigation. Appeal the
agency’s lack of response or its denial. At the federal level this will
force you to wait another 20 working days before suing, as the
agency will have to lapse on the deadline for the appeal as well. At
the state/local level, a simple letter to the agency asking for it to
reconsider its decision can suffice and show the court you are
46

reasonable. Some states allow you to appeal to the attorney
general or a commission (e.g., Connecticut).
•

Be sure to submit the administrative appeal to the appropriate FOIA
appeals inbox. FOIA allows you to appeal the failure to comply with
a request, which is called a “constructive denial.” Although this will
delay your ability to sue right away, it will show the court that you
were trying to avoid litigation and were trying to work the issue out
with the agency versus the courthouse.

Exhaust all other options
Sometimes the best way to get public records is through cajoling, political
pressure, public shaming, or skillful negotiation.
•

Narrow the request to specifically what you need.

•

Publicize the denial, focusing on how it affects average people. Go
up the ladder to elected officials to ask why their agency is hiding
information. Request the same record of peer agencies and note
their deviance (research shows the pressure causes agencies to
cough up records – nobody wants to appear deviant).

•

These and more tactics are outlined in the CQ Press book, “The Art
of Access: Strategies for Acquiring Public Records,” by David Cuillier
and Charles N. Davis.

Get support
•

If you get nowhere with an administrative appeal and decide to sue,
apply for aid to help cover your costs (make sure to keep receipts for
all expenses related to the request/suit, such as parking, mailing,
court fees, etc.):

•

The National Freedom of Information Coalition Knight Litigation Fund
(http://www.nfoic.org/knight-foi-fund) provides assistance for court
fees.

•

The Society of Professional Journalists’ Legal Defense Fund offers
funds toward attorney fees (https://www.spj.org/ldf.asp). In both
grant cases, you have to apply, but it’s a simple process.

•

Check with media law attorneys in your area to see if anyone will take
it pro bono or on contingency. This could save you a lot of time and
heartache.

47

Taking them to court
After considering the above, it is time to sue. Ask the agency one last time
for an estimated completion date in an effort to further show that they, not
you, are the ones being unreasonable. If you get rebuffed or ignored, sue.
Here is how:
1.

Get to know the court

If it’s a federal FOIA case, look up U.S. District Court in your area and visit
the courthouse. For a federal record, you are allowed to sue in the U.S.
District Court where you live, the U.S. District Court where the records are
kept, or the U.S. District Court of the District of Columbia. It is probably
easiest to sue in the district court where you live if you need to go to an oral
hearing. If it’s a state/local record, visit your county courthouse. Many court
websites have sections designed for pro se parties, including forms and
examples of complaints. Refer to these. If they don’t, refer to the local rules,
specifically the section about commencing or initiating a civil action. Courts
do things differently, and some will require you to provide a cover sheet,
notice of interested parties, or other documents. If in doubt, call or visit the
court clerk’s office. Be friendly. Clerks are usually helpful, and while they
can’t give legal advice they are usually willing to answer procedural
questions.
2.

Write the complaint

The meat of your suit is the “complaint,” which states who you are, who you
are suing, what happened, and what you want. It launches the lawsuit. You
need to provide sufficient information to say what you want and why
(because you were wronged). However, do not make the mistake of
including all your arguments in the complaint. The government has the
burden of proving that they met the legal standard to deny your public
records request. Don’t argue something when you don’t have their argument
in front of you. Also, don’t give them ideas as to what to argue. Don’t try to
write it to sound like a lawyer. Just write it clearly. Follow the court rules,
which outline the exact process, even the formatting of complaints, such as
font and margin size. Some courts provide complaint templates. To see a
sample complaint online, go to bit.ly/SampleComplaint.
3.

Fill out the summons

The summons notifies the government that it is being sued. Download the
summons template from the court website under the forms section. Do not
sign the summons, the clerk will. Prepare three versions. When serving the
federal government, you need to serve the Department of Justice U.S.
Attorney General, the Civil Process Clerk for the U.S. Attorney’s Office of the
district you are suing in, as well as the agency you are suing. Your complaint
also needs exhibits, such as the records request, agency acknowledgment,
and any communications with the agency. If the agency has an overlying
48

“department,” such as the Federal Aviation Administration under the
Department of Transportation, sue both agencies. It is likely you will need to
take three copies of everything to the courthouse. One will be for the clerk,
one for the judge, and one for you. You will then use your copy to make the
additional copies needed to serve the government with the lawsuit.
4.

Go to the courthouse

Now that you have everything ready, head over to the courthouse. If you
are suing for federal records, go to your nearest U.S. District Court. If you
are suing for local/state records, head to your nearest county courthouse.
Unfortunately, most courts do not allow pro se individuals to file cases
online. Be sure to go with the filing fee, which can be paid with credit card.
At federal court that can run about $400, and county courts for local/state
records cases are usually less. See page 4 where you can apply for funds
from the NFOIC Knight Litigation Fund. When you arrive, go to the civil
clerk’s office, and explain you want to sue. Give them the documents you
have, and they will take care of the rest. They will return stamped copies to
you. While there, ask about the possibility of seeing filed documents online.
This will greatly reduce the time it takes to receive documents filed in your
case.
5.

Serve the agency

Now you need to notify the government that it has been sued. You must
serve all the defendants (the agency/department), and in the case of the
federal government, the U.S. Attorney General at the Department of Justice,
and the Civil Process Clerk at the U.S. Attorney’s Office in the district you
sued in. You can do this by certified mail with return receipt. Note, however,
that someone else must serve the documents. This can be your family
member, neighbor, etc., as long as they are over 18, and not the person
suing. In your mailing, include all the documents you filed with the court,
including the summons, and a “proof of service” form, which you can obtain
from the clerk. Note that you normally have to utilize the “other” checkbox
on the form since you are suing the government instead of a person, and the
rules for serving the government are different. Do not sign the form, but
make copies. Just include the form in the mailing. This notifies everyone of
the date they were served. Service can take several weeks, as the mail
slows down once it reaches the post office which serves the agency while it
goes through the needed security screenings. It will take a few days to get
back the green cards proving that the documents were served. Make copies
of those cards, and fill out the rest of the proof of service form, and mail
three copies of that to the Clerk of the Court. This will tell the court that you
did your part with serving the government and sets the date by which the
agency needs to reply.

49

6.

Wait for an answer

The “answer” is the agency answering every paragraph of your complaint.
For the most part. The agency will likely deny most everything you claim,
except what you included in an exhibit or that can be easily proven by you.
Do not take the answer personally. At the federal level, the government has
30 days to file an answer. Some courts incorrectly issue a 60-day summons
but government lawyers will typically take steps to correct this mistake. The
next step will likely be that a government lawyer calls you or emails you.
Note, this person represents the government, not you. However, you must
work together to reach a resolution in your case, as you don’t have a lawyer.
At the federal level the DOJ will request an extension to filing an answer to
the complaint you filed. It is a good idea to grant this. The DOJ will try to
resolve the issues without resorting to further litigation. It is possible that
the DOJ will get the agency to respond to your request and avoid the need
to file an answer. In this situation, the case will be dismissed through a joint
request or stipulation. Be sure to read the joint request for provisions stating
you won’t be allowed to recover the money from the court expenses you
incurred. If so, reach out to the DOJ and let them know not to include that
provision. You can try to recover court fees as a pro se litigant (that doesn’t
include copy fees, attorney fees, or fees for your own time).
7.

Haggle

The next stage will involve some back and forth communications, and might
lead to closing the case immediately. Some courts require the parties meet
and prepare a joint proposal for deadlines; others make the deadlines
themselves. It is possible that portions of the request you submitted can be
resolved during this phase. The agency might be willing to negotiate, seeing
you are serious. Check online with resources such as the Federal FOIA
Appeals Guide at www.rcfp.org/federal-foia-appeals-guide to see if any
claimed exemptions are worth disputing. If something is not worth disputing,
advise the agency that you will not object to those portions of their
response. If no issues remain, the case should be dismissed by mutual
consent. If issues remain, dispositive motions are next.
8.

Respond to dispositive motion

A dispositive motion attempts to get the judge to dispose of the case from
the get-go. This can be done through one of two ways: Motion to Dismiss or
Motion for Summary Judgment. Read the agency’s dispositive motion
carefully. At the federal level, utilize the Reporters Committee guide noted
above, as well as the DOJ litigation guide specific for the exemptions invoked
-- https://www.justice.gov/oip/doj-guide-freedom-information-act-0. For a
Motion for Summary Judgment, you must identify that the agency is 1) not
correct in one of the facts which would decide the case and/or 2) the agency
is not entitled to judgment in its favor. Using the guides noted above, work
on a “Response to the Motion.” Check the local rules to see how much time
50

you have to file. If you would like more time, request the agency consent to
an extension, and then, with that consent (or denial), ask the court to
approve. Work on your response carefully. Explain why the records are
important to the public. Include as much information in your briefs as
possible in case a new judge is assigned to the case. Make constant
revisions. Attack the agency’s arguments, and make sure you read and
understand the arguments the agency is relying on. If the agency missed an
important part required to be able to survive claiming the exemption, make
sure to state that. Your response to the motion needs to comply with any
page limits and formatting noted in the local rules for that court. Also, you
must use a “Statement of Facts” for every single material fact you rely on. A
material fact is something important that can decide the case. Your motion
will basically have a lot of in-text citations to the Statement of Facts, similar
to that of the agency’s. You will then have a separate Statement of Facts
Document, similar to the agency’s, and each Statement of Fact must be
supported by adequate evidence. This evidence can be either a declaration,
or, an exhibit. Keeping the Statement of Facts, argument, and exhibits
organized is the most time consuming portion, but be sure to do it right,
because it will help your case. When responding to the motion, research the
cases the agency uses to support its argument. Find distinctions between
your case and the cases cited. Show that to the court. Also, review the
evidence carefully – if the agency provides a declaration or affidavit and then
jumps to conclusions using words not in the declaration or affidavit, point
that out. Below the title of your response, state that you want an Oral
Hearing or Argument, if you want one. This can be good for your case if you
feel speaking to a judge can help. However, do not think of this court
appearance as another way to introduce newly found arguments into your
case. File your response with the court after it is completed and be sure to
provide the agency, DOJ and U.S. Attorney with a copy.
9.

Respond to agency reply

Next, the agency will file a “reply” to your “response.” It is also likely that
the agency will look at your response and ask for an extension to file a reply.
They might want the extension just to have it, or maybe they actually want
to provide additional records in an effort to avoid the judge deciding the
issue. Communicate with the agency to see what their position is shortly
after filing the response. Next thing you know you may have more
documents. After the reply is filed, you are not allowed to file another reply
without consent from the court. Typically, this consent isn’t granted except
for circumstances where you can show that the agency’s reply was
introducing substantially new information which you haven’t had a chance to
attack.

51

10.

Oral arguments or final decision

The judge may schedule an oral hearing, or simply decide the case without a
hearing. Either way, be sure to read the judge’s decision carefully. If you
lose the case, consider meeting with an attorney to review your appeal
options.
11.

Moving for costs

If you win the case, or if the case was dismissed after a joint request, it is
possible you can recover costs if you substantially prevail. Refer to the local
rules for the time limits to do this, and apply using the forms on the court
website to “tax” costs. Be sure to keep the agency informed and provide
them with a copy of the forms. In your forms, provide additional information
proving that you are eligible and entitled to recovery of costs. Costs are in
the form of printing, parking, mailing, case filing, etc. You are eligible and
entitled if you won’t use the documents obtained for commercial purpose,
and if the agency “changed position” as a result of the lawsuit. All those
estimated status date requests at the beginning come in handy now.
12.

Plant that head on a pike

Publicize your brilliant victory and thank all of those who helped. Make sure
the word is out in your community, nationally through SPJ and NFOIC, and
throughout the government community, so everyone knows about the win.
Plant that head on a pike as a warning to other recalcitrant agencies that
illegal denials will be thumped in court. Submit a new public records request
asking for all agency communications pertaining to your initial request and
lawsuit. That can help you learn about their thinking for the next time you
sue. Revel in your tenacity and efforts to protect democracy and the people’s
right to know. Huzzah!

52

Access resources
David Cuillier

Reporters Committee open government guides
https://www.rcfp.org/open-government-guide/ (then click on your state)
A great guide to the public records law and open meetings law in every
state. It describes the different pieces of the law in plain English. A musthave resource for everyone. Updated in January 2019.
iFOIA
https://www.ifoia.org
Creates an order letter, will deliver it to the agency (federal), and track
orders online. Created by Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press.
MuckRock
https://www.muckrock.com/
Helps people get public records. Will assist in you in your orders for a small
fee. Has thousands of records posted that have been acquired through more
than 65,000 public record letters nationwide. Great place for record ideas
and tips. Also guides to the law for each state.
Reporters Committee legal hotline
800-336-4243 or online at https://www.rcfp.org/legal-hotline/
Free advice for acquiring records at the federal level and assistance with
state-level queries.
FOIA Mapper
https://foiamapper.com/
Merged with MuckRock, this online resource allows you to search FOIA logs
for record ideas, agencies and topics at the federal level. Assists in finding
what agencies to contact.
Society of Professional Journalists
http://www.spj.org/foi.asp?
This group provides information about freedom of information, including a
blog and resources. The “Open Doors” publication has document-based story
ideas, check the guide to FERPA, and see the Sunshine Network with experts
for each state. Find a list of state chapters and contacts on the website.
The National Security Archive
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
Tips for accessing public records through FOIA, as well as federal records.

53

Investigative Reporters and Editors
www.ire.org
This group has an online resource center (for members) that includes a
searchable database of more than 30,000 investigative stories and a
searchable database of 8,000 tip sheets. Also check out the Extra! Extra!
daily stories: http://www.ire.org/extraextra/
Student Press Law Center
http://www.splc.org/
This nonprofit center provides free legal assistance to student journalists.
Check out the Web site for the publications and searchable database on a
variety of student media law issues. It also includes a super FOIA letter
generator that caters to each state.
State coalitions for open government
http://www.nfoic.org/nfoicmembers
Nearly every state has a coalition for open government, which provides
assistance in accessing records. Check the National Freedom of Information
Coalition Web site for a coalition in your area. Also, NFOIC has a litigation
fund for suing agencies over records.
NFOIC Knight FOI Fund
http://www.nfoic.org/knight-foi-fund
Can provide court costs for suing for public records.
SPJ Legal Defense Fund
https://www.spj.org/ldf.asp
Can provide up to $5,000 quickly for legal aid in a suit, and can request
more if deemed a worthy case.
SPJ First Amendment Forever Fund
https://www.spj.org/firstamendmentforever.asp
An endowed fund that can provide up to $5,000 for any project that provides
impact to further press freedom, the First Amendment or freedom of
information.
First Look Media Press Freedom Defense Fund
www.pressfreedomdefense fund.org
Assists journalists and whistleblowers with their litigation.
Society of Environmental Journalists
www.sej.org
Environmental story archive that provides ideas for data and FOIA orders.

54

Office of Government Information Services
http://www.archives.gov/ogis/
The federal agency, started in fall 2009, is the federal ombudsman for FOIA.
Have a problem with an agency? Contact them and see if they can help.
OpenTheGovernment.org
http://www.openthegovernment.org/
An advocacy group with news and reports about access to federal records.
News Media for Open Government
http://foropengov.org/
Formerly the Sunshine in Government Initiative, this group provides
hundreds of stories produced with public records (The FOIA Files).
Yale Media Freedom & Information Access Clinic
https://law.yale.edu/mfia
Provides legal aid for those fighting for records. Other similar law clinics
have been started at Michigan State, Virginia, Case Western, Arizona State,
SUNY-Buffalo and elsewhere.
Data.gov
www.data.gov
A keyword searchable website for finding federal agency databases. Also, to
submit federal FOIA requests, try the new (evolving) federal portal,
foiaonline.gov.
Google News Alerts
http://news.google.com
Go to Google News, click on “News Alerts” then set up alerts with keywords
such as “public records request” and “freedom of information” and Google
will send you links to stories that contain those keywords.
Google Dataset Search
https://toolbox.google.com/datasetsearch
This application, launched September 2018, allows you to do a keyword
search for finding databases posted online by government agencies,
academics and news organizations (anyone who sets up the metadata to be
found by Google). Millions of datasets included.
The FOIA Project
http://foiaproject.org/
Part of the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse
University, this center tracks FOIA litigation and requests.
55

FOIA Wiki
https://foia.wiki/wiki/Main_Page
Set up by the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, this is a
comprehensive resource for everything about federal FOIA.
Right to Information Global Ratings
https://www.rti-rating.org/
Rates the more than 120 FOIA laws in the world and provides details about
each law’s legal provisions. Spoiler: U.S. ranks 69th, below Mexico, Russia
and Kyrgyzstan.
Freedom Info
www.freedominfo.org/
A great rundown of right-to-know laws throughout the world. Pick a country
and compare it to the United States. Learn a country’s law before requesting
records there.
Access Audit Toolkit
www.spj.org/foitoolkit.asp
Looking to conduct an access audit in your community? Check out this
guide, created for the Society of Professional Journalists by Charles Davis.
Sunshine Week
www.sunshineweek.org
Opinion columns, editorial cartoons, and projects from previous national
Sunshine Weeks (held each mid-March), created by News Leaders
Association (formerly American Society of News Editors).
Sunlight Foundation
https://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/
A great blog and information about access to records, particularly regarding
technology and good government practices.
AltGov2
https://altgov2.org/
Tons of records acquired through FOIA and posted since 2004 by author
Russ Kick of Tucson, Arizona.
Government’s Attic
www.governmentattic.org
Posts a variety of federal documents, including FOIA logs.

56

Brechner Center for Freedom of Information
http://brechner.org/
This center at the University of Florida provides FOI news, research and
other information for requesters.
Hello, it’s Reveal
www.revealnews.org/article/hello-its-reveal/
A great Adele “Hello” spoof of problems getting access to government by
Reveal – The Center for Investigative Reporting.
India Needs a Superhero
www.youtube.com/watch?v=6sVeo3G0Gio
A powerful 3-minute video that shows the power of FOI anywhere in the
world.
The Art of Access: Strategies for Acquiring Public Records
A 200-page paperback book guide by David Cuillier and Charles N. Davis,
published by Sage in 2010, and then as a second edition July 30, 2019. Buy
online at Amazon. More information, contact Cuillier at
cuillier@email.arizona.edu.

57

Exercise your FOI muscles
David Cuillier
Below are activities and skills you can practice to hone your access muscles
and integrate a “document state of mind” in your life and workplace. These
are just some of the ideas included in “The Art of Access: Strategies for
Acquiring Public Records,” by Cuillier and Charles Davis.
Make an “FOI First” sticky note
Create an “FOI First” sticky note and post it on your computer/laptop
monitor. Then select a day and once a week, first thing, submit a public
records request for that document. Request one new document each week at
that designated time/day. For example, write “FOI First Friday” if you choose
Friday.
Circle yourself
Grab a piece of paper and put your name in the middle. Then around your
name write all the different roles and identities you represent (e.g., student,
taxpayer, homeowner, driver, parent, pet owner). Then, around those roles,
write all the public records that might contain information about those roles.
Be amazed at the paper trail you will leave behind in this world. Now do the
same thing for a prominent person in your community or someone you cover
on a beat. Go examine those records to see if you find anything surprising or
newsworthy.
Map an agency
Go online to the main web page of a local government agency, such as the
city, university or school district. Then start burrowing through the site, and
on a piece of paper or your computer start mapping out the agency based on
what you find. Write down what requirements the agency must meet and
what documents it generates. Come up with at least two document-based
story ideas.
Google Advanced Search document hunt
Identify a government agency you are interested in and find its online
domain name (e.g., www.michigan.gov for the state of Michigan). Then, in
Google, go to the Advanced Search function (just Google “Google Advanced
Search”) and search within that domain for different file types
(.pdf,.doc,.xls., etc.). For example, a search of the michigan.gov domain for
the word “the” yielded 2,190 Excel files, 9,070 Word files, and 197,000 pdf
files. Browse them to see what records they have posted online. Or conduct
the same search with more specific keywords. Find three records that could
be the basis of stories.

58

Find an FOI friend
Find a like-minded journalist at a similar non-competing news organization
who can be your document buddy. Contact that person with an e-mail or
phone call. Arrange to have coffee and talk about records you have and plan
to request. Try to get three tips or records ideas from the person. Share
ideas and keep each other motivated.
FOI an FOI log
Pick a local government agency and request the requests for the past year
or two. See if the log is kept in an electronic format, such as Excel, and try
to get the disposition, including whether the records were provided, when
they were provided and who asked for them. Then do a quick tally to see
how many records were requested, what percent were provided, how long it
took people to get the records and who tended to request the records
(media, businesses, attorneys, etc.). Look for trends over time, or compare
agencies to identify the most secretive and open local governments. Find
three potential records that could lead to your own stories, and then request
them.
Blank-form hunt
Search a local government website or your state’s website, looking for all
forms provided online; often state websites will have an actual link to forms
from their home pages. You can also look for licensing renewal pages or
search for the keyword “form.” You will find hundreds of blank forms that
people fill out. Print out two that interest you and use a highlighter to mark
the parts that are most useful to your reporting. Then request the database
that the form is based on.
Create a communal document pool
On your newsroom Intranet or university online course system, or perhaps
through Google Drive, create a place where reporters can post documents
they have received that might be of help to other beats. Post the document
and location, or the actual document or data. Create a running index of
great documents in the community.
Get Grandpa’s FBI file
Impress your family (or get ostracized from the next reunion) by requesting
Grandpa’s FBI file, or your own. Anyone is allowed to request to see their
own FBI file, if they have one. Also, you are allowed to request the files on
anyone who is deceased. Check out the website “Get Grandpa’s FBI File” at
www.getgrandpasfbifile.com. To request your own file, see the companion
website, “Get My FBI File,” at www.getmyfbifile.com. You can do this in just
minutes, and then take bets on when you get the get the files. MuckRock
also has a great guide to getting your own FBI file at
https://www.muckrock.com/news/archives/2018/aug/09/fbi-flowchart/
59

Zaba and Pipl yourself
Pick a person: yourself or a key source. Then run that person through
www.pipl.com, www.zabasearch.com and Google. Look at the vast amount
of information available online that these websites gleaned, including date of
birth, home address, home phone number, pictures and relatives. Notice
how Google isn’t really that helpful—that it’s more important to know where
records are kept. Try to figure out where the information came from, and
then go get it yourself. Identify which information is inaccurate. Create a
“profile” of the person based on what you found. Later, if a public official
denies information to you, such as the date of birth of city employees or
home addresses, then show that official his or her own “pipl” results
displaying that information. The bottom line: If someone wants to find you,
they will. As unpleasant as it is, keeping dates of birth and home addresses
secret is futile—that horse is already out of the barn.
Compare state laws
Identify strengths and weaknesses in your state public records laws by
comparing your FOI law to other states. Find an area of your state public
records law that interests you by scanning the Open Government Guide at
the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the press (www.rcfp.org/ogg). For
example, look at the category “How is e-mail treated?” or whether “gun
permits” are secret. Then use the “Compare” function at the bottom of the
page to get a list of how each state handles that particular issue. Get out a
piece of paper and divide it into three categories: Open, Secret, Unclear.
Write down where each state fits and then tally what percentage of states
make that information public or secret. Once you’ve identified the
weaknesses in the law compared to other states, contact your press
association and state coalition for open government
(https://www.nfoic.org/organizations/map) to see if something can be done
about it.
Compare abroad
Compare U.S. FOIA to other nations’ FOIA laws. Go to http://www.rtirating.org/ and find a country that is rated well. Then go to
http://www.freedominfo.org/ or Google to find the text of that country’s law.
Compare the law to U.S. FOIA (https://www.rcfp.org/federal-opengovernment-guide). What parts of the law should the U.S. consider
adopting?
Record yourself
Record yourself asking for records. Or practice with a colleague or fellow
student. Simulate a records request. Examine how you act. Note whether
you use “I” statements or “You” statements. Go down the list of negotiation
principles presented in this chapter and see if you are following them. Note
how you can improve, write it on a piece of paper and practice.
60

Visit your local law library
The best way to become adept at legal research is to dive in, with a little
help from the people trained to help: law librarians. Visit the closest law
library to get a primer on the legal resources available. Even if you don’t
have a law school nearby, a general university library or public library will
have some resources you can try out. Find three resources that will help you
understand the law.
Build a request kit
When you are in a document state of mind, you will begin to request records
on the fly—when a source at City Hall mentions a report, or a school board
member refers to an audit during a board meeting. In those cases, you need
to be ready to submit a public records request immediately. Put the
following items in a folder to bring with you:
•

Blank public records request forms. If an agency you cover has
its own forms it prefers people to fill out, bring copies of those
forms.

•

Thumb drive or flash drive. So, a clerk can transfer electronic
files for you.

•

Portable handheld scanner. To capture images of documents at
the agency rather than paying for copies. Or use your cell phone
to take pictures.

•

Copy of your state public records law. Go to www.rcfp.org/ogg
and click on your state. On the left is a link to your state statute.
Copy it to a Word file and reduce the font, then print it out.

•

Summary of supportive case law. In that RCFP guide at
www.rcfp.org/ogg you’ll find explanations by an attorney about
each element of the law and case law supporting openness.
Create a one-page sheet of paper that lists key elements and the
cases that support openness.

Do a double take
For your next document-driven story, identify a document that is held by
two different agencies, such as a boating accident report (e.g., your state
boating safety commission and the U.S. Coast Guard), and request the same
document from both agencies. Note how the different agencies handle the
requests and compare what information each agency redacts and makes
public. This will enable you to piece together a more accurate picture for
your story and better understand the inconsistencies of how different
agencies, and perhaps different people within agencies, provide records.

61

Get extra database ideas
Go to Investigative Reporters and Editors’ website and click on the Extra!
Extra! portion of the site (www.ire.org/extraextra). Look for the subject
archives on the left part of the page and click on “CAR” (computer-assisted
reporting). Browse through the nearly 1,000 CAR story summaries, each
containing a link to the actual story at the news organization’s website. Find
five database stories that you would like to do and go request the data.
Kibitz with a custodian
Find an agency of interest, such as your university or a city, and find out
who handles public record requests. Offer to buy the person a coffee and ask
about their job. Don’t inject your own thoughts or talk about yourself—just
learn about what the person does, what problems they encounter and what
they appreciate from requesters. Also ask what records are valuable that
people fail to request. This will help later when you need records on the fly.
Find a quote machine
Identify an expert or two in your state who you can call to get a good quote
for a story when you are denied public records. It could include your press
association director, a media law professor or a state FOI coalition president.
Get to know the expert and see if he or she will provide home contact
information for after-hours interviews. To be fair, make sure to find experts
in municipal government who can provide other perspectives. Possible
sources include your state’s association of cities or counties, a state records
ombudsman or an assistant attorney general.
Find your dream house
Identify a house—either your own or one for sale in the community (see
www.zillow.com). Then collect as much information solely through public
records as you can about the house, property and surrounding
neighborhood. Here is a list of potential records you can tap:
•

Property tax records including assessed value, owner’s name

•

Police reports of nearby crimes and sex offender registries

•

Development plans, including road plans, proposed development

•

Parks plans

•

Airport flight-pattern maps that show sound levels

•

School test scores to compare schools

•

Environmental Protection Agency records regarding hazardous
chemicals and polluted sites

•

Court records regarding the sellers

•

Nuisance complaints reported to the city
62

