WRITING INVESTIGATE NARRATIVES
By Deanna Pan (​@DDpan​) and Jennifer Berry Hawes (​@JenBerryHawes​)
Authors of “An Undying Mystery,” 2019 Pulitzer Prize finalist in feature writing (link to story:
https://bit.ly/2Zljxy8​)
So you want to write an investigative narrative? Here is what you will need.
●

●

A narrative reads like a novel, so it requires the basic elements of plot: an inciting action,
tension/drama due to an interesting character (or multiple characters) facing at least one big
challenge (internal or external), a climactic event or realization that resolves that struggle, and a
resolution. ​In other words, something must happen in this story.
○

That something begins with a ​major disruption ​that creates a challenge for your
character(s) that he/she must resolve. This is the energy, engine and driver of your story.
Focus on this struggle. Avoid falling down the rabbit holes of unrelated challenges your
character faces that don’t play key roles in overcoming her central problem. Stay focused.

○

Think about your main character’s motivations early on. ​What makes her ​need​ to
overcome the central challenge?​ Beat a deadly disease, expose her employer as a crook,
or bring a violent criminal to justice? What is likely to stand in her way? If you can
anticipate these roadblocks, it will help you (and photo, video, etc., who you should
involve very early on) know when to be physically present with her. It also will help you
know what documents to request. Key scenes will occur when she hits those roadblocks.

○

In an investigative narrative, you will have key documents that will frame your story. But
what other docs, personal letters, archives, old photos, etc., could fill gaps or add details?
Ask your characters to mine their cell phone for pictures, videos and texts that will tell
you so much about them and their journeys.

○

Be sure to record and take your own pictures and video to bring your characters back to
life for you when you sit down to write. Keep your sources’ cell phone numbers handy
and warn them that you’ll be contacting them again for fact-checking or additional details
to flesh out a scene.

○

Before you interview your subjects, help them understand what kind of story you’re
planning to write and the details you’ll be asking for. ​Prepare them for the time
commitment and personal sacrifice involved on their end.​ Ask your subjects questions
with scene-creation and character-building in mind. Some questions you might ask: ​Walk
me through everything that happened that day. What specific details do you remember?
What was going through your mind when X happened?

On to scene creation. Again: ​Something must happen! In every scene,​ unless you are stepping
back to provide background or other expository information. (And keep that to a minimum.)
○

If it doesn’t propel your narrative toward the climactic event or realization, the scene is
wasting words. In newspaper-length narratives, we don’t have room to screw around.

●

○

Think visually and cinematically as you write. Use all of your senses if you can. What are
the sounds and smells of your scene? What does it feel like? Advice from a former editor:
Imagine your story unfolding like a movie.

○

Pick a point of view and stick with it. Don’t describe your character walking into a room
if you are writing from that person’s point of view. Instead, describe what that person
sees, thinks, feels as she enters the room. Help your reader embody that character.

○

Do not use details just because you noted them. Use them to reveal key texture about a
character or scene. Otherwise, they are distracting. We don’t need to know the model of a
character’s car or her shoe color if these aren’t important to understanding her
motivations or struggle to overcome her key challenge.

○

A scene takes place in a certain space and time. Do not add quotes from interviews you
do later. Use them to inform what you write, to add detail, etc., but don’t take us out of
the scene or confuse readers about when and where the scene is occurring.

.
Information quicksand is your enemy. ​How do you organize it?
○

Do not transcribe every word of every interview. ​As you’re interviewing your
subjects, keep an eye on your recorder when they say something interesting and jot down
the time stamp so you can easily come back to it later. Keep files of key ideas and quotes
with a note about where to find them. You can always go back. You cannot reclaim
wasted time.

○

Keep multiple files in Google docs or wherever, especially to share with co-writers. But
keep only one central narrative file​ for critical scenes. A tick-tock works well for a
chronological format. Be picky about what you put in there. ​Imagine building a body.
This is your spine. It must be crisp and strong.

○

Keep one ​“Holy Shit!” file​ for evidence and detail that you don’t want to lose in the
mass of interviews and documents.

○

Write sketches​ o​ f all scenes ASAP​ while details are fresh with a note of where to find
more details later if you decide to use the scene. When I’m on the field, I’ll write a quick
scene using my Notes app on my phone, which I’ll email to myself later.

○

Endings are important. Maybe even more important than the lede. Determine early on in
the writing process what scene you will end on and the emotional impact you want to
deliver. Your ending should provide resolution and harken back to the “theme” of your
story — the ​underlying truth or message ​your investigation reveals.

○

Reading is writing. ​Study the work of your favorite narrative writers and dissect what
they do well, why their stories work. We love John Woodrow Cox, Eli Saslow, Stephanie
McCrummen, Sarah Stillman, Rachel Aviv, Jessica Pressler, Jen Percy, Pamela Colloff,

Lane DeGregory, Dan Barry, Skipp Hollandsworth, Rachel Monroe, among many, many,
many others.

