Subpoenas &
Other SourceRelated Legal
Issues for
Journalists
Katie Townsend - Reporters Committee for
Freedom of the Press

Defining the Relationship
On the Record . . .
Off the Record . . .
On Background . . .
Not for Attribution . . .
They mean what you and your source collectively
agree they mean.
Promise of confidentiality? Conditions?

An Enforceable Contract?
Steele v. Isikoff, 130 F. Supp. 2d 23 (D.D.C. 2000)
- Applying Virginia law, the district court granted a motion to dismiss contract
claims arising out of alleged failure of Newsweek reporter Michael Isikoff to
honor an agreement not to reveal that Julie Steele was a source.
- The district court concluded that because “a reporter’s promise of
confidentiality is a moral obligation, not a contractual requirement, and
because a moral obligation does not give rise to express or implied contractual
duties, there is no contractual relationship between Steele and Isikoff.”
- And “[e]ven if reporters and their sources could form contracts, . . . Steele’s
lie breached the alleged reporter-source contract in this case,
thereby relieving Isikoff of his duty to perform.”

Promissory Estoppel?
Cohen v. Cowles Media Co., 501 U.S. 663 (1991)
- Cohen, a campaign worker in the Minnesota gubernatorial race provided
opposition research to the Minneapolis Star and Tribune and the St. Paul Pioneer
Press—after receiving promises of confidentiality from them. The papers
then identified Cohen in their stories, and he was fired.
- Cohen sued the newspapers. The Minnesota Supreme Court held that the
First Amendment did not allow a plaintiff to recover damages under a state
law promissory estoppel theory. Even in the absence of a contract,
promissory-estoppel principles can permit a person who acts in reliance on a
promise to enforce that promise.
- The Supreme Court in a 5-4 decision reversed; it held that it didn’t offend the
First Amendment to apply promissory-estoppel principles to members of the
news media.

Subpoenas, Warrants, and More!
- Third-party subpoenas (civil, criminal, grand jury).
- Search warrants.
- Stored Communications Act (SCA) warrants.
- Electronic surveillance orders (Section 2703(d)
orders & pen register/trap and trace orders).
- National security letters (NSLs).
- Other?

State Shield Protection
- 49 states and the District of Columbia
have some form of shield protection.
- These protections vary in scope.
- “Absolute” v. “Qualified”
- “Confidential” v. “NonConfidential” & “Published” v.
Unpublished” Material
- For example: The Texas Free Flow of
Information Act provides a qualified
privilege in both civil and criminal
cases that applies to both confidential
and non-confidential information.

State Shield Protection

Federal Subpoenas
• No statutory federal shield law.
• Post-Branzburg, many federal courts
have recognized a qualified reporter’s
privilege that applies at least in civil
cases.
• The Fourth Circuit test: “(1) whether
the information is relevant, (2)
whether the information can be
obtained by alternative means, and
(3) whether there is a compelling
interest in the information.”
• After U.S. v. Sterling, 724 F.3d 482
(4th Cir. 2013) this test applies in
civil – but apparently not criminal –
cases. The Fourth Circuit held that
there is no First Amendment or
common law reporter’s privilege in
criminal cases.

Warrants
- Fourth Amendment protects against “unreasonable searches and
seizures”; it requires “probable cause.”
- Zurcher v. Stanford Daily, 346 U.S. 547 (1978)
- Local police had used a warrant to search the newsroom of
The Stanford Daily, the Stanford University student
newspaper. They were looking for photos of a confrontation
between police and protestors. The U.S. Supreme Court held
that Fourth Amendment requirements (i.e., probable cause)
were sufficient to protect First Amendment interests; thus, the
First Amendment did not provide any additional protection
against the search of a newsroom.

Privacy Protection Act of 1980
- The PPA (42 U.S.C. § 2000aa) strictly limits law enforcement’s
authority to search for or seize a journalist’s documentary
materials and/or work product.
- The PPA effectively requires law enforcement to obtain a
subpoena instead of a search warrant.
- But there are some exceptions. Law enforcement can use a
warrant if the immediate seizure is necessary to prevent the
death of, or serious bodily injury to, a human being, or where
there is probable cause to believe that the possessor has
committed or is committed certain crimes.
- The “suspect exception” applies only where the offense does not
consist of the receipt, possession, communication, or
withholding of the material.

State Warrant Provisions
- The PPA applies to state and local
law enforcement.
- California law expressly prohibits
the use of search warrants to seize
materials covered by the California’s
shield law including broadly defined
work product and documentary
material. Cal. Penal Code § 1524(g).
California law also expressly
provides that an aggrieved
journalist may seek the return of
items seized in violation of the law.
Cal. Penal Code § 1538.5(n).

SCA Warrants/James Rosen
- Warrants issued pursuant to the SCA must be “issued using
the procedures described in the Federal Rules of Criminal
Procedure (or, in the case of a State court, issued using State
warrant procedures).” 18 U.S.C. § 2703(a).
- In May 2013, it came to light that in 2010 the FBI had
successfully obtained an SCA warrant requiring Google to
provide it with the contents of emails from the personal
email account of Fox News reporter James Rosen in
connection with an investigation of a suspected “leak” of
classified information.

SCA Warrants/James Rosen

DOJ News Media Guidelines
- Limit the circumstances in which federal prosecutors may
subpoena members of the news media. They were expanded in
2014 to include federal search warrants. 28 C.F.R. § 50.10
- Prosecutors are generally required to secure Attorney General
approval before seeking a warrant to search the premises,
property, communications records, or business records of a
member of the news media.
- Prosecutors may only invoke the suspect exception when the
conduct that is the basis for the investigation is not based on, or
within the scope of, newsgathering activities.

Electronic Communications Records
- DOJ “views the use of certain law enforcement tools, including
subpoenas, court orders issued pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 2703(d)
or 3123, and search warrants to seek information from, or
records of, non-consenting members of the news media as
extraordinary measures, not standard investigatory practices.”
- Section 2703(d) orders and orders authorizing the installation
and use of pen register/trap and trace devices allow prosecutors
to obtain non-content electronic communications records (e.g.,
email metadata) directly from service providers (e.g., Google) on
a lower-than probable cause standard.

On the Border . . . .
- CBP officers may operate immigration checkpoints anywhere within 100
miles of the external boundary of the United States. Roughly two-thirds of
the U.S. population live in this border zone.

Resources
- Reporters Committee’s Reporter’s Privilege Compendium:
https://www.rcfp.org/reporters-privilege/
- EFF’s Surveillance Self-Defense Guide: https://ssd.eff.org/
- “Journalist on the Move” Security Scenario
- 2015 Pew Research Center Study on Investigative Journalists and
Digital Security (including data from IRE survey):
https://www.journalism.org/2015/02/05/investigativejournalists-and-digital-security/

