IRE19 Tip Sheet: Reporting on hate
ProPublica's Rachel Glickhouse and Frontline's Sarah Childress
Resources for hate crime reporting:
● We created a​ ​reporting recipe​ that lets reporters search by jurisdiction to see what police
reported to the FBI and what data we received from police departments. We also have
suggestions for how to send your own FOIAs to police.
● We wrote about​ ​white supremacist flyering and why it's important to be cautious​ when
covering this particular type of incident.
● We investigated the​ ​training police receive on hate crimes​. We have training materials
we can share with interested reporters.
● Explore which large law enforcement agencies​ are reporting zero hate crimes.
● See what ​kind of patterns​ we found covering hate crimes.
● Read the FBI's hate crime ​training manual​.
Tips for investigating hate crimes:
● Read incident reports carefully and keep a look out for slurs and other signs of bias. Just
because the police haven't marked it or aren't investigating it as a hate crime ​doesn't
mean that it isn't one​.
● Incident reports can also help identify hate crimes that were miscounted or wrongly
labeled in overall data sets. We found this to be the case with ​alleged anti-heterosexual
hate crimes​.
● Find out how police track hate crimes internally. If police don't know the right code to
pick or box to check, they can end up misclassifying dozens or even hundreds of crimes.
● Use news clips and reports tracked by nonprofits like the ADL and CAIR to compile a list
of known hate incidents in your area, which you can then compare to police and FBI
data.
● Be skeptical and talk to as many people as possible who were involved. Some of these
cases are more clear-cut, but others are very messy.
● Look at what people are saying on social media about the incident and who live near the
area. This could provide new leads and even connect with more sources.
● Ask the police for their hate crime data. You'll get a good sense of how they're tracking
hate crimes by how much work it is to get that data.
● Get familiar with your​ ​state hate crime law​.
● Establish relationships with diverse communities. More than half of victims don't report to
police, in part because of trust issues.
Questions to ask when investigating hate crimes:
● Why do the victim(s) and/or witnesses believe it is a hate crime?
● If an individual wasn't targeted, what's the reaction of the community? (It can still be a
hate crime without a clear individual targeted)

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Are the police planning to investigate the incident as a hate crime? Why or why not?
Do prosecutors plan to pursue a hate crime charge? Why or why not?
If the crime is under federal investigation, why did local authorities turn it over to the FBI?
Do police have a two-tier system for determining hate crime charges?
Do police get trained in hate crime investigations? If so, what does that look like?
How do police track hate crimes in their system?
How many hate crimes in your city have been prosecuted?

Do's and don'ts for reporting on hate groups:
● Don't elevate their message, and don't glamorize them. Don't republish their flyers, and
be careful about how you cover flyering in general. This also means being careful about
how you frame their hate speech. Don't be an amplifier. (For more on this, read ​The
Oxygen of Amplification​ from Data & Society.)
● Don't cover them just for the sake of it. Decide if this is worth your time. What's the news
value? How are these guys affecting your community?
● Do your research and talk to experts before you jump in. It's vital to understand how
diverse white supremacy has become and why it's become politically powerful.
Atomwaffen and the KKK and Richard Spencer and Chris Cantwell all have different
abhorrent views. This beat is not for beginners.
● Do understand the difference between hate crimes and hate groups. White supremacists
that are members of or connected to hate groups do commit hate crimes and terrorist
attacks (which tend to get a lot of media coverage) but many hate crimes are committed
by "regular" people.
● Do understand the terminology and make sure your audience understands it, too.
(Alt-right, for example, is a term that white supremacists invented.)
● Do look for other angles. What factors are at play that make these groups/individuals
existence possible? Or make them appealing? Who funded/organized white supremacist
speaking engagements, and why?
● Do identify the harm. If the group hasn't committed an act of violence, what damage is it
doing to the community? Explain why recruitment is dangerous in a national context.
● Do think about your security. Some of these individuals can pose a real risk. Be
thoughtful about the personal information you share online, and take steps to protect
your identity and social accounts.
● Do take care of yourself. Listening to and engaging with hateful rhetoric can be draining,
especially for those of us from communities targeted by these groups. Take time for
self-care, and to remember that these individuals represent a small segment of society
— not the whole of it.

