Requesting records and data under open records law
By Ellen Gabler
Develop a documents state of mind
Don’t make the mistake of asking general questions of a government agency. The point
of open records laws are to allow you to request specific documents or data. An agency
does not have to do an analysis for you or pull together tons of information. But they do
have to provide you with records and data that already exists, so make sure you are
First, find out what exists
You have to know what exists before you request it. This is often a huge pain but doing
work up front can save you days on the backend of your reporting. It can be confusing
and difficult, especially if government officials are trying to block your path. Do not give
up. Some tips:
•

Talk to humans. Meet them in person or insist on speaking with them on the
phone. Ask them to walk you through the process of whatever you are reporting.
“What happens during an inspection of the nursing home? Where is the
information recorded? What is that form called? Is information entered into a
database? What is it called? Remember the concept of “How is something
supposed to work? And then How does it actually work?” Don’t worry so much
about them being “on to you.”

•

Read reports - and the footnotes. Reports often explain the paper trail -- what
forms must be submitted or how problems are documented. They also list
databases and records you wouldn’t know exist. My favorites: Anything from the
Government Accountability Office (GAO), Office of Inspector General, articles in
medical journals, Congressional reports, audits.

•

Look at forms and online databases. Information collected on a form is likely
entered into a database so you can figure out which fields exist. Caution: What’s
available to the public online might not be all the data fields that exist.

•

Ask for a record layout. It explains the structure and complete contents of a
database. You’ll be able to see which fields exist --- meaning what data is
collected, and can request the information accordingly.

Crafting the request
● Ask for media expediting
● Consider breaking up your entire request into smaller pieces

● Understand/ask what can speed your request -- redacting info you might not
need. For example, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission speeds
requests if you allow them to redact company names. There is a ridiculous law
that allows companies to be alerted about your FOIA request, and gives them 6090 days to respond as to why their name should not be released. If a company
name isn’t important to your story, this is a major time saver.
● Find out what records have already been released before and request those
Go beyond your initial source
For any story, you should make a list of all the potential documents, datasets and
sources that might help in your reporting. If a particular agency is refusing to release
data, see if another source might have it (county, state or federal government.)
●
Agencies often have to report their data to a higher body. Find out who that
would be.
●
Don’t be afraid to go over someone’s head. Often the person calling the shots
for a records request has more at stake with that particular request. Call their
boss and explain why release of the information is important.
●
Get legislators, county board or city council members on your side. Surely they
support an open and accountable government ...
●
Apply some peer pressure by broadening your request. If one city or county
won’t release information, request it from all others in your state. Or, go
nationwide. You’ll often receive vastly different responses.
Make a deal: They claim it’s confidential (or offer some other excuse)
Certainly there are records or data that should remain protected but “confidentiality” is
an overused excuse. Educate yourself on the law, find comparable data or records that
has been released by that agency or one similar, and don’t give up just because
someone says, “No.”
● Ask to swap “protected” information like names with a unique identifier. Example:
I did an analysis of patients frequenting Milwaukee County’s psychiatric
emergency room to quantify repeat patients. Surely the county couldn’t release
names of individuals, but we got the same result with unique identifiers.
●
Use their own data or records against them. Search the agency’s site and
reports to see if they’ve released similar data. Use that in your reply. I pointed out
to a state health department that it seemed strange they would report incidence
of sexually transmitted infections in specific, small Native American populations
yet they refused to report the number of births at specific hospitals. They
released the data the next day.
●
Report on their denial and reasoning, especially if it’s ridiculous. For a story on
delays in newborn screening, health officials told me releasing the information
would be “adversarial” to hospitals.

