Finding stories in local meeting agendas and other routine
places
Erin Mansfield, ​Tyler Morning Telegraph
mansfield.erin@gmail.com ​or
emansfield@tylerpaper.com ​Twitter and Instagram:
@_erinmansfield
Know your state’s open meetings
law
• Texas requires agendas to be posted “in a place readily accessible to the
general public” 72 hours in advance (including weekends and holidays). County
government: Bulletin board in county courthouse. Municipal government: Bulletin
board in city hall. School district: Bulletin board in central administrative office.
Counties of more than 65,000 and cities of 48,000 or more: Also on website.
• The body must give special notice to news media in the event of an
emergency meeting or an emergency agenda item.
Read each agenda item as a potential
story
• Keep an eye out for contracts, hiring decisions, spending items, fund
transfers, lawsuit discussions, and executive sessions.
• Avoid writing a single story with several different events that happen at a
meeting. Keep it to one story for an agenda item, unless multiple items are related.
Request supporting
documents
• In Texas, any written request for records qualifies as a request under the Public
Information Act. Send an email asking for whatever packet or supporting
documentation the body’s members are getting. Get the local government’s public
information officer in the habit of receiving these every time there’s a meeting.
Look at the consent
agenda
• Consent agendas are what allow boards to pass several items in one vote. This is
a good place for boards to hide contracts they don’t want you to see. My city
passed a $200,000 lobbying contract on a consent agenda. City Council members

didn’t seem to know they were voting on it.
Additional
steps
• Some things to request are any reports on expenditures you see listed, the
annual budget document, written department reports, and drafts of budget
proposals by department heads.
• Use court records database for pending litigation. If the case number is on the
agenda, you can look up by case number in your county court database. PACER
has federal court cases.
• Pay attention to any discussions at meetings. Is there a bigger issue you notice
underpins their discussion? Write a story about the discussion even if they don’t
reach resolution.
• Sit outside the room during executive sessions. Pay attention to who is called in
to speak in the executive session because in Texas bringing in the wrong people
is illegal. Come back when they reconvene to make decisions or adjourn.
Cover the Planning
Commission
• This is where developers go before going to the City Council. It’s often a livelier
event and more impactful to the outcome of a project. It’s where neighbors come to
complain openly about proposals, and it’s also where projects usually die.
• Request the zoning application. This will have contact info of owner, realtor,
other parties. They’re usually happy to talk about their plans. Property values are
available from the county’s appraisal district.
Look at the newspaper’s legal
notices
• These are required to be posted in newspapers of record by statute in most
states. They’re placed one week or more in advance in newspaper of record and
can give you a heads up before the agenda comes out.
• In Texas, tax incentive proposals must be posted 7 days in advance (Texas
Government Code 2303.4051), and elected official raises posted 10 days before
the meeting (Texas Local Government Code 152.013).
Request salary
information

• Ask for every single employee on payroll. Don’t limit to full-time. Ask for all
compensation. Reiterate that you want benefits, bonuses, car allowances, cell
phone allowances, etc.
• We found out that the county was supplementing pay of the district attorney and
district judges to the tune of $20,000 and $10,000, respectively. We would not have
found this if we had limited the request to the highest salaries or to full-time
employees.

