Cross-border investigations / IRE 2019
Tip Sheet
1. Know your partners. Work with others who share the same collaborative ideals and
spirit. Beware “superstars” whose ambition interferes with the project.
2. Cross border collaborative projects must be pertinent and worth pursuing for all of the
reporters. If the subject or problem being investigated has no relevance to their countries
or their audiences, why should they participate?
3. Understand that there will always be differences in working style, time management,
writing etc. Be tolerant, accepting, and choose your battles wisely.
4. Don´t be afraid to team up with different kinds of partners, from traditional media to
startups, and organizations of different sizes.
5. Look for new team members in other places if the story calls for it. Local perspective is
crucial in cross-border stories, so include it as much as possible.
6. When working in multiple languages make sure you don’t get lost in translation. Double
check with colleagues that you know what they actually mean instead of assuming you
know what they’re saying. The word “corruption,” for instance, could mean different
things in different parts of the world.
7. Decide from the start if you will all publish one story or if every team can have a unique
story with distinct angle, more pertinent lo local context, etc.
8. Ideally, try to meet in person with other team members before the project begins. Do
brainstorming, task assignments, set up coordination roles, communication and other
security and publishing rules together.
9. If your project is global and collaborative, that means its horizontal. You may have a
manager or leader, but everyone — despite age difference, experience or place of origin
— is treated equally and fairly.
10. A cross-border collaboration is not the same as having a correspondent or stringer
somewhere else sending information that you need, on demand.
11. Make sure all are familiar with privacy laws and legal frameworks across jurisdictions.
12. Set up the same standards for evidence collection, interviews and writing.
13. Design security measures in advance according to topic and the expected risk. Think
about who might be interested in your work. The NSA? A transnational corporation?
14. Collect and analyze data to find patterns and outliers. Look into geographical patterns,
follow the money flows, identify networks and connections and uncover the evolution
of events over time.
15. Set up intelligent alerts in Google and social media and in different languages.
16. Consider a prenup. Coming to a clear and firm understanding about roles and rules
before the hard work of an investigation begins in earnest is key to diminishing the
chances for conflict later on. Some questions to consider:
-Is one organization playing a lead role? If collaborating on a specific story, which reporter
takes the lead? Whose byline goes first, second, and so on? If there is a collaborative
edit, how does that work? If there is a dispute, who resolves it?

-How is the reporting to be organized? Does each partner take on a discreet role, or is everyone
reporting out the same story?
-How to appropriately credit partner organizations. Where in a story or in a broadcast, and what
language to be used. Related: Who takes lead/and how is credit shared if submitted for
awards?
-Point person(s) for reaching out to a target of an investigation for comment.
17. The story is the star. Don’t lose sight of the ultimate goal!

Catalina Lobo-Guerrero​ - Global Investigative Journalism Network
Giannina Segnini Picado​ - Columbia Journalism Investigations. Columbia University
Ben Hallman​ - International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, @ben_hallman

