Data Sets Every Government Reporter Should Have
Ana Ceballos, Tina Macias, Mark Horvit

This tip sheet will give you some general tips on unearthing data from agencies, and then a
bunch of specific examples of data that’s led to stories, along with links to examples of what
those stories look like.

General Tips
Go to any agency or department’s website and search for data​. There are several ways to do
this:
-

The most obvious, but often the most overlooked: Look for the “data” tab or dropdown
menu.
Use the site’s search engine to search for “data,” “spreadsheet,” “Excel,” “XLSX,” “CSV”
or any other key word that could find a database.

Use the Google Advanced Search​ and plug in the domain for the agency or department you’re
covering (for example, houstontx.gov for the City of Houston), then search for specific file types
(.xlsx brings up many pages of results for the city).
Go to an agency’s office and see what forms they collect​. Also look for any places on their
website​ ​where people can fill in information. Every single form results in a database.
Learn how processes work​. It’s often a bad idea to simply ask an agency for data. Instead, first
interview someone involved with the process you’re interested in (or a spokesperson if that’s
all you can get). Listen for every instance in which they gather information — that’s a potential
data set. Once you know how they do what they do, you know what to ask for, and how to ask
for it in the way they already collect it.
Record Retention Schedules​. Just about every state has a records retention schedule posted
online, that details the documents and data that agencies must keep, and the length of time
they must keep them. In many states this applies not only to state agencies, but local ones.

Specific Data Sets and Stories
Work Orders
● Anytime something is broken in government, there should be a system to fix it – at least
when it comes to vehicles and plumbing. Everyone from a school district’s maintenance
department to a city’s fleet management division should keep track of work orders,

everything from how long it took and how much it cost to paint a wall, repair a vehicle
or maybe even a $300 carwash.
https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/a-300-car-wash-thats-what-one-houston-a
gency-pays/285-578078964

Check registers
● Every governmental entity should detail its expenditures in some sort of check
register/check ledger /accounts payable/vendor disbursement database. This goes
beyond a budget, even a line-item budget.
● Many check registers are available online. Look for anomalies. Request the invoices
behind the expenditures for more details. You might find millions spent on fancy charter
buses or red light tickets that can lead you to violation videos.
https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/fancy-fleet-costing-hisd-millions/285-5476
87589
https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/caught-on-camera-school-buses-running-r
ed-lights/285-595907470

Animal control calls
● The calls that government-run animal control get and respond to can be a gold mine. It’s
a good request, just to go fishing. It’s good data to have on hand.
● Make sure to ask for a field that has a description of the calls and the outcome of the
call. It can generate anything from stray-dog hot spots to thousands of cockfighting calls
that go unanswered.
https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/inside-the-blood-sport-of-cockfighting/285
-546081118

Congressional Statement of Disbursements
● Like check registers, the ​Statement of Disbursements​ is a detailed account of U.S. House
members’ spending. It’s updated quarterly online. We used this in a story about empty
Congressional district offices – one Congresswoman spent $3,000 a month on three
unstaffed satellite offices.
● Download all of the years and volumes of the member of Congress in question
● Do pivot tables to discern the categories used the most/how much each staffer spent. Did they
get unusually high raises? Are they spending on high-end travel? How much are they traveling
on the taxpayer’s dime?

● Look at the dates and see which public/political event coincide with travel expenses
https://www.khou.com/article/news/nobody-home-local-congressional-offices-sit-empty-and-y
ou-pay-for-it/285-615334223
GOP nominee for governor travels for Fox News appearances using taxpayer money

Criminal Court Clerk Data
● Criminal court data is especially useful in a breaking-news situation. Harris County
District Clerk puts some of this online ​already​, and in addition, we ask our district clerks
for a data dump of criminal filings every few months. The key fields to ask for are: ​case
number, file date, next court date, defendant name, date of birth, race, sex, address,
defendant unique identifier (SPN, TDCJ number, inmate number), attorney name, bond
amount, disposition, disposition date, arresting agency, officer name, officer report
number.
● Request this data from the clerk who handles criminal cases. For example, in Texas, the
district clerk handles felonies and serious misdemeanors. JP, municipal and city clerks
usually handle low-level misdemeanors and traffic.
● Here’s some of the stories that we turned shortly after breaking-news situations with
the help of the data we already had on hand.
o Little done to keep guns out of domestic abusers hands; many go on to commit
additional gun crimes. (2 weeks post-Sutherland Springs Shooting)
▪ https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/little-done-to-keep-g
uns-out-of-domestic-abusers-hands/285-493717083
o Examining an problem-cop’s past cases (3 weeks-post a deadly raid based on a
false search warrant)
▪ https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/sloppy-police-work-e
vidence-issues-led-to-dismissals-in-gerald-goines-past-cases/285-3fd5be9
0-9c8d-4da0-87d1-1d7acd65f5b8
▪ https://www.khou.com/article/news/investigations/khou-11-investigates
-issues-with-embattled-houston-police-officers-past-no-knock-warrants/
285-13b94210-449c-4406-b843-f24a45c814ce

US Department of Education Civil Rights Data
● The USDOE ​Civil Rights Data Collection​ is updated every two years and has a plethora of
data – discipline, staff counts, bullying, arrests. The data can be dirty, so be careful with
it.

● Corporal Punishment:
https://public.tableau.com/views/CorporalPunishment/Dashboard1?:embed=y&:display
_count=yes&:origin=viz_share_link
● Counselors:
https://public.tableau.com/views/Counselors/DistrictMap?:embed=y&:display_count=y
es&:origin=viz_share_link

Finding federal government contracts with private entities
​www.USAspending.gov

٠

Here you can find federal contracts and grants the federal government has in your
state

٠

Examples of things you can find include U.S. Department of Health and Human

Services contracts to run migrant children shelters and services paid to non-profits to
house migrant children; U.S. Department of Justice grants and contracts with private
prisons; or U.S. Department of Agriculture contracts with food packaging companies.
Homestead shelter operators gets quiet, big no-bid deal

Finding voter data in your state
​Florida’s voter extract disk.
- Data extracted from the state Voter Registration System, which includes information on
all registered voters with details on their demographics, vote method they picked, age
Andrew Gillum wins Florida primary with big margins in four counties with most black voter
Finding misconduct or internal investigations in state and local agencies
Inspector General reports

٠
٠
٠

There are annual reports conducted by agency inspector generals. Request them.
There are case numbers with back-up documents.
Put them in a database and analyze trends, favoritism or inconsistencies with

punishments depending on the employee.
Ex-staffers in Putnam-led FL agency got new state jobs after misconduct investigation
Finding the outline of every state record retained by local and state agencies
​State retention records with databases

٠

Ask your state for their retention records guideline, which will be a treasure trove of
every single record the state and local governments are required by law to retain,
identified by a line item

٠

That includes bank account and credit card records, architectural and building plans,
government employee leave records, union bargaining records, subpoenas received or
sent out by an agency, travel records, etc.

Finding all federal inspector general report looking at all areas of the federal government
​www.oversight.gov

٠
٠
٠

The website database allows you to search by locality
It allows you to search by the latest date nationwide
Includes investigations of FBI agents, U.S. Attorneys and other federal employees

Additional Tips
● Remember that there’s likely data behind every government form online or otherwise.
o Example: We had a tough time getting gang crime data, until we presented the
PIO with a form with a checkbox.
https://public.tableau.com/profile/tina.macias#!/vizhome/GangCrimesinHousto
n/HoustonGangCrimes
● Many governmental agencies have an open data portal online with lots of data sets to
dig through.
o data.texas.gov
o data.gov

Other Data Sets to Consider
Traffic tickets​. Map the parts of town where tickets are given, looking for patterns. In Kansas City, for
example, a disproportionate number of tickets were issued in neighborhoods with largely black
populations.
Open Records Offenders: ​Many states keep lists of agencies that have violated the open records or
open meetings laws. Who are the big offenders? Are any of them actually being fined or punished in any
way?

