The O’Brien Fellowship in Public Service Journalism
O’Brien Fellows are professional journalists selected to spend nine months reporting
and writing stories that can drive change and improve lives.

What do O’Brien Fellows do?
●

Produce an in-depth public service journalism project on a regional, national or
international investigation.

●

Work from the O’Brien suite at Marquette University’s Diederich College of
Communication near the heart of downtown Milwaukee and Lake Michigan.

●

Earn a $65,000 salary stipend over nine months and tap into generous
allotments for reporting-related travel and housing.

●

Publish or broadcast the project through their home news organization or, in the
case of independent journalists, another outlet.

●

Integrate Marquette’s best journalism students into their projects.

What else?
●

Help to identify a journalism student for a university-funded summer internship
at their organization after the fellowship.

●

If they wish, partner with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (co-founder of the
fellowship) and access its journalists, staff and production resources.

●

Join in the college experience by auditing classes, guest lecturing, meeting faculty
experts and attending events.

Who is eligible?
Applicants should have at least five years of professional experience and produce
journalism regularly as an employee or freelancer.
Applicants may be connected to print operations, radio, television, websites, podcasts,
online publications, wire services, or magazines of general public interest. There are no
academic prerequisites.
Applications from international journalists are welcome.

Do fellows live in Milwaukee?
Yes. It’s a residential fellowship based in the city.

What are the monetary benefits?
The stipend of $65,000 for nine months of salary is paid to fellows’ sponsoring
organization, or directly to the fellow in the case of independent journalists. Other
benefits include:
●

A travel, research and training allowance up to $8,000. This covers projectrelated travel in the US and abroad as well as technology, data and document
costs and equipment.

●

A residency allowance of up to $4,000 for a single, married or partnered fellow,
up to $6,000 for a fellow with one child, up to $7,000 for a fellow with two
children, up to $8,000 for a fellow with three or more children. Fellows submit
rent receipts from the rental property owner.

●

A moving allowance based on family size and distance. The allowance, covering
the move to and from Milwaukee, ranges from $2,000 to $4,000 in total.

●

Tuition remission (up to seven credits) for courses offered by Marquette
University, for fellows and spouses.

How many fellows are selected annually?
Three to five.

When can I apply?
Applications for the 2020-21 class open on Dec. 1, 2019. The deadline for applications is
Jan. 20, 2020.

Where can I find the application?
Click the “Apply” tab on the O’Brien website.

What’s the key to getting serious consideration?
One tip: Make a strong effort to answer the 10 questions embedded in part 3 of the
application:
1. In a tight paragraph, please summarize the project.
2. What is the key question you are trying to answer?
3. Based on your preliminary research, what makes this a timely and important story?
4. Who would publish or air your work, and in what format(s)?
5. The O’Brien Fellowship is centered on deeply incorporating student journalists into the
projects as researchers, data analysts, reporters, writers or multimedia specialists.
What roles might students play in your project?
6. How might your project break new ground? If other outlets have taken on the topic,
explain how your work would advance the story.
7. Discuss what you would need to do to pursue the story. Is it a data or document-driven
story? If so, what are the documents, what will it take to get them, etc. Is it a source
driven story? If so, who are the sources? Are they cooperative? Hostile?
8. What are possible obstacles to completing the reporting, and how do you plan to
address them?

9. What is the “minimum” story that would come out of your project? What is the greatest
potential upside?
10. Estimate how long you would need to complete the project.

When are fellows selected, and when do new fellows start?
Selection is in late February or early March. Fellows arrive on campus in mid-August
each year.

Who do I call with questions or to kick around a potential project idea?
Dave Umhoefer, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and former O’Brien Fellow who
directs the program. Email: david.umhoefer@marquette.edu. Phone: (414) 288-5956.

Who are some past and incoming fellows?
Check this list.

What are some examples of published O’Brien-backed journalism?

Jailed in Crisis | The Virginian Pilot: 2017-18 Fellow Gary Harki brought to light more
than 400 deaths of mentally ill inmates in jails across the nation.
Florida’s Disposable Workers | Naples Daily News: 2016-17 Fellow Maria Perez
exposed companies that profit from undocumented laborers, then dump them when injuries
strike.
Cycles of Violence | Milwaukee Journal Sentinel: 2018-19 Fellow Ashley Luthern
explored the deep impact of unsolved homicides.
Portraits from Rural America | Wisconsin Public Television: 2017-18 Fellow Andy
Soth’s film illuminated the reality of rural life in historically ‘blue’ counties that voted for Donald
Trump in the 2016 presidential election.
Treading Water | The Gazette: 2018-19 Fellow Erin Jordan investigated states’ efforts to
reduce pollution washing from farm fields and industries into the Mississippi River.

Lessons Lost | Milwaukee Journal Sentinel: 2017-18 Fellow Erin Richards revealed
consequences of and solutions to high student turnover in K-12 schools.

Recognition:
“Jailed in Crisis” won the 2019 Al Nakkula Award for police reporting, which
is co-sponsored by the Denver Press Club and the University of Colorado Boulder's
College of Media, Communication and Information.
“Florida’s Disposable Workers” won a George A. Polk Award for immigration
reporting and prompted a push for change.
A wide-ranging and revealing series on state and local government secrecy, by 2015-16
Fellow Miranda Spivack, was awarded a Sunshine Award from the Society of
Professional Journalists.
“Shoot to Kill,” by 2015-16 Fellow Justin George, won several awards for its probing
look at the increasing lethality of gun violence in the nation’s largest cities.
The acclaimed 2017 book, “The Death and Life of the Great Lakes,” by 2013-14 Fellow
Dan Egan, exposed readers to the serious biological damage threatening the water
system. His earlier O’Brien reporting on the topic earned an Alfred I. duPont award
in 2015.
Persistent reporting on the dysfunctional Milwaukee County mental health system, by
2012-13 O’Brien Fellow Meg Kissinger, spurred legislators to put medical
professionals in charge of overseeing the programs. Her “Chronic Crisis” series won a
Polk Award.
2013-14 Fellow Hal Bernton reported from the front lines of China’s energy industry
in “Losing Ground: The Struggle to Reduce Carbon Dioxide.” The series also focused on
the challenges of reducing carbon emissions in the United States.
The “Poor Health” series by 2013-14 Fellow Lillian Thomas spotlighted barriers to
health and health care for low-income urban Americans. It offered potential solutions
sprouting in such cities as Philadelphia and Portland.
“Gasping for Action,” a groundbreaking series by 2014-15 Fellow Raquel Rutledge,
prompted new federal warnings about the dangers of the lung-burning chemical diacetyl
in coffee roasting and vaping devices. The work won two business-writing awards from
SABEW.

