IRE 2019
“How to find the best investigative
story ideas and pitch them
successfully”

Tips on reporting for the pitch
Maybe you have the kind of reporter-editor
relationship in which you stroll in, put your
feet up on the editor’s desk, tell him or her
what you want to work on and get an
absolute, unconditional blessing and
commitment of time, support and resources.
Or maybe you work in American journalism
in 2019.
In an era of diminishing resources, when time
is increasingly a luxury and projects may
require investments in data, coding, video
and audio, even an excellent track record
with an editor is no guarantee that your
project is going to be greenlighted.
Further, editors may have to make the case
for time and resources to their​ ​bosses.
Even if this is​ ​not an issue, even if you don’t
have to argue your story and your case,
drawing up a pitch can help clarify what you
are writing, why you are writing it and what
you need to get to the finish line.
While each newsroom has a different take on
the pitch- its formality, how many people you
must talk to, whether you do this as a team there are core issues to address.
Before you begin:
●

Know your editor. (And your news
organization.)

Every editor has his or her preferred story
type and treatment. Get to know what your
editor’s favorite stories are, from both your

own newsroom and others, and why they are
favorites.
For instance, I had two editors. One was very
comfortable with and focused on data. The
other was hooked by anecdote, and stories
which clearly showed personal stories of
harm. We all want both numbers and
anecdote, of course.
But in pitching a story to one, I might lead
with the numbers. Pitching the same story to
the other editor, I might focus on stories of
people.
Why should this even matter? Isn’t a great
story a great story regardless of editor
preferences?
Yes, but: You do not want an editor who is
lukewarm to your project. Lackluster editor
interest and involvement can be a recipe for a
project that is minimally or sloppily edited,
published late and forgotten quickly.
Similarly, your news organization has its own
priorities.
If it’s truly digitally driven, or newly
enamored with podcasts, then your pitch
might incorporate those options. If a paper is
so locally focused that a regional or statewide
story would be out of its wheelhouse, then
you may consider scaling back, or going on to
another story proposal.
●

Talk it out.

Describe your project to a colleague or two,
or three. Tell them the three or four things
that most surprised or interested you.
Then watch what they pick up on and get
enthusiastic about. Ask them if there is
something they are confused by, bored by, or
have questions about.
They can surprise you. Twice in two years,
once with Trump’s Florida-Russian business

connections and once with Purdue Pharma, I
wound up writing pieces I originally had no
intention of tackling because it felt like
previously covered ground.
Casual conversations with people in the
newsroom persuaded me to take a different
approach, and I wound up writing about both.

interesting, but, hmm, I think I’ve read that
before. Somewhere. Pretty sure.”
You may get that reaction pitching stories on
some well-known topics such as nursing
home abuse, violence in prisons, substandard
hospital care- but they are well-known topics
precisely because they keep happening.

An honest back and forth with colleagues can
also reveal potential logic flaw​s​ in your
underlying assumptions. Better to hear it
from them than from your editor in a story
pitch.

Remind your editor there’s a reason we keep
writing about them: They’re important.

Alternatively, team reporters and editors can
gather together in a small room with a large
whiteboard and whack away at ideas and
findings. This takes a few hours, a lot of Diet
Coke and even more patience, but when it
works, it can work really well.

At the beginning of a project, you really don’t
know what you are going to find. In-depth
reporting may later change the nut graf in
some way.

●

Find a way to make your editor care.

The answer to why a reader should care
enough to keep reading is not inherently
obvious, especially if you are writing about
harm done to an unsympathetic population
such as prison inmates or drug-using parents.
It’s our job to make them care. An editor is a
good place to start.
To persuade your editor, and ultimately your
readers, that your story is worth their time,
ask yourself some questions: Why are you
writing this story at this time? What findings
make it compelling? What harm would occur
if no one uncovered or wrote about it? Is
there a path to change stemming from the
project? What would that look like?
And the perennial editor’s question: What
makes it different from other pieces on
similar topics?
Sometimes an editor gets a faraway look in
their eyes and says, “Yeah, that’s really

Organizing your pitch:
●

Bow to the tyranny of the nut graf.

But you already have an ​idea​ of what your
project is. Clarity and the short attention
spans of busy editors everywhere require you
to be able to state it in one - at most twosentences.
If you require three, then your project really
hasn’t gelled in your mind.
You can try doing more reporting, hashing it
out with colleagues, writing your findings
down – whatever helps you rethink or look at
your findings in a slightly different way. I’m
pretty visual, so I will sometimes jot
individual findings on sticky notes, put them
on a board and see if a simpler, clearer nut
graf becomes apparent.
●

Numbers as a backbone.

Even a few early numbers can give a project
context and backbone.
You don’t necessarily need big data at this
point. And like the nut graf, you may not
know all of the available data in all its
permutations until you are reporting.

But numbers have a place in your pitch.
For instance, you may want to dig into a
pending bankruptcy at a local charter school
in Florida. You can point out that the school’s
finance woes come at a time when an average
20 charter schools a year are closing in
Florida, and that the number of for-profit
charter schools has doubled in eight years.
That’s not big data. It’s not exactly on point,
either.
But it does give your editor context, and also
an argument for exploring finances of
multiple charter schools, not just one.
●

Seek out a wise man or​ ​woman.

Unearthing a relevant quote from an expert
supporting an issue you will be writing about
can lend credence to your proposal. That’s
especially helpful if your project challenges
conventional wisdom.
●

Remember the humans.

You don’t need a dozen anecdotes, maybe just
one. But they should exactly illustrate your
nut graph. You want to convince your editor,
not give him/her a reason to argue with you.
Let’s say your charter school story nut graf is:
Charter school ABC used taxpayer money to
maneuver a reverse merger on the sketchy
Vancouver stock exchange, enriching
directors and leaving students without books.
Not-quite-on-topic anecdote: ​Little Johnny’s
mild-mannered parents called the Vancouver
mayor and demanded to know why the stock
exchange was a notorious magnet for
fraudsters.
Editor response: “Why are you talking to me
about stock exchange regulations?”
Better anecdote: ​Little Johnny’s
mild-mannered parents commandeered the

executive director’s 140-foot yacht and
demanded to know where the textbooks were​.
Editor response: “Go right ahead and do this
project, new favorite reporter!”
Ask for resources:
●

Have an idea of the time you will
need.

For many of us, the golden days of “take all
the time you need” are in the rear view
mirror. Estimate how much time you would
need to report, write and fact check. Then, if
your editor tries to establish an
unrealistically short deadline, you will be
prepared with reasons why you need more
time.
●

Figure out what tools and talent the
project will need.

Video, photo, audio, online interactives,
animation, cutting-edge digital and print
design, coding, newsletters, social media
planning: Not all of us are going to get all of
the tools and supportive talent.
Think about which of these tools other
projects at your news organization have
successfully used, or projects on similar
topics at other news organizations. Use those
successes as examples of what can be done
for your project.
Be prepared to argue for the ones that matter.
Finally, prep for the surprise:
You get a greenlight, you are deep into
reporting and then, because the news gods
have not smiled upon you, one of two things
happens:
●

You uncover a logic flaw requiring
you to rethink an​ ​underlying premise,
or

●

You uncover something which is
related to your original premise, but
much, much better.

Avoiding irritating your editor at this point
and keeping your new, revised project
moving forward actually starts much earlier.
Once you have project approval, make certain
you have a sit-down with your editor once a
week, at a minimum, to talk about the week’s
findings.
For larger news organizations, or news
organizations with dedicated and organized
investigative teams, this may seem like a
no-brainer.
But editors often are juggling multiple
responsibilities, and projects.
If your editor is in the loop, he or she is less
likely to feel blindsided when interviewees
abruptly recant, or numbers lead you astray.
And even if neither occurs, your editor is
more likely to be vested in the project - a true
partner.
Questions?
Pat Beall ​|​ ​pbeall@pbpost.com​ ​|​ @beall1 ​|
www.palmbeachpost.com

