Making time for investigative
work in a daily newsroom
*** ​Practical time management tips
from editors of The Oregonian
*** ​Navigating the project bubble (From
Therese Bottomly,
​
editor and vice president of content)

1. Recognize it is hard and a lot of work 2. Find the organizational tool that
works for you. It might be Slack, Trello, a
notepad, a whiteboard, a calendar, whatever – but use it 3. Involve all
stakeholders early. Don’t wait months to involve multimedia or data
teams. 4. Meet regularly with all stakeholders. 5. Schedule time for yourself to
work on the project. Put an hour on your calendar
once a week at least, more as needed. 6. If the project is a priority, your actions
need to show it is a priority. That means
occasionally passing on other work or running interference for reporters and others.
7. Do not avoid essential questions: nut graph, major findings, structure 8. Seek
feedback along the way from those outside the project bubble. Listen to the
feedback. They are your first readers. 9. Ask for help. If you need to be detached
for a week from other work, ask. Maybe
you only get three days but that’s better than
nothing.
*** ​Controlling the chaos (From
Mary Mooney,
​
night breaking news editor)

Think of it as the journalistic equivalent of making Thanksgiving dinner: prep work,
priorities and helpers make it doable. For that:

● ​It's important to give reporters time set aside specifically for a particular
project. ​The "do it when you can" means it'll never get done. (You're having turkey?
It takes time to cook. No way around it. Otherwise everyone ends up poisoned and
puking. Or fleeing a burning house after an attempt to speed things up by
deep-frying goes awry. YouTube has proof of this.)

● ​Try to break a project up into manageable chunks with clear deadlines. ​The
sidebar's due by this date. The info for the graphic's due by that date. The mainbar's
due by that date. I think reporters work better when the expectations are clear. And
spacing out the work means the editor doesn't get a huge dump of copy at the end.
It's like those checklists for Thanksgiving: You wouldn't expect to buy a turkey, bake
pies, make sides and clean and decorate the house all on Thanksgiving, right?
You'd figure out what needed to be done first, and how far ahead it could be done.

● ​Divide, conquer and delegate. ​For both reporters and editors. What can you take
off your plate to give you time for a project? Can you outsource non-project stuff to
colleagues, who will doubtless need to return the favor when they're working on a
project of their own? (Can someone else set the table/clean the house/shop/buy
flowers while you deal with the turkey? Don't be a hero and try to do everything
yourself. That's the path to food poisoning and family fights. Or in the case of
projects, lawsuits and burnout.)
***
Prioritized list making ​(From Grant
Butler, a trending editor)
● When I worked (at another paper), my editor was a big proponent of the Franklin
Covey planner system. Back then, it was a calendar book where you would make a
daily to-do list, where you would prioritize things as: A) Things that must be done
that day; B) Things that would be good to get done that day; C) and things that can
be done if time allows, but the sky won’t collapse if they get pushed to the next day.

The planners also had appointment calendars, and ample room to take notes of
meetings, brainstorming ideas, whatever.

● I liked the organizational tool. The basic pages looked like this:
● There used to be Franklin Covey stores, but they have disappeared with the
arrival of smart phones. I think they make an app now. But I find I can use the
combination of my Outlook calendar and desktop Stickies (digital post-it notes),
which don’t cost a cent. I always have one with the list of stuff I want to do that
day. And there’s a second one I use to organize my own story lists.

***
The fine art of traffic directing ​(From
Karly Imus, a newsroom director)
● Set a standard that every reporter is a GA sometimes, depending on the news cycle and
colleagues’ availability
● Pick only the best enterprise stories and backfill for beat reporters so they have time to
devote, but also expect them to pivot quickly from enterprise if news dictates
● Centralize scheduling so editors know which reporters are available to jump in to help

***
Player-coach writing advice ​(From Amy
Wang, a life and culture editor)
● When I’m working on enterprise, I aim to get at least one thing done every day on that
story. It could be as simple as reading one document or scheduling an interview. If I finish
all my daily tasks early, it could be a bigger thing, like transcribing an interview or actually
writing a section of the story. The key for me is to do *something* every day to keep the
momentum going.

● Almost the first thing I do on an enterprise story is write the nut graf. I use it for guidance
on those daily tasks. So if the nut graf lays out four challenges an organization is facing, I
work daily on challenge A until that part of the story is done, then move on to challenge B,
etc.
● Toward the end I do try to clear out my schedule so I have a full day or at least a half day
to fact-check, wordsmith, etc.

***

Creating the culture -- tips for investigations
editors
and those who want to
be Shawn McIntosh Atlanta Journal-Constitution
● Make sure beat reporters are expected to do watchdog work on their beats. If
only investigative specialists investigate, the best ideas won’t bubble up.
● For every major breaking news story, ask the question “What went wrong?”
Almost every news story has some kind of breakdown that is deserving
of
accountability
.
● Be present and active in news meetings. Suggest watchdog angles on routine
stories, not just those an investigative team would tackle.
● For any big breaking news story (huge traffic jam, bridge collapse, school safety
incident, big sports event in town, subway breakdown, delays in addressing
implementation of promised improvements) assign a good watchdog reporter
to
evaluate the response.

● Run the routines. Make sure the reporters in your newsroom are following the
routines that create watchdog opportunities -- regular public records requests,
checks of all periodic government reports, court filings, campaign reports, etc.
● Think strategically about the issues your community is facing. Set up brainstorm
meetings to find illuminating
angles.
● Let your readers know you are committed to accountability journalism. Write
columns about what you do; invite tips; speak to community
groups.
● Follow through on public records requests. Protest poor response. Pick up the
records. Pay for them. Meet with officials who are recalcitrant. File a lawsuit if
needed. In short, train government employees that you mean
business.
● Be supportive of reporters who dig. Celebrate victories.

A newsroom cake for key First Amendment victory at the AJC

Our “Gold Digger” award, given out

often

