Collaborations with students​ serve a dual mission: Produce great investigative
stories while training the next generation of investigative reporters.
Here are some ​tips for success​ ​from academics for their professional partners:
Many news organizations plan in January for projects that they hope to complete within the
calendar year. If you are working with students, that’s too late.
The academic​ ​year begins in the fall, and that’s when decisions for winter and spring are made.
Fall planning is done in spring and summer. We’re always working at least one term ahead.
Pre-reporting and planning need to be done ​before​ the term begins. On day one of the new
term, the academic partner must be ready to hand students their initial reporting assignments as
well as a syllabus that describes where they’re headed and what they’re expected to produce by
the end.
In some cases, students’ work will need to be completed by the end of the term. In others, they
may be able to pursue threads and stories beyond the semester. Either way, they need to have
something to show for the effort when they’re done. ​More on that below.
Students can provide the people-power to go broader and deeper -- to comb through stacks of
lawsuits, submit public records requests across counties or states, clean and analyze data,
develop case studies. Work with your academic partner on developing clear, detailed
instructions for student assignments that serve to guide, educate and assure consistency.
It helps to build in layers of work: public records requests at the beginning, but also
informational interviews. Instructors will need to pair the practical work with how-to lectures on
topics such as backgrounding, for example.
Just like professionals, students have differing levels of skill and drive. Some will require more
guidance than others. We have to be prepared to meet each student where they are. Plan
ahead, and don’t be surprised when it takes a student much longer to complete a task than a
professional.
Intersperse bigger, more complicated challenges with smaller victories along the way.
Letting students try, fail and try again until they get it right is a key part of the learning process.
We need to build in time to allow them to make mistakes and learn from those mistakes with our
(and your) guidance while they report. For us, that means systematic monitoring and
backstopping for detecting and correcting failures as they occur -- and well before the story is
aired/published/posted. It’s worth it -- seeing them learn and succeed is a rewarding experience.

For those reasons, we require students’ memos, stories, graphics, everything to be liberally
footnoted with links to supporting evidence -- interview transcripts, documents, etc. This allows
timely vetting by their instructor-supervisor and by you throughout the reporting and production
process.
The students need you to provide opportunities for them to be reporters, not just research
assistants, and to produce something that will impress potential employers when they graduate.
Being one of 50 in a credit box won’t cut it.
Be willing to share real reporting tasks on the lead stories and look for other ways to give
students discrete assignments that they can point to as their work product: sidebars, graphics,
video, photos. ​Publishing related stories over a longer period of time can also work. ​If not all the
students’ work fits in your package, consider creating a student project page with your academic
partner and linking to it.
For semester programs, we recommend reserving the last month for editing, revising and fact
checking. For quarters, the last two weeks. The academic partner should have a rigorous,
written fact-checking process in place. Build in enough time at the end to do it right.
IRE19 ​New investigative centers: The university model
Panelists:
Kathleen Johnston, director, Michael I. Arnolt Center for Investigative Journalism | Indiana University ​kj100@iu.edu
Maud Beelman, exec. editor, ​Howard Center for Investigative Journalism | Cronkite School ​maud.beelman@asu.edu
Sarah Cohen​, Knight Chair in Journalism, Cronkite School, Arizona State University ​sarah.h.cohen@asu.edu
Kathy Best, director, ​Howard Center for Investigative Journalism | University of Maryland ​klbest@umd.edu
Deborah Nelson​, ​Assoc. Prof. of Investigative Journalism, Philip Merrill College of Journalism ​dnelson4@umd.edu

