IRE 2019 Tipsheet – Holding them Accountable (When you don’t get the interview)
Charlie Specht, Investigative Reporter, WKBW-TV, Buffalo,
Charlie.Specht@wkbw.com
The Catholic Diocese of
Buffalo
• Decisions affect or influence the majority of people in Buffalo.
• Leaders are used to unquestioned authority and a culture of secrecy.
• Other institutions (police, courts) have failed to hold the church accountable.
• Bishops rarely make public appearances.
Religious leaders are used to judging and not being judged. Many are comfortable (more
comfortable than politicians) making grand pronouncements and definitive statements. Use
this to your advantage and keep track of every one.
Beginning stages ​-- At the beginning of a controversy (during the “friendly” stage) the
important thing is to get the bishop or other member of the church hierarchy on the record.
Think not just of that day’s story but of what you might want to know three or six months
from now. Then save this footage in an easily accessible place.
Once they catch on, use your colleagues to help you get answers you may need later for
an investigative story. Ask someone who is not on the investigative staff to get sound from
the bishop. They may try to “fool” this reporter or may tell a lie they would not try with you.
News conferences ​-- Let competitors ask the obvious questions to get quotes and sound
bytes. Ask the more detailed questions to which you already know the answer. This will be
a test of the leader’s honesty. The more evidence you can compile, the stronger your story.
Don’t discount the idea of going to a religious service and recording a leader’s homily. Often
they will tell their congregation things they wouldn’t tell reporters. Don’t be obtrusive – take
out your phone and just set it on the pew or in your front pocket. Some pastors even post
their homilies and comments on the church website or podcast.
Victim-survivors -- ​In situations of sexual abuse, the victim-survivors are in a more powerful
position than reporters to hold leaders accountable. Set them up to do that with your
questions, then get out of the way.
Getting out of your comfort zone – ​If your subject goes into hiding, you may need to take a
different approach. In some circumstances, it may be necessary to use a news conference to
put them on the spot in an unconventional way. In those cases, it can be acceptable to make

a scene, but you have to have the facts – and the public -- on your side.
Real-time feedback through social media ​– After public opinion shifts against them, the
subject may realize silence doesn’t benefit them. If they call another news conference to “set
the record straight,” stream it on your website or Facebook page, then monitor viewer
comments. During the Q&A, you can take those comments (from abuse victims, parishioners or
viewers) and ask them directly to the authority figure. They may be less apt to publicly criticize
you for asking the question if they know it is coming from Jane Q. Public.

