Using scientific testing without having your story look like a lab
report
The testing:
● Figure out what you want to test for and where you want to test. Talk to
environmental experts to get advice and guidance. At first, we didn’t think we’d
test for asbestos, but it ended up a key part of our schools’ investigation.
● If you’re looking at schools, find out how the school district tracks problems. You
want to find maintenance logs, work orders, asbestos surveys (AHERA), drinking
water surveys and test results, building-level asthma numbers (number of
students with asthma, number of attacks by month, number of times medications
given), paint and plaster surveys, facility condition assessments, renovation and
construction contracts and budgets.
● Use school maintenance logs to come up with the most rundown elementary
schools to narrow your scope. They will also help guide staffers where and what
to test.
● Find former and current environmental scientists who work in schools and
cultivate them as sources.
● Request copies of federally required AHERA reports on asbestos.
● If instead of schools, you’re looking at soil that could be contaminated from
former lead smelters, for example, research where they were, what they
produced and their history of violations. Map all the smelters to help guide where
you should test.
● Find a lab that will agree to do analysis for you and get estimated cost.
● If you do your own testing or are enlisting others to do so, find a lab that has a
technician who can train you how to test, and explain what supplies you’ll need to
order.
● If you are enlisting teachers or staffers to collect samples for you, type up
detailed ​instructions​ that they can follow. Put together kits with dust wipes and
vials in Ziploc bags. Put labels on the vials, so the staffer can write the location
where the test was taken and the date and time of the test.

Finding teachers and staffers to test:
● Use a database of school salaries to identify teachers and staffers in the worst
schools with the worst classrooms.

●
●
●

●
●
●

Cold call teachers and staffers and tell them what you’re looking into and ask
them if they will help. Send direct messages through social media.
Chat up teachers at union meetings and conferences.
Meet the teachers to give them the kits and demonstrate how the tests should be
done. Go over it with them to make sure they feel confident how to test. Remind
them to label everything.
Ask them to take photos of the area they tested.
Use charts and graphics to show your findings and make the numbers not so
overwhelming.
Write a ​sidebar​ explaining how you did the testing.

Tell the human story behind the numbers:
● ​Readers’ eyes will likely glaze over if you don’t have people who have been
harmed.
● ​Cultivate sources in the teachers’ union. Talk to as many school nurses as you
can – they know sick children. A school nurse helped hook us up with the mom of
a child who had missed 44 days of school – and made 15 ER visits - in one year
all because of asthma. Another source told us a first grader had been severely
lead poisoned at school. We didn’t have the name of the child, only the school.
We found the family by going to the school numerous times at dismissal time.
One parent of another first grader gave us the last name of the mom; another
parent knew the child’s first name was Dean. Then we got on the phone trying to
find the right family. After several failed attempts, both on the phone and
knocking on doors, we eventually tracked down the child’s grandmother in New
York.
● ​In another case, we heard that children and teachers had been sent to a hospital
“as a precaution” because they had possibly been exposed to carbon monoxide.
We didn’t know how serious it was. So, we went to the school, again at dismissal
time, to find out. Turns out, it was more than a precaution. Two children had
passed out. Again, we didn’t know the names of the children. We went to the
school and chatted up parents until we got a lead.
● Be prepared that when you go to a school, principals do not want you on school
property. Stay on the sidewalk if you can, but get ready to be chased by school
police even when on public property.
● Spend time with the families you find to gain their trust. Get the families on the
record, with photos and videos.
● Obtain copies of the child’s medical records from the parents.
● Also obtain school absence records from parents if it’s part of the story.

In the cases of lead poisoning, the Health Department keeps a database of
children’s blood lead levels. The department wouldn’t give those to us (with
names of children) for privacy reasons. So, we made an agreement with the
health department that if the parents signed waivers, we could get access to a
history of all their blood tests with dates.
● Children often have beautiful quotes, showing their innocence and how they’ve
been harmed.
● Some children in one school wrote letters to a legislator, with a plea for help. If
you find children who have done this or something similar, see if those children
will read those letters for a video.
●

READ THE SERIES HERE​ ↓
http://media.inquirer.com/storage/special_projects/toxic_city_landing_page.html

Contact information:
Wendy Ruderman:
wruderman@inquirer.com
215-854-5924
Barbara Laker:
blaker@inquirer.com
215-854-5933

