50 PUBLIC
RECORDS YOU
NEED TO
REQUEST

RIGHT NOW!!!!!

IRE 2019
Paula Lavigne
@pinepaula
Marina Trahan
@HisGirlHildy

Criminal justice
■ Police reports
– By name, address, type of crime, time frame
– All types: arrest, incident, “information” (the term they give reports that are taken
for informational purposes only but often yield some good info)
■

911 calls AND Calls for Service, which is a more comprehensive set of data

■ Body and dash cam videos
■ Parking tickets and parking permits
■ Jail booking forms/cards
■ Prosecutor case files
■ Evidence not automatically filed in the court case file (audio, video, transcripts)
■ Private security contracts (with businesses, event centers, hospitals, sports venues)
■ “After action” reports: summaries of law enforcement action/response to a big event.
Done by local, state and national law enforcement, including US State Dept.

WDSU-TV New Orleans : Ticket Turmoil
https://www.ire.org/resource-center/stories/27877/

"WDSU Investigates: Parking Ticket Turmoil" is
an in-depth six-month investigation into
erroneously issued parking tickets by the city of
New Orleans. WDSU’s investigation spurred a
probe by the city’s Inspector General. In the
months following, it was discovered that nearly
7,000 parking citations were improperly issued,
potentially costing drivers hundreds of
thousands of dollars in false payments. 2016

https://www.ire.org/resource-center/stories/25252/
Deputies working off-duty paid details at places such as
Walgreens and Wal-Mart all pay Sheriff Marlin Gusman
one dollar for every hour they work, providing Gusman
with about $100,000 in discretionary money each year.
Gusman, who often pleads penury in running his office,
uses the detail money to throw parties for his staff and
hire cheerleaders -- such expenditure is illegal, the
Attorney General's Office has opined. 2011

Health, safety and environment
■

Restaurant / food safety inspection reports
– From city, state health departments; FDA; USDA; CDC for outbreaks
– Think beyond restaurants: sports venues, hospitals, school cafeterias, prisons

■

Animal welfare inspection reports for farms, pet stores, zoos, etc.
– Mainly via USDA, National Institutes of Health for lab animals

■

Organic producer/grower/retailer inspection reports
– USDA, state ag agencies

■

Water safety: swimming pool inspections, municipal water testing, lakes, etc.
– Multiple state/federal agencies



Amusement park safety inspections



Underground storage tank leaks
– EPA/state; generally easy-to-use and more standardized database.

■

Code enforcement violations
– Wherever there are rules and regulations, there are data.

■

ADA complaints / enforcement action

■

WEED !!! Permits for marijuana producers, retailers, dispensaries, etc.
– Good rundown of state permitting agencies https://smallbusiness.findlaw.com/businesslaws-and-regulations/marijuana-business-licenses-permits-and-planning.html

What’s lurking in your
stadium food?
ESPN's Outside the Lines reviewed and
collected more than 16,000 food-safety
inspection reports from health departments
that monitor the 111 professional football,
baseball, basketball and hockey facilities
across North America. The review of routine
inspection reports from 2016 and 2017
found that at about 28 percent of the
venues, half or more of the food service
outlets incurred a high-level violation -- one
that poses a potential threat for foodborne
illness. Outside the Lines also calculated the
average number of high-level violations per
inspection at each venue, and compared
that to the average for restaurants and other
food outlets in the surrounding area, for the
82 venues for which we had community
data provided by Hazel Analytics.

https://tinyurl.com/espnbugsandmice 2018

https://tinyurl.com/y4sz8mj6

Education

(some restricted to public schools only)

 K-12
 Free-and-reduced lunch data, an indicator of income
 Standardized test scores
 Safety inspection data
 District financial records
 Higher education
 Research grants
 Internal investigations / audits
 Accreditation reports
 Both K-12 and higher ed
 School violence/crime data (via Clery Act)
 Title IX complaints, findings of responsibility (names not protected under FERPA for adults)
 Settlements (some happen before a lawsuit is filed) regarding employees, faculty, staff
 Salaries of employees, staff; contracts with coaches, third-party comp
 Sports
 NCAA athletic department revenue/expense reports
 Student-athlete exit interviews
 Reports of NCAA violations
 Sports venue crime/arrest/expulsion logs.
 Logs of text messages sent by fans to report unruly behavior

NMFishbowl.com requested exit interviews from
University of New Mexico senior athletes during two
academic years. The interviews revealed claims of,
”Inequitable treatment of male and female athletes
in the area of weight limits and body mass;
https://nmfishbowl.com/2017/01/12/exclusive-unm-docs- discriminatory access to trainers, weight rooms
and other facilities amongst UNM sports; problems
detail-pitfalls-of-athlete-experience/
with paying for sports related injuries; frosty relations
2017
with some head coaches; and instances of racial
insensitivity on the field and in the classroom.”
The Statesmen Journal - 2009
From the IRE website: The Statesman Journal ran a series of stories that showed how the newest and
least experienced teachers in the Salem-Keizer School District work in the highest poverty schools, which
was based on a data analysis by the newspaper. Using raw data from the school district and state
education department, Statesman Journal education reporter Mackenzie Ryan analyzed teacher
experience levels, student minority and poverty make up, and state test results at each school.

2018

COLLEGE ATHLETES IN recent years were about three times more likely than other students to be
accused of sexual misconduct or domestic violence in complaints made at Power 5 conference
schools, according to an analysis by Outside the Lines.
That finding is based upon data from Title IX complaints covering allegations of sexual assault,
domestic violence, sexual exploitation, sexual coercion, stalking or retaliation collected from 32 Power
5 schools that provided records in response to requests for complaints against athletes over the past
six years. https://tinyurl.com/y5urjnbm

Governance
 Meeting agendas, meeting minutes, meeting video

 Manuals, policies, forms. Getting copies of what rules the agency has to follow and what forms it
processes will help you find out what data it collects.
 Catalog of databases and data dictionaries
 Financial disclosure / conflict of interest filings for lawmakers and anyone else required to submit
those
 Approved grants and contracts.
 Records retention schedules
 FOIA log : agencies keep logs of all public records requests they receive
 Calendars for public officials
 Correspondence
 Emails (including draft messages in employee email accounts)
 Cell phone bills
 Text messages
 Internal messaging system correspondence, i.e. Slack.
 Social media postings
 Also request copies of correspondence mentioning your name and/or your media outlet. If you run a
big story about an agency, wait a few days and then request all correspondence from the agency that
included a copy of that story’s URL.
 Military records

Golden Padlock 2018 Winner

2018 | City of Atlanta
Atlanta was selected for this honor for directing
city staff to block records requests and for
releasing false invoices that triggered a criminal
investigation into alleged violations of Georgia’s
Open Records Act. In response to a potentially
embarrassing records request from Channel 2
News, former Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed’s press
secretary sent text messages to city staff
advising they respond by being, “as unhelpful as
possible…Drag this out as long as possible…And
provide information in the most confusing
format available.”

https://tinyurl.com/yytmmhth

Business / non profits
• IRS 990 forms from nonprofits
• Although available from online sources (Guidestar, ProPublica, CitizenAudit, etc., the
nonprofits themselves are required to turn them over, which is an option for more recently
filed forms.
• Non profit filings with the secretary of state
• State licensing data
• States license everything from athletic trainers and sports agents to cosmetologists and
masseuses to home builders and electricians. See what they license and what type of
regulations those licensees have to follow, and you may have a valuable dataset.
• Building inspection/permit reports
• Occupational Safety and Health Administration reports
https://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/establishment.html
• Economic impact statements
• Liquor license permit/revocations
• Tax exemptions
• Contracts with government agencies
•
•

Consumer complaints to the FCC and FTC (online retailers, scammers, etc.) / Better Business Bureau
FCC complaints about profanity during live broadcasts https://t.co/h6Fa0yVTRU

https://tinyurl.com/yxkt2flz
2019
Big Baller Brand rift emerges as Lakers' Lonzo Ball severs
ties with co-founder over money allegations
According to two sources close to the family, over the past two years,
the Lakers, too, expressed concerns to Foster over numerous
customer complaints about Big Baller Brand made to the Better
Business Bureau, which gave the company a failing grade in 2018.
Last year, the bureau reported receiving 184 complaints over the
past three years, mostly involving problems sending correct
merchandise, shipping orders on time, and not providing information
or responding to questions about delivery status.
…….
The Federal Trade Commission has recorded about 200 complaints
made against Big Baller Brand from April 2017 through mid-January,
most of which are duplicates of those made to the Better Business
Bureau. The FTC enforces federal laws pertaining to internet
commerce, but FTC officials, citing policy, do not comment on
whether the agency is investigating a company.

More: https://tinyurl.com/yakz46ho

Transportation
 SAFER inspection reports for commercial vehicles
 Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/company-safetyrecords
 Aircraft ownership / registration (FAA)
 Watercraft licensing
 Vanity plates
 Ride-share permits (where required)

Other
 Ethnic group historical records
 Gun violence (CDC, NEISS FBI)
 YOUR SUBMISSIONS!!!

Did we miss an idea? Add it to
the list. Reply to @pinepaula

Additional record ideas from panel audience
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Criminal filing and disposition extracts - https://t.co/TiDgonrqpO?amp=1
School bullying incidents, use of seclusion rooms and restraint on students through state dept of education.
Radon testing in schools data through health department
Apps downloaded on government phones of state workers. (Look for apps designed to delete/shield
messaging)
Tort claim filings. https://www.sacbee.com/news/state/california/fires/article226237815.html and
https://www.idahostatesman.com/news/business/article218011845.html
Exit interviews and/or separation agreements with law enforcement officers
Notes that school board or city council members are scribbling on note pads during meetings.
https://t.co/dqMATND4MD
Law enforcement disciplinary records or use of force records.
Blocked or muted Twitter, Instagram, etc. users on government accounts (police, mayor, etc.)
https://t.co/DxaY76TLXW
Government purchase card receipts
Brady Indexes (for law enforcement officers who have lied) https://t.co/M4mOfJIxrr?amp=1
Sexual misconduct violations in Olympic sports of https://t.co/egwKTXdLjD?amp=1
911 misdials
Police, city official overtime records
Alcohol licensing/permitting agency citations, (might have interesting narrative)
Sentencing reports
6/14/2019

