EMOTIONS AND ACCOUNTABILITY: TIPS FOR
MASTERING THE ART OF COMPELLING TV INTERVIEWS
Joce Sterman (@jocefromthenews), Chris Papst (@chrispapst), Phil Williams
(@NC5PhilWilliams)

The Art of the Emotional Interview
Don’t be a stranger
Before you start – get to know your subject. Look at their social media. Have a background call.
Look for connections to try to eliminate the weirdness that comes with showing up to meet
someone with lights and cameras. The biggest barrier to good, emotional interviews is YOU
feeling like a stranger to the person you desperately need to open up.
No good conversation starts with a list of questions
It’s not an interview, it’s a conversation. Let them know what you plan to talk about IN
ADVANCE to make sure they’re comfortable with how tough/emotional the interview could be.
But don’t supply lists of questions and don’t bring one. Nothing ruins an authentic interaction
between two people like an agenda of all the things you have to talk about.
Shift the spotlight
Do everything you can to make them forget this experience is on-camera. Hide your setup as
much as possible. Talk about options for where/how the interview will happen – what your
ideal plan is, ask for suggestions for places you could go together, things they can show you,
activities you can share, etc. If you get push back on an outside-the-box idea, try again once
you’ve met in person.
Memorable moments can be hard to make sitting down
You’re trying to make a connection with this person and it’s not about soundbites – it’s about
creating memorable moments together. Good interviews with humans can be sit-downs. They
don’t have to be. When possible, seek out interview opportunities that are interactive or onlocation somewhere. Doing something/going somewhere creates a distraction from all the
spectacle of television and helps people open up. Additionally, being somewhere that’s part of
the story helps to paint a better picture of what happened and what your subject experienced.
Be as tough & fair with “victims” as you are on “bad guys”
These are everyday people we’re asking to help us tell a story. They’re not obligated to talk to
us. So be sensitive, but never forget it’s your job to ask hard questions on both sides. The socalled “victims” of our stories don’t get a pass on scrutiny. Ask them for the pictures and proof
up front so you can be prepared with ideas of how to use them for memorable moments when
you meet in person. Develop a game plan of how to handle the tougher subjects you’ll need to
tackle on-camera in a way that’s sensitive AND fair to both sides.

You were a human being long before you became a reporter. Act like it
If you want real answers, ask real questions. Don’t be a reporter. Be YOURSELF. Talk to them
like everyone else you know. Make the questions to the point and conversational. Multi-part
questions create confusion for people who are already overwhelmed by this experience. Stop
when you hear the question mark come out of your mouth! (Obligatory tip credit: Julian Sher)
Prepare, so you can be present
The worst thing about human interviews is when the reporter is so caught up in their mission
that they forget to be human! Prepare so you can be present in the moment. Actively listen so
you can ask thoughtful follow-up questions. Some of the best moments come from the
questions you didn’t realize you’d ask. And if you’re in the moment – you’ll ask them. If you’re
not prepared to improvise in the moment, you’ll miss an opportunity and kick yourself when
you log the tape.
Forget the facts and figures, focus on the feeling
Good soundbites and memorable moments come from feeling questions - what do you
remember? How did you feel in that moment? What was the hardest part? When they answer,
allow your subject the dignity of their emotions. Human emotion – whether it’s laughter or
tears – is what fuels powerful stories. Don’t ruin the moment. DON’T INTERRUPT, EVEN WHEN
IT’S AWKWARD OR PAINFUL.

The Art of the Accountability Interview
Get the interview
The best stories have the best voices. Exhaust every effort to get the characters that your
investigation needs. Be prepared to take weeks or months to land the biggest interviews if the
story will hold or requires significant time to assemble. Don’t settle for, “so-and-so declined to
comment”. “Unscheduled interviews” can be good TV, but sit-down interviews tend to yield
better results. Be willing to meet anywhere at any time. Be flexible to reach an agreement for
the interview.
Find the right setting
Determine what setting fits your story in terms of topic. Limit any possible distractions to
ensure the viewer’s focus remains on the subject and the content. Find a setting that will make
your interview comfortable. A comfortable subject will produce better sound. Remember, the
idea is to tell the fairest, most well-rounded story, for the audience. If possible, have the
photographer arrive early to set up to avoid “small talk”.
Determine your main gets
Cast a narrow net in terms of reaction – at first. Once you get what you need broaden the
scope. Determine the potential “wow” moments of your story and build your questions, and

the direction of the interview, around them. Time your “wow” moment questions
appropriately. In most interviews, you will feel when the time is right.
Know your subject better than your subject
Know the answers to most of your questions before you ask them. Research as many aspects of
your subject as resources and time allows. Test the interviewee by asking factual questions
early in the process to see if they are honest. Remember what they say. If they attempt to
mislead you, correct them in a nice way. Subtly send the message that you did your homework.
Most people will respect your research. If they don’t, the interview could be fun.
Anticipate, don’t influence
Find someone you trust and perform mock interviews. Have that person try to throw you off
your game or redirect the interview with unexpected, yet possible, answers. Ask yourself and
your team, “what if?” and “then what?” It’s always helpful to set up multiple cameras at a
variety of angles to record anything that could happen – like your subject walking out of the
interview. Also, alert security if you think and interview can get out of hand.
Match your subject
Read your subject’s non-verbal cues (read a few body language books). In most interviews, you
want to make your subject comfortable. Try to match their tone, pitch and speaking levels. Not
only is this how you may get the best answers, it’s also easier for viewers to watch. No one likes
to watch uncomfortable interviews, it’s distracting. Allow uncomfortable moments to create
themselves.
Have a conversation and keep it going
Most people aren’t used to being interviewed. But they are used to having conversations. Try to
avoid the standard question/answer format. Talk to the subject like you would anyone else and
frame questions around the discussion. Avoid sudden shifts in topics. Look for natural segues to
guide the interview towards important issues. Don’t be afraid to share a laugh and lighten the
mood. Be sure to listen intently to the subject’s answers. We’ve all made the mistake of asking
a question that was already answered.
Nice reporter asking tough questions
Don’t be the focus of the interview. Your job is to guide the interview to get the best possible
information for viewers. Your job is not to “create TV”. We’ve all seen interviews where the
reporter can become the bad guy. Stay calm. Limit movement. When pressing a subject, press
them respectfully. Adding a sir/ma’am/Mr./Mrs. to a hard-hitting question goes a long way. Kill
them with kindness.
The thesis question
Look to strong, succinct questions to reinforce the story’s thesis. In other words, make your
point with an interview question instead of a bridge stand-up or powerfully delivered track.
Example from a recent story of mine: “If the principal isn't working for the school system, how
can she still be getting paid?” That’s the story laid out in one question. Plan your “thesis

question” and wait for the right moment during the interview to deliver them. Place it in your
script appropriately.

The Art of the Unscheduled Interview
It should be a LAST resort, not the first!
Ask for a sit-down interview first. You will almost always get more real information in that
environment than in a hurried unscheduled interview. Also, viewers may see such interviews as
extremely intrusive, which means you risk having the viewers sympathizing with the subject.
Serious questions that deserve serious answers
Ask yourself: Is it worth it? Unscheduled interviews, because they can be intrusive, may not be
worth the hassle/perception if you cannot defend it by saying: "These are serious questions
that deserve serious answers."
Whenever possible, give the subject adequate notice about the subject matter
An interview is only an "ambush" if the subject has no idea about your interest in an interview
and about the general subject matter. If the interview is a surprise, you give the subject the
"out" of denying any knowledge of what you are discussing and/or claiming that he/she needs
time to research the topic before responding.
Warn the subject that an unscheduled interview is a tool in your toolbox
In my request for a sit-down interview, I am particularly likely to tell public officials that I
operate under the premise that (1) public officials have an obligation to answer questions on
camera for the public to see, (2) I always prefer a "cordial sit-down interview" over chasing
someone down the street, but that (3) I am willing to do that if necessary.
Have a plan
An unscheduled interview requires coordination with other members of your team. Discuss
various possible scenarios so that reporter and photojournalist are on the same page.
Include the viewer in the process
Explain to the viewers why you chose to do an unscheduled interview. When you first approach
the subject, make it clear that you have been trying to reach him/her for X number of
days/weeks to get answers to your questions.
Always be polite - ALWAYS!
If the viewers are offended by your behavior, they are less likely to listen to what you have to
say.
Express openness to hearing the subject's side
Your interactions should always make it clear that your motive is to (1) give the subject a

chance to tell his/her story and (2) get to the truth. If they subject suggests that you just don't
understand the situation, make it clear that you really want to understand his/her perspective.
What are the three most important questions?
Sometimes, you just get a chance to fire off one question. Many times, you are lucky if you can
get out three questions. Anticipate that possibility and go into the unscheduled interview with
those top three questions. For example, if your story is likely to suggest that the subjected
defrauded clients/taxpayers, you should try to ask: "Did you cheat these people?"
Be prepared for a full interview
Sometimes, you may end up having a lot more time with the subject than you anticipated.
Subjects may just freeze and field any question that you are prepared to pose. They may even
agree to a sit-down interview on the spot. Be prepared to seize the moment. It helps to have a
sense of how you might tell your story, so questions can be posed accordingly.
Have a sense of when it's time to let it go
If you have spent five minutes with a person and you are getting absolutely nothing, that may
be your moment to let it go. If the person goes into his/her office and slams the door, that may
be your moment to let it go. If the person finally gives you what you sense is the definitive
closing part of the interview, that may be your moment to let it go.
Be completely transparent afterwards
All sorts of accusations can be made about how journalists conduct themselves in unscheduled
interviews. Be prepared to post the entire exchange and explain the circumstances in even
more detail online.

