Tip sheet
Marilyn Thompson, Senior Editor, ProPublica (marilyn.thompson@propublica.org)

Pitching local project ideas: Five questions to ask
1. Why should anyone care? What is unusual or distinctive about your local area and its issues?
Bad water quality? An especially cozy state legislature? The corporate headquarters of a
particularly interesting company? A place distinctive in its racial or ethnic make-up? Keep asking
yourself this central question and refining your pitch. Example: California jails and the impact of
realignment.
2. Why are you the best person to tell this story? Personal experiences, years living in one
location, time devoted to a specific beat, unusual access to data or documents. Convince us that
you have something special to say about a local issue. Example: Ken Ward on Gov. Jim Justice.
3. What do I already know about my subject? Pre-reporting is critical. Offer a reporting plan with
specific story ideas. Find out what experts have had to say about your subject. Include
summaries of travel that will be required, agencies that have relevant documents and any
projected costs. Get going on public records requests. Find out what data is available. The more
you know, the more convincing your pitch will be. Example: KentuckyWired
4. Why ProPublica? We do accountability stories with moral force and try to find out what’s
wrong, who is responsible and what can be done to fix it. Spend some time on our website
reading our recent work and try to assess what our staff can do specifically to help you advance
the reporting. Make sure your idea is not one we have already tackled on some level in recent
years. Check the IRE archives for similar projects on the topic. Avoid trying to recreate a project
that has already been done well elsewhere. Example: WNYC and The Real Bosses of New Jersey.
5. When am I finished? Our process includes several layers of review and sometimes involves
coming back to you and your editor with ideas for reshaping your proposal. Be open to change.
Example: Connecticut’s segregated housing.

