Kae M. Petrin
Digital Reporter
St. Louis Public Radio
kpetrin@stlpublicradio.org​ / ​@kmaepetrin

Investigating Property Developers
Starting Out
Perhaps a company has received exclusive development rights or a large tax abatement. Or a city is
making way for a large, new project — like a sports stadium or federal employment center — and
neighborhood residents fear they’ll be displaced. Or a deal was made years ago, but the project still isn’t
done. These are just a few reasons that a property development company might deserve a closer look.
Step-by-Step
First ​learn the legal process​ for acquiring development rights, tax abatements, etc.
a. In most municipalities, developers must go through a series of hearings, committees,
councils or boards before securing any sort of public funding. And in many cases
(especially if the property they own is in a historic district) a developer must receive
approval to pursue large-scale projects. ​Follow the process, and FOIA the paper trail.
b. All these processes will change depending on whether the land was publicly or privately,
whether a tax credit/abatement program is state vs. local, and how a local government is
structured.
c. Key questions: ​Who shows up to represent the developer in any hearings? What sort of
promises were made, by whom? Which public officials support a developer? While this
development is in progress, does it limit other developers’ options for pursuing similar
projects nearby?
2. Get the deal itself.
a. FOIAing the process paperwork might not lead you all the way to the original development
deal and associated legal agreements. In fact, to even learn the name of the deal and the
agency that holds it, you might need to acquire a bunch of other paperwork first. But it’s
worth it! Whether it’s a bill, a contract, or some other sort of legal agreement,​ the actual
deal will tell you far more about any developer than the officials who approved the
documents.
b. This will also lead you to additional documents that might be unusual, such as databases
or certificates created specifically for the development.
3. Talk to tenants and neighbors. ​Walk around.
a. Nearby communities​ may notice illegal or otherwise questionable development patterns
long before a developer even announces project plans. Current or former property owners
may have some insight. Business owners in the area may report conflicts with a larger
developer, or concerns about a development displacing their businesses.
b. Inspection records, citizen service bureau complaints, and building permits​ can indicate
what’s going on at a property site on a daily basis.
c. Key questions: ​Who might be displaced by a new development? Is this development part
of a larger pattern of gentrification that might be an important story? Who has to live next
to in-progress or abandoned projects? Have others tried to develop the same area? What
prevented them from doing so?
4. Use the record trail to ​check project progress and legal compliance​.
a. Tax records. Tax abatement accounts. Certificates of completion. Progress reports.
Databases. Identify any paper trails that the developer should have created. You can’t get
direct access to private developers’ records, but they often have to file tons of paperwork
with state, local or even federal governments.
1.

b. You can also get contact information this way. Project permits may include phone numbers
for construction companies and representatives.
c. Important questions include: is the developer paying taxes? Maintaining properties that
they own? Meeting deadlines, or requesting extensions if not? (If extensions are granted,
which politicians or committees are approving those decisions? Do these approvals seem
consistent with others, or is the project receiving unusual treatment?) Is the developer
renting units in existing properties? Paying contractors and subcontractors? Receiving any
money for completed projects?
5. Go back to the beginning of the development. ​How did the developer acquire the property?
a. Check deeds and sales records. ​The relevant municipality may have these in a searchable
database, though it’s always safer to double-check by going to the Recorder of Deeds’
office. Missing property transaction records might indicate shady deals, underpaid former
owners, or incomplete transfers.
6. Look into any claimed ​tax credits or abatements​.
a. Has any money been dispersed? What for? To whom? Do the credits or abatements seem
in line with property values? Does taxable or abated income from completed projects
match projections?
7. Think ​beyond the construction.
a. Development doesn’t stop when the building’s complete. Is a large project being
well-managed? If it’s residential, has it attracted tenants? What happened to people who
used to live there, or who used to own businesses nearby?
When Are The Findings Newsworthy?
Broken promises, misspent funds, and flouted legal agreements often merit coverage. But even if a
development appears legally above-board, new developments — especially large ones — change
neighborhoods and lives. Given the right voices, even a traditionally successful development might merit a
story.

