Investigating health and safety hazards in housing
1) ​What went wrong, and who should be held
accountable?
● Follow the money = figure out who owns it, manages it, and pays the rent.
● Federal rental subsidies mean federal oversight of health and safety hazards -this includes traditional public housing, but also Section 8 and less well-known
programs.
● Local housing authorities and private landlords are responsible for running and
maintaining HUD rental properties, and must also comply with state & local laws.

2) If it’s HUD-assisted rental property, how did federal
officials conduct oversight and enforcement?
● HUD conducts inspections based on federal health and safety standards under a
legal mandate to ensure federally subsidized housing is “decent, safe, and
sanitary.”
● HUD makes some of these inspection scores public through its ​Physical
Inspection Score ​databases. ProPublica has created its own user-friendly ​“HUD
Inspect” database​. FOIA to get the full inspection reports.
● If landlords fail to maintain their properties, HUD is supposed to take ​quick
enforcement action ​against them to help ensure that problems get fixed promptly -actions detailed in documents. You can FOIA for those, too.
● You might get a faster response to FOIA requests from the local housing
authority, if they have oversight responsibilities.
● Also useful to FOIA: The underlying contract that landlord has with HUD, which
also tells you how much money they’re getting from the federal government (aka
taxpayers).

3) What are state/local rules, regulations, and
oversight responsibilities?
● FOIA the local government for housing inspection records, complaints, and
citations for a property (or multiple properties under the same landlord).

● Also consider: Incident reports from the police, fire department, 911 calls, and
ambulance calls to a specific address if there’s a hazard you are trying to track
(e.g. collapsing ceiling, carbon monoxide).
● Search for court records for previous cases involving the landlord (whether it’s a
private owner or the local housing authority) and property management company.
● State housing codes are often left to local authorities to enforce, but it’s worth
looking at those statutes as well. The ​National Council of State Legislatures ​is a
helpful resource.

4) Look at the underlying standards for inspections, how often
they occur, if there are staffing, budget, or other constraints, etc.
● Examine the actual standards and protocol for conducting inspections.
● What about enforcement? If there are serious problems, what’s supposed to
happen next? There are typically enforcement policies, rules, and guidance,
detailed in documents — find those, and see if they’re being followed.
● Consider what the standards are missing. If something isn’t in there, the property
won’t be penalized for it.

5) How widespread is this problem? How long has it been going
on, there and/or elsewhere?
● Is anyone keeping track of these types of incidents?
● If not, can you create your own tally? (Enlist help, if necessary.)
● Are there similar incidents that might be hidden from view? How else might they
be described or categorized?

6) Remember that housing is a fundamentally human concern about a
basic human need — a safe place to live.
● Basic shoe-leather reporting is critical. Visit the property, but also the surrounding
neighborhood and community.
● Have residents give you a walk-through of their home — a natural place for
sharing personal stories.
● Make the human stakes clear. Think about photo and video possibilities.

Suzy Khimm National
Reporter, NBC News
Washington, DC
suzy.khimm@nbcuni.com
Twitter: @SuzyKhimm

