REVERSE MORTGAGE TIPSHEET
IRE 2019
Jeff Kelly Lowenstein
Grand Valley State University
@JeffKLO, ​jkellylowenstein@gmail.com
(312) 532-7902
I.​

​Be in regular contact with trusted sources.

The ​initial story​ I did on reverse mortgages began with a meeting I had with a
longtime source who said that his aunt had been victimized by a reverse mortgage
scam and was in danger of losing her home.
II.​

​Hit the court records to see if the individual case reveals something systemic.

While meeting with the source I looked at ​local ​and ​federal court records ​to see if
something similar had happened to people beside the source’s loved one. The
search revealed that the alleged scam artist had been sued close to 100 times in
local and federal court! His actions had also been the subject of previous news
coverage and a 2002 pledge by the Illinois Attorney General to put him out of
business. Having this background information allowed us to ask more pointed
questions.
III.​

​Power of Follow Up

Don’t feel you have to cover the entire top in a single story. For the initial project we
did follows about ​a FBI raid​, the filing, ​progress​ and ​passage​ of legislation and
various court actions ​against the scam artist. Each story provided an opportunity to
build audience, sources and momentum for the project.
IV.​

​The data is out there to take the story from the local to the national level.

I discovered ​HUD originations data​ from 1989 to 2011 and HECM Data Monthly
Snapshots that cover from 2012 to the present toward the end of the initial project.
This data provided a key basis for the project we have just published with
USATODAY.
V.​

​Fight for public records! FOIA is as strong as we make it.

Colleague, friend and USATODAY national investigative reporter ​Nick Penzenstadler
fought with HUD for months to get the foreclosure data. While we did not get all
fields we had requested, the data he did get proved absolutely critical in telling a
longitudinal story that revealed both disproportionate originations in predominantly
black neighborhoods during the last decade and even higher levels of foreclosure in
those same communities during the 2013 to 2017 period.

VI.​

​Bring in demographic data to deepen the story.

Nick told me that 60628 had the most foreclosures of any zip code in the country.
This South Side zip code was familiar to me through my time doing race and poverty
analysis work for ​The Chicago Reporter​. It gave us an opening to bring together
demographic data​ from the census at the zip code level with the originations and
foreclosure data to bring out the national character of these patterns.
VII.​

​Look for periods within the data.

We eventually looked at originations data during the 30-year life of the program that
officially began in 1989. Doing so let us see that the program’s peak period of activity
was from 2001 to 2009. This let us hone in on that decade.
VIII.​

​Put the data in historic context.

The ongoing legacy of ​redlining in black communities​ and the erasure of the
hard-earned homeownership gains​ by residents of these neighborhoods after the
passage of the landmark ​1968 Fair Housing Act​ made this story even more
disturbing. The generational wealth gap between black and white families gave an
additional level of context.
IX.​

​Test alternative explanations.

We controlled for median household income to try to answer the argument one often
hears that “This is about class, not race” argument.
X.​

​Don’t go beyond what you have.

We had the predominant race of the zip code, not the lenders. Stick with that.
We didn’t get a smoking gun email of intentional targeting, but had a number of
pieces of evidence that spoke to that. We had many people talking about taxes and
insurance and a couple of data points, but didn’t have national data.
XI.​

​Always ground the story in people.

At core this is a story about home, about family, and about community. It’s critical to
convey both that homes is the emotional center AND the key, if not exclusive
exclusive element of the financial legacy for many families with whom we spoken.
USATODAY editors were very strong about making sure we had that element, and it
helped to start by talking with people about what home meant to them in order to
build trust and illustrate the loss.
XII.​

​Give everyone a reason to care.

There can be a tendency to distance oneself from the story if it’s only about other
people, whoever they are. We worked to show in the USATODAY project that the
individual, other family members, community and ​general public​ pays a price when
these loans go bad. ​A 2006 study​ about the impact on community property values

showed the ripple effect of an individual foreclosure on already vulnerable
communities. The story showed the bitter irony for many people of folks who already
owned their home outright and had been pillars of their communities being part of its
diminished value through participating in a program that touted a carefree
retirement.
XIII.​

​Be creative about distribution.

We used my brother’s​ Instagram account ​for the initial story and ​sparked
conversation​ and offers of help from people around the world. Using this approach
allowed us to get a much wider audience for the work than we would have had if we
only went through the publication.

