Investigative Echoes
Here is a checklist to think about the lifecycle of a big investigative story after it is
published/aired. This echo strategy is planned beyond the obvious follow-ups that occur
when something happens (new data, change in laws, resignations, etc.).
1. Later that day echo – The story that reflects the investigation that was published/broadcast
earlier and how the story has advanced in those hours.
2. Why/how we reported echo – The story that takes the reader/viewer into the
source/tips/reasons for the reporting and what was the investment of your team.
3. Endorsement echo – The reaction of other staff in your building/company to your reporting
and why it matters (authentic and specific).
4. The next day echo – The ICYMI publishing of the story for the audience that might have been
distracted or unavailable to read/watch/listen.
5. The next weekend – The repack of the story for the audience that has time on the weekend to
read/watch/listen.
6. Reaction echo – The initial general reaction on social media to the story/volume (ideally you
trend) with a look at the type of reaction/volume.
7. Questions you had echo – The reporting you do off questions that the audience asked/is
asking about your story.
8. Influencer echo – The specific reaction of key people who have influence around the story
topic now that they have seen the investigation.
9. Survey/Poll echo – The ways to query the audience/readers about their reaction to the story
and what they would like to see happen.
10. Legislative echo – The reaction to your story from the authorities that can further investigate,
fund, and or legislative change.
11. Legislative session echo – The republishing of your reporting in time for a key legislative
session or meeting.
12. The next official meeting echo – The meeting of authorities/trade group/others who have
official involvement in the story.
13. Interview echo – The places (local/national radio, podcasters, national TV, vertical media)
where you can talk about your story as it continues to unfold.
14. Format echo – The version of the story in another format be it video, snackable (short form
video), quiz, slideshow, eBook, documentary, etc.
15. Townhall echo – The event your organization holds or others hold to explore the issue that
your investigation touched on.
16. Internal echo – The one month reporting back to leadership about the results from your
investigation including all echoes, external links and KPIs.
17. Subscription/membership echo – The use of your reporting to encourage people to support
your journalism.
18. Award echo – The story you will do when you enter/nominated/win an award.
19. Yearender echo – The integration of your story into your organizations end of year reporting.
20. Anniversary echo – The contextual report of what you say to your readers one month, one
year, etc. after the original reporting.
© 2019 SmithGeiger LLC

