AFTER THE INVESTIGATION TIP SHEET
Panelists:
Andrew Finlayson | andrew@smithgeiger.com
Anne Galloway | agalloway@vtdigger.org
Emily Le Coz | elecoz@gatehousemedia.com
Noah Pransky | pransky@gmail.com
ECHOES
Echoes speak to how to keep an investigative effort alive through a conscious effort in advance
of publication/broadcast to fully identify the opportunities to come back to the big story. Too
many times teams are exhausted by getting the story on that they may not have a plan for the
weeks ahead to keep the story going with viewers/readers/listeners.
Echoes are often something an investigative team should plan outside of any spontaneous
reaction to the story.
Here is a checklist to think about the lifecycle of your story after it is published/aired. This is
beyond the obvious follow-ups that occur when something happens (new data, change in laws,
resignations, etc.):
Later that day echo – The story that reflects the investigation that was
published/broadcast earlier and how the story has advanced in those hours.
2. Why/how we reported echo – The story that takes the reader/viewer into the
source/tips/reasons for the reporting and what was the investment of your team.
3. Endorsement echo – The reaction of other staff in your building/company to your
reporting and why it matters (authentic and specific).
4. The next day echo – The ICYMI publishing of the story for the audience that might have
been distracted or unavailable to read/watch/listen.
5. The next weekend – The repack of the story for the audience that has time on the
weekend to read/watch/listen.
6. Reaction echo – The initial general reaction on social media to the story/volume (ideally
you trend) with a look at the type of reaction/volume.
7. Questions you had echo – The reporting you do off of questions that the audience
asked/is asking about your story.
8. Influencer echo – The specific reaction of key people who have influence around the
story topic now that they have seen the investigation.
9. Survey/Poll echo – The ways to query the audience/readers about their reaction to the
story and what they would like to see happen.
10. Legislative echo – The reaction to your story from the authorities that can
fund/legislative change.
11. Legislative session echo – The republishing of your reporting in time for a key legislative
session or meeting.
1.

12. The next official meeting echo – The meeting of authorities/trade group/others who

have official involvement in the story.
13. Interview echo – The places (local/national radio, podcasters, national TV, vertical
media) where you can talk about your story as it continues to unfold.
14. Format echo – The version of the story in another format be it video, snackable (short
form video), quiz, slideshow, eBook, documentary, etc.
15. Townhall echo – The event your organization holds or others hold to explore the issue
that your investigation touched on.
16. Internal echo – The one month reporting back to leadership about the results from your
investigation including all echoes, external links and KPIs.
17. Subscription/membership echo – The use of your reporting to encourage people to
support your journalism.
18. Award echo – The story you will do when you enter/nominated/win an award.
19. Yearender echo – The integration of your story into your organizations end of year
reporting.
20. Anniversary echo – The contextual report of what you say to your readers one month,
one year, etc. after the original reporting.
START EARLY
Start reporting your follow-ups before your main investigation goes live by sharing initial findings
with key lawmakers and other stakeholders and getting their reactions ahead of time.
SOCIAL MEDIA
Take advantage of different social media platforms for specific purposes to advance your story.
- Twitter is good for engaging public officials and legislators and getting results
- Facebook is good for engaging average readers and advancing the conversation
BE PERSISTENT
Stay on top of public officials in the weeks and months after an investigation to hold people to
account and demand change. Put every meeting and relevant date on your calendar for
possible folos. Continue digging and obtaining public records -- especially those that provide
insight into how those people are talking about your investigation.
METRICS
Use metrics to both manage up (by showing your bosses how many people clicked on your
story) and guide your follow-ups (by tracking which stories in an investigation generated the
most traffic).
THINK LIKE A LOBBYIST
You exposed wrongdoing, and it’s up to you to advocate for change. Don’t be afraid to demand
action.

How Can You Follow Up Your Big Investigation: Link Echo Tactics
Sending your story to organizations that are interested in strong original in -depth investigative stories can
result in additional exposure for your reporting. These teams may be interested in your story, could link to it,
write about it, or offer their perspectives and possible partnership plus quality links into a story is a SEO best
practice. NOTE: This list is not for awards or grant submission.
IRE has the Extra Extra blog that you can submit your investigation to by filling out a form here.
The Global Investigative Journalism Network distributes the latest news on investigative journalism
worldwide in eight languages a day on social media and its website. Their fortnightly newsletter also
features Stories of the Week and Tips & Tools. You can send an item to hello@gijn.org. More at
https://gijn.org
The Investigative Reporting Workshop, which publishes at investigativereportingworkshop.org, welcomes
stories — or messages about stories to come with embargoed links — by other news organizations that they
can tout on social media and in their weekly newsletters. They are particularly interested in government and
corporate accountability in the areas of immigration, campaign finance and police shootings. Email:
lperri@irworkshop.org.
The Poynter Institute often highlights journalists and journalism in its regular coverage online and in its
daily morning newsletter. Send links and contact info to news@poynter.org.
Propublica makes it easy to share tips/suggestions with their editorial staff at this link. They would like to
remind IRE members that they also can consider applying to their Local Reporting Network.
Longform shares non-fiction over 2,000 words in length. https://longform.org/suggestions
The Nieman Lab is focused on innovation so if you do any unique experimental storytelling with your
investigation, you can send it to staff@niemanlab.org.
The Center for Health Journalism at USC welcomes queries from reporters who want to pitch an
essays/blog posts on the impact/lessons learned of big health investigations. You can also upload the stories
if you have permission from your news outlet. editor@centerforhealthjournalism.org
Among the many Facebook groups around journalism, Investigative Reports describes itself as a one-stop
shop to share investigative journalism. There is also TVNewsStorytellers where TV journalists can share their
investigations that demonstrate strong video production .
For broadcasters, there is also the National Association of Broadcasters rec ognizes and links to investigative
reporting that serves the community. You can submit your story to sraven@nab.org.
Know of additional organizations that would be interested in sharing links to original in -depth investigative
reporting? Send us the information at Andrew@SmithGeiger.com.

© 2019 SmithGeiger LLC

Investigative Echoes
Here is a checklist to think about the lifecycle of a big investigative story after it is
published/aired. This echo strategy is planned beyond the obvious follow-ups that occur
when something happens (new data, change in laws, resignations, etc.).
1. Later that day echo – The story that reflects the investigation that was published/broadcast
earlier and how the story has advanced in those hours.
2. Why/how we reported echo – The story that takes the reader/viewer into the
source/tips/reasons for the reporting and what was the investment of your team.
3. Endorsement echo – The reaction of other staff in your building/company to your reporting
and why it matters (authentic and specific).
4. The next day echo – The ICYMI publishing of the story for the audience that might have been
distracted or unavailable to read/watch/listen.
5. The next weekend – The repack of the story for the audience that has time on the weekend to
read/watch/listen.
6. Reaction echo – The initial general reaction on social media to the story/volume (ideally you
trend) with a look at the type of reaction/volume.
7. Questions you had echo – The reporting you do off questions that the audience asked/is
asking about your story.
8. Influencer echo – The specific reaction of key people who have influence around the story
topic now that they have seen the investigation.
9. Survey/Poll echo – The ways to query the audience/readers about their reaction to the story
and what they would like to see happen.
10. Legislative echo – The reaction to your story from the authorities that can further investigate,
fund, and or legislative change.
11. Legislative session echo – The republishing of your reporting in time for a key legislative
session or meeting.
12. The next official meeting echo – The meeting of authorities/trade group/others who have
official involvement in the story.
13. Interview echo – The places (local/national radio, podcasters, national TV, vertical media)
where you can talk about your story as it continues to unfold.
14. Format echo – The version of the story in another format be it video, snackable (short form
video), quiz, slideshow, eBook, documentary, etc.
15. Townhall echo – The event your organization holds or others hold to explore the issue that
your investigation touched on.
16. Internal echo – The one month reporting back to leadership about the results from your
investigation including all echoes, external links and KPIs.
17. Subscription/membership echo – The use of your reporting to encourage people to support
your journalism.
18. Award echo – The story you will do when you enter/nominated/win an award.
19. Yearender echo – The integration of your story into your organizations end of year reporting.
20. Anniversary echo – The contextual report of what you say to your readers one month, one
year, etc. after the original reporting.
© 2019 SmithGeiger LLC

