MASTERING THE
INTERVIEW
By Corey Johnson and Marisa Kwiatkowski

THE PRE-INTERVIEW
(Marisa)

Preparation is key.
■ Keep a question list.
■ Background check everyone.

Create a timeline

Adapted fraud triangle
How is the process supposed to work?

How does it actually work?

Where could it/ does it
break down?

For “target” interviews
■ Don't assume someone won't talk to you.
■ Don't leave the hard interview until the last minute. Ask early and often.
■ Don't ask how long you can wait for the interview; ask how soon it's safe.
■ Be honest. Don’t ambush them or sugarcoat what the article is about.
■ Treat them as people, not subjects. People can sense authenticity.
■ If you have one shot, try to get the information you need then, rather than
scheduling an interview another time.
■ If they’ve declined to be interviewed, keep circling back. Let them know about the
progress of your investigation.
■ Ask yourself, if you were trying to disprove the results of your investigation, how
would you do it? Critique yourself.

For “inside” confidential sources
■ Establish ground rules up front, with editor approval. Make sure everyone understands how
information will be used.
■ Don’t call people at work. It’s not likely that someone will agree to be a confidential source
while sitting at their desk at work, surrounded by colleagues.
– Find people after hours.
– Call cellphones or reach out via social media or at gatherings of groups they are
involved with. Or go to someone’s home.

For trauma survivors
■ Whenever possible, reach out via an intermediary – someone you know is aware of the abuse
and can contact the survivor on your behalf. Explain what you are working on and ask if they will
contact survivors and pass on your email or phone number.
– Victims’ advocates
– Prosecutors
– Police
– Attorneys
– Organizations that work with survivors
– legislators
– Family members

■ When you connect with a survivor, be clear about what you are working on and why their story is
important for you to understand.
■ Let them dictate the terms of the interview for their comfort, such as whether someone else
comes with them and location.

THE PREINTERVIEW PHASE
(Corey)

Where do I find sources?
■ You want to know the biggest failure most reporters make? They don’t see the
potential in each and every person that crosses their path. Here’s the beautiful
truth. Sources are everywhere. Your teachers – past and present – janitors,
secretaries, barbers, hair-stylists, bus drivers, resource officers, doctors, dentists,
coaches, music instructors all have a story to tell. They are more than just their job.
Their lives are full. Have you ever really really talk to them?
■ .

How do I find government
sources? The old way
Telephone directories and organization charts will give you life. Old ones
from 3 to 5 years ago are superb. Current ones are sublime.
Get them through the website. Get them through friendly employees.
Get them through your local library, secretary of state, or local municipal
clerk. Get them through a Freedom of Information Request, if you must.
JUST GET THEM

They look like this

And this

And this

The Research Phase – Backgrounding
■ News clippings, Google
■ Friends, Neighbors, Co-workers
■ Nexis Lexis
■ Accurint

■ http://www.reporter.org/desktop/tips/johndoe.htm
■ Court Records (Civil, Criminal, Probate)
■ Property Records (Mortgages, Titles, Loans)

■ Bankruptcies & Taxes

Why do I need all that, Corey?
■ The goal is to discover interesting and important insights about your
potential interviewee and the place they work.
■ You are especially looking for areas where you and the source might
have common ground. Did you attend the same schools or church? Or
know the same group friends or teachers? Or shop at the same place?
Do you have the same taste in music? Or zeal for hobbies or pets;
Have they experienced a tragedy or hardship that you can relate to? If
so, this profile type information will become essential to your pitch.

The Connection Phase – What’s a
pitch?
■ In this context, the pitch is the reporter’s request for an interview or
time spent together. A well designed pitch should include a reporter’s
personal insights or relevant information from his or her background
research. It should anticipate and address obstacles – spoken and
unspoken - that would prevent a source from helping. The appeal that
speaks to the source’s self-interest, concerns, fears and ideals is the
winner – hands down.

Why not email? Why Twitter and
Facebook?
■ The convenience of the email and social media messaging is tempting. But think
about it? If you stole money or raped children, would you admit to a stranger in an
email? Would you even respond?
■ Sure, on occasion you can use social media or email to arrange a meeting but avoid
making it your primary interviewing tool.

Getting over shyness and fear
■ Do everything possible to quiet your inner critic. There’s a little voice in all of us,
planting seeds of doubt and fear, from time to time. When that voice pops up to
persuade you not to knock on that door, not to make that one phone call, not to
make that one research trip – recognize this to be the enemy. It is your comfort
zone talking, wanting to keep you just as you are. Recognize the voice. It’s your
greatest hater. Push past it, by any means necessary. Because all great work, all
great achievements happen outside of the comfort zone. All of them.

Best approach to connecting
■ A good pitch delivered in person is one of the most powerful ways to
cultivate sources who work in government or business. Talking with high
ranking officials in the office is fine. However, many people feel more
comfortable discussing important matters in the comfort of their home
and not in a public spaces where they could been seen or overhead. They
also feel more secure if there isn’t much of a paper trail connecting each
of you – at least initially.

■ In general, the best times for home visits are between the hours of 6 p.m
– 8 p.m. on a weekday, and 11 a.m and 2 p.m. on weekends. But there’s no
hard rule. You can try different time, if the circumstances dictate it.

THE INTERVIEW
(Marisa)

Determine your goal of the interview.
What are you seeking?

■ Information?
■ Emotion?
■ Quotes/reaction?

For “target” interviews
■ Get them talking early.

■ Don't assume someone won't talk to you or won't answer a question.
■ Assumptions can affect what questions you ask, how you ask them, etc. You need to give
empathy to even the worst interviewee so you can understand their point of view and
motivations.
■ Be humble. Don’t react to criticism. Hear someone out. I’ve had people who initially refused
to speak with me later agree to do so.
■ Ask them what you should be looking into. It's a fact-check on your own assumptions and it
can build a trusting relationship.
■ Who else should you be talking to?

For trauma survivors
■ Remind them of the purpose of the interview.
■ Explain that you will be asking detailed questions to
better understand what happened.
– Ask them to let you know if there is a question they
don’t want to answer or that makes them
uncomfortable.
– Be clear that you are asking those questions not
because you don’t believe them, but because you
want to make sure you understand what they are
saying.
■ Before you ask a single question, ask them if they have
any questions for you. This may alleviate any concerns
they have that you are not aware of. It also gives them a
sense of ownership over the interview process.

To name, or not to name
■ You can’t unring this bell. Make sure s/he understands what
using his or her name means.
■ Pros
– Gives the public a measure of trust.
– Drives home the emotion of the situation.
– For some, it is a relief to share what happened.
■ Cons:
– Very personal.
– Criticism.
– Social media trolls.
■ Don’t force it.

Initiating the survivor interview
Begin with confirming basic information: “Can you start by spelling your name for me?”

Then move to open-ended questions. “Can you tell me how you met so-and-so?”
“Can you walk me through what happened?

Never ask why someone waited so long to report or didn’t report. Instead, ask
them when they felt comfortable coming forward and whether something had
happened that made them feel it was the right time?

Get out of the way of
the interview.

DON’T HEM AND
HAW.
DON’T
APOLOGIZE.
DON’T ASSUME.

No one cares how smart you are with
the questions you are asking.
■ You must show some proficiency or understanding in order to secure an interview.
Once you have the interview, you don’t need to show how smart you are. Just ask the
questions.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3GaMf1luwKg
https://www.ispot.tv/ad/77cw/state-farm-double-check-career-day-feat-aaron-rodgers
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AxPiLiVK_mI

Double-barreled questions
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mHfbSwcfH4w

If you want a direct answer,
ask a direct question then
shut up.

A note on recording
video and audio.
■ Careful with the noises. It’s human nature to
encourage someone with “uh-huh” and
“hmm.” Don’t.
■ Explain to people up front that you won’t be
making those sounds because of video
recording. It’s not because you’re not
listening.

■ Instead, smile, nod, wrinkle your brow and
give other nonverbal cues.

Ask people to tell you a story.

What color was the truck?
“Blue.”

Tell me about the truck.

RECORD THE
INTERVIEW AND
TAKE NOTES ABOUT
EVERYONE ELSE.
scene details, reaction, pauses,
emotion, etc.

Is there anything else
you would like to say or
think people should
know?

Ask to continue the conversation.
■ At the end of the interview, seek permission to circle back to verify information or
ask follow-up questions.
■ Extend an invitation for them to reach back out to you with additional information.

Additional documentation
■ Ask if people kept a journal or diary, or wrote letters about what happened? If so,
can you see it or make copies of it? You may be surprised by what people are willing
to give you.
■ Do they have medical records or other types of records that show what happened?

Breaking confidentiality barriers
Trauma is complicated. Confirm what you can.
■ Child welfare documents

■ Education records
■ Medical records

■ Mental health records
■ Social service records
■ When all else fails, ask
them for their own records.

MASTERING THE
INTERVIEW
Corey

The three techniques to becoming an
interviewing Jedi
■ Conversation vs. Interview

■ Ratcheting
■ Mirroring and hypnotizing
■ The false end of the interview (aka the Remix)

Ratcheting
■ Ratcheting is the act of first getting your foot in the door by getting another person
to agree to allow something safe. Then gradually obtaining permission to do more
and more.

Mirroring-Hypnotizing
■ Mirroring-Hypnotizing during an interview happens when the reporter listening to
source begins to speak in the exact language, using the same terms and jargon of
the source.
■ This technique is meant to be subtle it’s not to be used haphazardly. But if the
source is on a roll, repeat back what their saying, exactly how they say it. What
happens, the person begins to go into a zone where they forget time and space and
begin to visualize what they’re saying. They also connect with you as an interviewer
in a most intimate way.

Last but not least – The Remix (aka the
False End of the Interview)
■ Save your best question, the thing you want to most until the very end – just as you
are walking out the door.
■ The detective show Columbo demonstrates this with devastating effect. The
character will walk off and then say “Just one more thing.”
■ Highway patrol officers and narcotics officers use the technique and great
investigative reporters do as well. At the end of a long interview, it primes your
interviewee in a completely different way. Some of the best, most honest material
comes at the end.

Ok. One more last thing
■ Tone, Tone, Tone.

POST-INTERVIEW
(Marisa)

Write everything up as soon as possible.
■ Don’t wait until the end of the reporting process to transcribe interviews or recall
details. Doing so on a flowing basis will make the reporting stronger. You’ll be able to
see holes in reporting and remember context and moments more vividly.
■ Try to do so the same day, or within 24 hours.

Keep the conversation going.
■ Assume it will be made public – so be careful and professional.

Verify facts.

THANK YOU
Corey Johnson

■ 916-346-8584
■ cgjresearch@gmail.com
■ @CoreyGJohnson

■ 317-444-6135
Marisa Kwiatkowski

■ mkwiatko@usatoday.com
■ @IndyMarisaK

