Investigating immigrant
issues away from the border
MARIA PEREZ – MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL
@mariajpsl
maria.perez@jrn.com

Finding the story away from the border
 Learn about the issues that affect immigrant communities beyond immigration

policy, look at the intersection between those issues and deportations.
Education, housing, labor conditions, infrastructure, drivers licenses…
Immigrant communities are diverse, have different immigration and
socioeconomic status, different problems.
 Sources: attorneys (immigration, labor, pro bono), advocates, churches,
bodega owners, volunteers – and that person who knows everyone in town.

Labor issues…

Who is
benefitting?

Working conditions

Stories can take different shapes in
different counties

They come after natural disasters

Photo: Dorothy Edwards/Naples Daily News

They are everywhere

Reporting
Can you measure the scope? Find the data!
What agencies could gather data that will help you
quantify the story? You can find alternatives to the
federal immigration agencies: courts, local law
enforcement, local prosecutors, administrative courts.
Excel, MySQL aren’t that hard to learn and can help a
lot!
 Create your own data: records requests, court cases,
story clips, autopsy reports…

Reporting
Traditional sources may not know about the issue.
Get sources to open up:
Knocking on doors works better than phone calls.
Is there anyone who they trust and can vouch for you?
Be honest: Explain what you are doing, what you can’t do.
Be extra clear about name use. Sometimes you can try to
negotiate in case of common names.

Reporting
Follow the money!
Understand the system. Who benefits? How?

Responsibility of law enforcement / regulators.

Writing
Try to write as you go and keep evolving nut graph/s.

Don’t stereotype: Details, details…
Keep the exploitation at sight throughout the story.

Help to get time and resources:
Marquette University O’Brien Fellowship in Public Service Journalism
ProPublica Local Reporting Network grants
The Investigative Fund initiatives , including the Ida B. Wells Fellowship for
journalists of color.
The McGraw Fellowship for Business Journalism
The Education Writers Association Reporting Fellowship
The Abrams Nieman Fellowship for Local Investigative Journalism
 IRE Freelance Fellowship for freelancers
And many more…

Keep calm
and don’t
give up!
MARIA PEREZ – MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL
@mariajpsl
maria.perez@jrn.com

