Covering immigration when you don’t live near a border
2019 IRE National Conference, Houston
Daniel Connolly, Author of The Book of Isaias: A child of Hispanic immigrants
seeks his own America
205-807-0608, danieljamesconnolly@gmail.com
www.danielconnolly.net - Twitter @DanielConnolly

About me and this tipsheet
I'm an investigative reporter for The (Memphis) Commercial Appeal. I
wrote my first articles about Hispanic immigration to Memphis as an intern in
2001. And 18 years later, I'm still reporting on this subject.
I started with little knowledge of immigration and ended up writing a book
about it. I've written this tipsheet to help people in non-border areas follow a
similar path. I geared this tipsheet to people who haven't covered immigration
before. But hopefully those who are more advanced will find something useful in
it as well.
It's a process approach - how you go from knowing nothing about an
immigrant community to doing complex stories.
Q: I've never covered immigration. How do I start?
For basic facts and figures about immigrants in your community, your best
bets are the U.S. Census bureau or the Pew Hispanic Center pewhispanic.org.
For the Census, I recommend calling their press office rather than trying to
navigate a confusing web site.
When you start out, you have to quote advocacy groups and government
spokespeople. But your best work starts when you make an effort to go out and
find "real people."

Q: How do I find "real people?"
Start by reporting easy stories. Go to a local festival for immigrants - say
the India Fest in your town - and write a story about it.

Write a profile of a real estate agent who works primarily with
immigrants.
Report on a sports league - like a soccer or cricket league.
Write about a school system program for students with a big immigrant
student population.
Write a feature on local ethnic media - i.e. Spanish-language radio
stations and newspapers.
Go to a music concert that's geared toward immigrants in your
community.
Q: Can I do this on the phone or by texting or Facebook?
Not really. You need to go out and meet people face to face. And you
might need to do interviews and sourcing on nights and weekends.
Q: Ok, I can do those easy stories. What's next?
You can step it up with some explanatory stories.
For these kinds of stories, you're not trying to win an investigative
reporting award. You're trying to explain to readers how institutions work.
Write a quick article about your local immigration court. Or if it's far
away, do a feature about someone who's traveling a long way to get there.
Find out where the nearest immigration detention center is. Immigration
lawyers and federal officials can help you with the above stories.
If you have done several stories along these lines, you'll have ideas for
controversial / complex / advanced investigative stories.
Q: I'm thinking that down the road, I want to do an advanced story on
detentions and deportations. Are immigration records public?
Immigration records are generally closed. Immigration court hearings are usually
public, though, and ICE spokepersons will give you some basic information.

The Transactional Records Clearinghouse at Syracuse University, or TRAC, has
tons of studies and records related to immigration enforcement. The staff will
help you out. trac.syr.edu
Immigrants in my community have been detained. How do I find out where they
are?
Use the ICE detainee locator to look up a person's location.
https://locator.ice.gov/odls/#/index
This is easier if you have the immigrant's unique ID number, called an A-Number.
Ask a family member or lawyer for their A-Number.
Q: How do I find out more about someone's immigration history?
You can ask an immigrant to sign a waiver allowing ICE to discuss more of their
immigration case with you.
Here is a link to the waiver form:
https://www.ice.gov/doclib/news/library/forms/pdf/60-001.pdf (English)
https://www.ice.gov/doclib/news/library/forms/pdf/60-001-sp.pdf (Spanish)
Q: I only speak English. Do I need to learn Spanish to do immigration reporting?
- Not necessarily, but learning Spanish will definitely help. Hire a tutor and
/ or take classes at a local university. The Duolingo app is useful, but won't
substitute for in-person training. If you want to learn any foreign language, plan
on making a serious effort for two to three years, at least.
- Alternately, you can find immigrants who speak English.
- Even if you speak more than one language, you will meet people you
can't speak with. If you need an interpreter, the best practice is to hire an
interpreter certified to work in court or in a hospital.
- Avoid using children as interpreters. They typically lack the language
skills to do it well. Plus you need to talk about adult stuff with adults, and you
don't want kids overhearing.

Q: Will people who are in this country illegally talk to me?
- My experience is in general, yes, they will talk with you. And they'll tell
you things that could get them in trouble.

Q: Could my reporting get someone deported . . . or killed by a criminal?
- Yes, your reporting can bring down serious consequences on people,
especially if they are here illegally and / or under pressure from a criminal gang or
domestic abuser. So go slow.
- If you're not sure how to handle a situation, take time and think it
through. Hold a story for an ethics discussion within your news organization.
- If you're still not sure, use IRE to contact an experienced immigration
reporter to talk through the issue.
- The 2nd Quarter 2019 IRE Journal included useful articles on ethics of
immigration reporting. Read it here: https://www.ire.org/wpcontent/uploads/2019/05/IRE-Q2-2019.pdf
Q: So much is happening in immigration news all the time. How do I keep up?
The newsletter "Migratory Notes" provides a roundup of the week's
immigration news. (I'm on the advisory board.)
Sign up here: https://medium.com/migratory-notes
Other major networks for immigration reporters include PRI's Global
Nation Exchange on Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/groups/globalnation/
and the Gannett immigration team - for Gannett reporters only.

Good luck! And keep going. These are great stories that are taking place
right in your community.

