IRE 2019 TIPSHEET
“OVERCOMING OBSTACLES”
Moderator: Scott Zamost, Senior Investigative Producer CNBC
Panelists: Scott Friedman, Senior Investigative Reporter NBC5 Dallas-Fort Worth,
Diane Wilson, ABC11 Troubleshooter Durham, N.C.
Chris Henao, Assistant News Director KSAT12-TV, San Antonio, Texas

1. Scott Friedman, Senior Investigative Reporter NBC 5 Dallas-Fort
Worth
Questions that might help you find another path to getting documents and data when
you hit a records roadblock:



Is there a records coordinator at the agency who would speak to you about the
universe of records they keep? Are there other ways they collect the information
you are looking for beyond what you asked for in your initial request?



Who else might collect information related to the topic you are investigating? Are
there other agencies that might keep similar information?



Are there overlapping layers of coverage that might provide additional
documents? If it’s a local issue is there a state agency that tracks it? If it’s a
state issue is there a federal agency that tracks it, etc.? With law enforcement
issues, are there multiple agencies that happened to be at the same incident
scene or assisted each other in an investigation?



If you are requesting data, are there additional forms or fields in the database
that could help if obtained? Get the record layout or key for the entire database.
Is there something else they capture in the data that might give you additional
details?



If the complete dataset you are looking for is not available, is there a workaround
where you could get the supporting information you need and build your own
database or run your own calculations?



If time is your obstacle, has anyone else asked for similar records previously?
Some agencies now post previous requests and responses on-line and you can
search what has been previously requested. This can be helpful particularly in
breaking news investigations.



Are there past lawsuits or criminal filings where information you are seeking may
have been entered into the court record and might be more easily accessible via
the court clerk?

2. Diane Wilson, ABC11 Troubleshooter, Durham, N.C.
Obstacles with Confrontations
1.) Prepare before your confront
-Have documents/paperwork to prove your case
-If you can know the environment/be familiar with where the confrontation will
take place
-Stick mic vs lav (if holding documents to prove your case, lav mic might be
better)
-Weigh options of confronting them on private property vs confronting them in
a public space
-Talk with your photographer, how do you want it to be shot, (two shot vs just
person) how long are you going to follow and keep asking questions, etc.
-Be prepared for anything: person you're confronting tries to attack you or your
photographer, the person denies it's them, the confrontation goes so long your
photographer runs out of battery/space on his card. (have a back-up camera
rolling so this doesn't happens. Consider taking an intern to record with their
cell phone or a GoPro, or attach another recording device on your
photographer's camera so you always have plan B)
2.) Actual Confrontation
-Start rolling from the minute you get out of the news car, until you get back in
-Give them a chance to respond, don't just keep yelling questions

-If the first reaction is to kick you out, what can you do to try and get them to
talk?
Obstacles with legal
1.) Involve attorney as early as possible
-Get their concerns right away
-Tell them the testing you want to do, the public record requests, the audits
you have
-Don’t hide something and hope they don't find out
-Undercover approval
2.) Can't get story/script legally approved
-First make sure legal has your story days before it airs (obviously this is not
for day turns, but relates to promoted stories)
-What else do they need so approval can happen
- If won't approve the script you gave them, what would they approve to get
the story on and then do follow-ups
Obstacles with Settlements/Businesses try to kill the story
-Get everything you need before contacting the company or doing the
interview. Get all their paperwork/pictures/documents/detailed written
document explaining what happened to prove their case and that you have
enough on the record before reaching out to the company.
-Get written consent from the viewer that you have permission to use all the
information they provided to you before you reach out to the company.
-Consider a Facetime interview on the fly if you think a company is going to
act before you can do the on-camera interview.

3. Chris Henao, Assistant News Director, KSAT12-TV, San Antonio,
Texas
Prepare for the Unexpected

Be strategic with how you plan your next steps in an investigation. At what
point are you ready to reach out to the focus of your story? The takeaway
here is to prepare for how the focus of your story may respond and how
that will impact your workflow. Double check your work, identify any blind
spots before reaching out. When trying to gauge how the focus of the story
will respond look at previous behavior, reach out to colleagues who may
have previously dealt with the subject of the story. Does the public entity,
company, etc. have a history of preemptive-type behavior? Calling a press
conference to quickly address any negative situations. Or is their approach
more of a bunker down and wait it out? One where a statement may be all
that is provided.
Threats Should Not Come as a Surprise
It’s not uncommon to have the subject of your story reach out via phone,
email, or legal letter requesting, demanding, or sometimes just plain
threatening you to stop the publishing or broadcasting of your story. The
target of the communication is oftentimes not you, but your news director,
general manager, or even someone at the corporate level. With that in
mind, it is so very important to keep your managers in the loop. There is no
truer statement than this - managers do not like surprises. If it looks like a
story might have this kind of reaction, engage with your in-house or
corporate counsel, your managers, and any other stakeholders early in the
process so that there is a healthy amount of awareness and planning for
any possible action from the focus of the project.
Open Records Challenges – Delay
According to the Texas Public Information Act, public entities must
“promptly” produce responsive documents to the requestor, and that any
requests from the public entity seeking an attorney general’s opinion must
be made no later than 10 business days after the date of receiving the
records request. What this really means, and something to be prepared for,
is the window of time when it comes to open records requests could be as
little as a couple of hours to possibly more than 55 business days – the AG
must decide no later than 45 business days after the AG has received the
request.

Open Records Challenges – Are there really no records?
There are criminal penalties for violating the TPIA, a misdemeanor offense.
If a public entity is not producing records you know for certain exist,
reminding the PIO or official about the ramifications for falsely claiming the
records don’t exist can be a beneficial approach. In addition, formally
complaining to the attorney general is another route for doing what can be
done to hold public entities accountable for not following the LAW. Finally,
while we may think it is sometimes too much inside baseball, publicizing or
broadcasting a public entity’s ‘thumbing their nose’ at the law may help in
changing future behavior.
Links below to the Texas Attorney General TPIA handbook, Attorney
General’s complaint webpage, and the Freedom of Information Foundation
of Texas:
https://www.texasattorneygeneral.gov/sites/default/files/201806/PIA_handbook_2018_0.pdf
https://www.texasattorneygeneral.gov/open-government/open-recordscomplaint
http://foift.org/resources/texas-public-information-act/

