Covering Criminal Justice in Indian Country
June 15, 2019 /IRE Conference / ​Mary Hudetz​, ​AP Law Enforcement Reporter,
@marymhudetz​, ​mhudetz@ap.org
U.S. Overview
Native Americans make up about 1 percent of the U.S. population and there are more than 550
federally recognized tribes -- making a diverse population to cover.
Both geography and the way the criminal justice system is designed to work in Indian Country can
add extra hurdles for journalists. Tribal authorities can have jurisdiction for some crimes, and feds for
others. Sometimes even a sheriff gets involved depending on the situation.
The upside for reporters: All the bureaucracy means documents are constantly exchanging hands
between different federal and tribal government agencies. So there are almost always docs and data
to obtain. Just prepare to be strategic.

First things first: Sourcing
This worksheet will go over strategies for seeking out records. But the most efficient and authentic
route to finding stories in Native communities is still going to come from people.
You’ll need government contacts, including at police departments. Community members, however,
may be the most important because they’re the ones feeling the impact of government gaps and
missteps. They’ll tell you things officials won’t, and you can work to verify their reports independently
with documents and more interviews.
Another important benefit: The wider your network of community-based sources, the easier it is to
work through cultural questions and nuances inherent to Native-focused reporting. A few starting
points for building contacts:
- Local Native American center. Most major cities in the Midwest and West have one. Find out
services and programs they provide, if they have open houses, will take you on a tour ...
- Tribal colleges on reservations. Do they have any public symposiums coming up -- a good place to
start for getting your foot in the door?
- University lectures by a Native American student alliance can be great for learning and networking.
- Colleagues at local or tribal paper on the reservation are great resources too. Just remember
sharing tips and answering questions should be a two-way street.

FEDERAL AGENCIES
Interior Department
The Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs has become the primary agency for carrying out the United
States’ trust responsibilities to tribes (i.e. obligations that come via treaty and other agreements).
BIA’s Office of Justice Services (OJS) ​oversees police, jails and drug enforcement divisions. It
also often collects jail and police data, and documents from tribes that receive federal funding.

Justice Department
Office of Tribal Justice​ and​ Office on Violence Against Women​ run tribal grant programs.
U.S. Attorneys ​offices are responsible for prosecuting reservation crime.

FEDERAL WATCHDOGS
Subscribe to the listservs for the​ Government of Accountability Office (GAO), and the Office of
Inspector General (OIG)​ for every agency on your beat: ​https://www.gao.gov/​,
https://oig.justice.gov/​, ​https://www.doioig.gov/
There are GAO and OIG reports for dozens of the major issues confronting Indian Country. Use their
databases to pull up past reports for a launching point into accountability stories. Read docs to get a
handle on the history of an issue. Also read closely for tips on which records the GAO or OIG asked
for and received to know what could potentially be available to you.

FOIA TIPS
Indian Country data collection continues to expand. But don’t expect this to mean getting your docs
will be easy or that they will be in perfect shape when you get them. A couple suggestions:
1. Think about which documents and data sets change hands between agencies, or that tribes must
send to the federal government to report on federally funded programs. Tribes aren’t necessarily
obligated to respond to your FOIA requests, but feds are. If you can think about the sort of
documents a federal department would need to collect or use to report to Congress,
you’ll start to zero in on the right document requests.
A couple places to start: ​https://www.doi.gov/foia/​,
https://www.justice.gov/usao/resources/making-foia-request
2. If you don’t have a ton of story tips yet, submit a FOIA request for a blank copy of the
forms a federal agency sends to a tribe in your region for reporting back on its federally
funded programs. This can help determine data collection activities on your beat,
and even help identify story possibilities. The more focused your request,
the better your chances. So think about asking for forms that one federal office sends to
a department within one tribe.

DATA ON DEMAND
Datasets that provide basic background for this beat and that you don’t have to FOIA:
National Institute of Justice. ​NIJ released survey results three years ago on violence against
Native American women and men: ​https://www.nij.gov/topics/tribaljustice/Pages/welcome.aspx
.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. ​Yearly reports have data on bookings and most prevalent charges
year-over-year by state and reservation: ​https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=200000
Investigations and Prosecutions. ​U.S. Attorneys and the FBI must report each year on
investigation and prosecution data showing investigations were referred for prosecution, and how
many cases -- including homicides -- were dropped and why. There are breakdowns by state. The
most recent report: ​https://www.justice.gov/tribal/page/file/1113091/download​.

