Using data to cover immigration
Garance Burke – Associated Press
Topher Sanders – ProPublica
Perla Trevizo/Susan Carroll – Houston
Chronicle
June 15, 2019

#IRE19

Key reporting tools
• Michigan state data on number of unaccompanied children
adopted
• Michigan court records on specific case of separated child
whose foster parents sought to gain permanent
guardianship

• U.S. Health and Human Services brief on separated child
• Foster program data tracking number of adoptions of
children who had been through Office of Refugee
Resettlement programs who had been adopted

Finding a story
• Which legal advocates and social workers work w/ migrant
children in your area?
• Can you go with those groups to meet clients?

• What kinds of placements are common in your state? Foster
care? Standard shelters? Emergency facilities?
• Which companies run or operate facilities that hold migrant
children in your coverage area? Can you find whistleblowers?

• How have demographics changed in recent years? Are the
communities in your coverage area prepared?

Mapping where the shelters are
https://projects.propublica.org/graphics/migrant-shelters-near-you

About the Immigrant Children Shelter Map

Shelters for unaccompanied minors

Call logs

Building your own spreadsheet

Reaching out to the public

Finding a story

• Who keeps national data about migrant children?
• Who has access to that data?
• What level of access do they have to the data?
• Which legal advocates, contractors, state agencies, social
workers, medical teams, etc work w/ them?
• If you get data, who can help you independently
corroborate and cross-check it?

HHS data on migrant youth placements, by state

Key reporting tools:
AP analyzed federal and state data including:
Unaccompanied minor placements, U.S. Health and Human Services
Public school enrollment and English language learner data, National
Center for Education Statistics
Estimates of public/private school enrollment, U.S. Census
Racial and ethnic demographics estimates, U.S. Census

Finding a story:
Sort data to understand:
How many unaccompanied minors were placed in your county? Is that number growing
over time?
What percentage of public school students already are English language learners?
Given demographics, district budget/preparation, what relative impact might they have on
the school system?
Then:
Where do local nonprofits/legal advocates say unaccompanied minors are going to school?
Are there special newcomer programs for them?
What do they learn there – English or the full curriculum?
What barriers/delays might unaccompanied minors have experienced?

What other immigration-related stories can we tell?

https://www.usnews.com/news/us/articles/2012/08/02/immigrantsprove-big-business-for-prison-companies

Key reporting tools
• FEC and state campaign contribution data
• Federal and state lobbying data
• U.S. Sentencing Commission data, policy manuals on
offender demographics and immigration crimes
• U.S. Bureau of Prisons data

Finding a story
• Which politicians have import control or influence over legislation impacting
the private prison industry and immigration detention?

• How can you shortcut your own understanding of the pitfalls of federal and
state contributions data? What are the reporting challenges?
• How can you shortcut your own understanding of the pitfalls of federal and
state lobbying data? What are the reporting challenges?

• Is there an immigrant detention center or prison housing “criminal
immigrants” in your coverage area? Who owns it?
• How have prison and detention center demographics changed in recent years
in terms of age, race, gender?

What’s next: story ideas to follow up
• Continue to follow up what’s happening inside the shelters for unaccompanied
minors. What do police reports show now? What’s the latest with Southwest
Key? Expansion efforts.
• The military and National Guard were deployed to the border last year. What’s
the latest with that? What exactly have they accomplished? How much is it
costing? K
• We continue to hear from the federal agencies about how much they are
spending on medical care and what they are doing, at the same time the number
of deaths keep rising? What does that mean? What data could we request to get
a better picture of what’s going on inside Border Patrol stations?
• While most of the attention remains on family migration, there are other issues
going on, including role local law enforcement continues to play (look at federal
grants that require some sort of immigration enforcement cooperation, what
interactions are local police officers having with ICE/BP?)

• What’s happening south of the border. Routinely check stats put out
by Mexico and Central America and make use of their public records
laws. For instance, while CBP doesn’t break down families by
adult/children, here’s something you can request from the Guatemala
government

Questions?
• Garance Burke: gburke@ap.org; on Twitter:
@garanceburke
• Susan Carroll: susan.carroll@chron.com; on Twitter:
@_SusanCarroll
• Topher Sanders: topher.sanders@propublica.org; on
Twitter: @ReporterTopher
• Perla Trevizo: perla.trevizo@chron.com; on Twitter:
@Perla_Trevizo

