Using data to uncover corruption in public procurement ​By Georg Neumann,

Open Contracting Partnership
Government procurement is the single greatest corruption risk in the public sector, with vast sums
of money being lost to corruption, fraud and waste. Research commissioned by the European
Parliament found that corruption and fraud in contracting in EU countries may cost taxpayers ​€​5
billion every year.
Know your procurement to know what to ask for. We’re always working with incomplete
information that comes from disconnected databases. Know about the transparency requirements
in your local and national procurement laws. Knowing what information is relevant at each stage
of the procurement process will help you put together the pieces and identify relevant red flags.
Structure your information to understand what’s missing. The Open Contracting Data Standard
provides a global schema used by more than 20 governments globally to structure the information
you gather throughout the investigation. Bringing together planning information, tender
information, award information and post-award information under a single identifier enables you to
track the process. The Data Standard is served by a free helpdesk and numerous tools to help
facilitate your work.
Understand your target. Don’t just look for the scandal. If the system is rotten, there will be
skeletons across each layer of government. Investigate the system and explain how the
government uses public contracting to provide public services, goods and public infrastructure.
INDIVIDUAL <<< >>> SYSTEMIC
Overpriced costs Bribery Cartels State capture
Privatization of public
Fraudulent process Nepotism Campaign financing ​
services
Direct awards Misuse of public offcie
Common red flags by stage of the procurement process. Each step in the contracting process has
its own red flags. Maintain credibility in reporting by fact checking and clearly stating where
available data is insufficient. Don’t rely on one red flag: triangulate your data whenever possible.
Don’t jump to conclusions on conflicts of interest. Sometimes things look fishier than they are.
Often, it’s lack of context and/or bad data behind it.
PLANNING TENDER AWARD CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION
Key planning documents not provided
Non-public bid opening or single bidder only
High number of contract awards to one bidder
Large difference between contract award and final contract amount
Modifying the contracts after it’s been awarded, on line item requirements
Conflicts of interest Turning a blind eye
on shoddy implementation
Vague description of supply terms
Cover pricing: Colluding to drive up prices artificially
Supplier receives multiple single source contracts
Change orders to increase prize substantially (or multiple by a smaller amount)
Issue of tender at an inconvenient time

Winning bid is at a substantially lower bid price than competitors or too close to estimate
Final prize is higher than industry average
Payment without delivery of service
Short notice to bidders Eligibility criteria for deciding which companies can bid for a contract set
too narrowly
Similarity in supplier addresses
Bidder that has never bid previously wins tender
Linking information ​It gets really interesting once you link contract data with data on

budgets & planning information, company registries and beneficial ownership, tax
records, land registries, campaign financing, declaration of interests. Look for identifiers
(openid.org) where available. Create your own if necessary.

Further resources:
• ​Countries that publish open data (​index.okfn.org​) and ​countries ​that publish standardized open
data (​Kingfisher​)
• ​Translate & flatten ​JSON <=> CSV
• ​How to guide (​part 1 ​& ​part 2​) to using standardized open data with Neo4j & graph algorithms
to explore shell companies in procurement: linking contracts with tax information to identify shell
companies and registries of commerce.
• ​Other visual tools: ​Kibana ​& Towerbuilder (​Repo​, ​ReadtheDocs​)
• ​The ​Idiot's Guide to Looting Public Procurement to Get Rich Quickly ​that looks at red flags in
the procurement process
• ​OCP’s ​Mythbusting Commercial Confidentiality in Public Procurement ​report provides an
overview on which information is generally considered sensitive and which is not, as well as
research why data should be open.
• ​Red flags for Integrity​: A collection of red flag analysis
• ​More data tools & platforms ​in our Airtable
@georg_neu | ​gneumann@open-contracting.org ​| www.open-contracting.org
Use of direct awards/ exceptions/ emergency procedures
Company has no history in providing service or product

