Editing the data story
IRE 2019

Maud Beelman, Howard Center for Investigative Journalism
Jennifer LaFleur, Investigative Reporting Workshop

What we’re covering
● The data and the process
● Vetting the data and methodology
● Writing the story
● Discussion and questions

The tools
● Data analysis: spreadsheets, databases,
statistical tools, mapping – and a host of little
tools and programs that can save tons of work
● Interactive apps: backend programming,
front-end programming, Ruby, Python, Javascript
and a host of little tools that make life easier
● If something seems like too much work, it
probably is. Try to find a better solution.

It’s not just about the software
● Critical thinking
● Basic math
● Understanding the context of the data
● Verifying the data with ground truth
● Good organizational skills
● Asking questions
● Knowing which tool to use and how to use it

Getting the data
● Find downloadable data online
● Scrape it
● Request via open records laws
● Build your own database

The role of data
● Foundational data
● Decorative data
● Responsive data
● Complex analyses or data
● Basic analysis

The editor’s role in data projects
● Listen
● Ask reporters early and often what worries them
● Ask what kinds of data are available
● Discuss known/suspected problems with the data
● Encourage creative thinking, brainstorm solutions
● Backstop frequently throughout
● Do your own research
● Edit the methodology

● Look at the data with/without your reporter
● Challenge the data (not the reporter)

10 questions every editor should ask
1. Does the data answer our questions? Does it surface other
questions?
2. Where did you find the data?
3. How did you vet/clean the data?
4. How did you calculate those numbers?
5. Are you keeping a data diary?
6. Did you replicate your data work? Could someone else?
7. Have you consulted experts or done a scientific lit review?
8. Do we need a white paper?
9. Could you write a nerd graf/story if asked to?
10. What is the significance of the data?

AARRRGGGHHHH!
● How long will it take?
● Why can’t we say blah, blah, blah?

How come I never get enough time for projects?
● Isn’t it good enough?
● Would you like fries with that data?
● You probably wouldn’t understand.
● What do you mean there are problems?

●

Bulletprooﬁng the data

Data checks
● What is the source of the data?
● How many records should you have/do you have?
● Is data missing?
● Is the data within reasonable ranges?
● Is everything included?
● Are there consistency issues?
● Are totals within reasonable bounds?
● Have you done internal checks?
● Are there duplicates?
● Gut check

Other considerations
● Are there codes that you don’t understand or

questions you need answered?
● Can you go look at one?
● Is the data a sample with a margin of error?
● Are changes over time reasonable?
● How else could you look at the data?
● Are there lurking variables?
● With maps -- did you use the right projection?
● Are you matching data sets?

Changes over time

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Year 6

More bulletprooﬁng
● Keep a data diary
● Backup your data (Never work from original)
● Check against reports
● Make sure you’re using the right tool
● Check with experts from different sides of the issue

Show findings to the targets and experts
● Duplicate your work
● Have another person duplicate your work
● Maintain a consistent universe of cases
●

Matching data
A name is not enough. Lots of people have the same name

How can you backstop all this?

Understand the methodology
● Find similar stories and study what they did
● Check with experts from different sides
● Find a guide
● Use the IRE Resource Center
● Learn the process of what you’re reporting on

Other backstops
● Ask for a copy of the record layout
● Ask for who else may have done similar research
● Read that research
● Read the documentation or data “how to” file
● Find the experts
● Ask for a detailed description of the work (white
paper to nerd box)
● Seek a second opinion from a trusted colleague
● Have a backstop process in place

Data diary
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

For backstop
For story footnoting/lawyering
For staying on track
What you did
How you did it
File names
Copy of code/syntax
Should be clear so that your editor and
colleagues can make sense of it

Data diary
● Later you can link back to

page or number in fact
check
● Highlight everything that
was derived from data (or
docs) and go back and
check

Gathering your own data
Pitfalls
● Time and effort
● Accuracy concerns
● Consistency concerns

Beneﬁts
● Totally original data reporting
● Control over all aspects of the data

“So I entered the information found by reading all
those documents into a spreadsheet, and it became
data!”
-- Margot Williams describing how she identified
Guantanamo detainees

Reminders
● Leave time for follow up after collecting your data
● If you’ve built a database, set a cut-off date
● Use verification or double entry
● Attempt to get “ground truth”

Workﬂow
● You need to have one
● Everyone needs to use it
● Make sure all parties are included in the beginning
● Project management system
● Google doc
● Github
● Backout scheduling

Writing the data story

The Basics
● Outline the project and the story/ies
● Footnote story memos and drafts (increases
accuracy and saves time)
● Lovelady the findings
● Write the nut grafs first
● Structure is as important as prose

I also tell my reporters — and I can’t repeat it to them
enough — that almost every story is a people story; that
they should research a problem or an issue or a trend for
its human qualities and write in terms of real people with
real problems. And I tell them particularly on complex
non-spot news stories, to use an outline.
-- Steve Lovelady, 1978 ASNE

The (very) Basic Outline*
● Lead: straight, anecdotal or a combo thereof
● Nut graf(s)
● Major themes (5-6) that support the nut

Theme #1, illustrative/supporting material
Theme #2, illustrative/supporting material
etc...
● Closing: Tie up the loose ends, come full circle or go forward

*general guidelines; good writers know how/when to break the rules

The Details
Story Structure: The two most basic organizational
methods
● Chronology (or reverse chronology) is the easiest

to write and for a reader to follow. Warning: don’t
make the reader jump time.
● Thematic structure is more complicated to write, but
can be effective for the right material.
● Even within a thematic structure, you can use internal
chronology.

Finding 1

Finding 2

More narrative

Finding 3

Finding 4

Finding 5

About the analysis

More Details
Characters: Who are they and what themes/points do
they illustrate? Will the reader care about them?
Benefit of data: You have lots of data points from
which you can choose.
Scenes: Which ones illustrate themes? Often a good
way to get into a story, especially if you’re telling
something that happened in the past, i.e., a
chronology.

The Implant Files
● Driving this investigation was data collected by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
● The analysis guided us to problem devices and
helped focus reporting
● AP decided to look at spinal cord stimulators

COLUMBIA, South Carolina (AP) — Desperate for relief after years of agony, Jim Taft listened
intently as his pain management doctor described a medical device that could change his life.
It wouldn’t fix the nerve damage in his mangled right arm, Taft and his wife recalled the
doctor saying, but a spinal-cord stimulator would cloak his pain, making him “good as new.”
Taft’s stimulator failed soon after it was surgically implanted. After an operation to repair it, he
said, the device shocked him so many times that he couldn’t sleep and even fell down a flight
of stairs. Today, the 45-year-old Taft is virtually paralyzed, a prisoner in his own bed, barely
able to get to the bathroom by himself.
“I thought I would have a wonderful life,” Taft said. “But look at me.”
For years, medical device companies and doctors have touted spinal-cord stimulators as a
panacea for millions of patients suffering from a wide range of pain disorders, making them
one of the fastest-growing products in the $400 billion medical device industry. Companies
and doctors aggressively push them as a safe antidote to the deadly opioid crisis in the U.S.
and as a treatment for an aging population in need of chronic pain relief.
But the stimulators — devices that use electrical currents to block pain signals before they
reach the brain — are more dangerous than many patients know, an Associated Press
investigation found. They account for the third-highest number of medical device injury
reports to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, with more than 80,000 incidents flagged
since 2008.
Patients report that they have been shocked or burned or have suffered spinal-cord nerve
damage ranging from muscle weakness to paraplegia, FDA data shows. Among the 4,000
types of devices tracked by the FDA, only metal hip replacements and insulin pumps have
logged more injury reports.
The FDA data contains more than 500 reports of people with spinal-cord stimulators who died,
but details are scant, making it difficult to determine if the deaths were related to the
stimulator or implant surgery.

“This project began with a little moment: Reporter
Maurice “Mo” Tamman, who lives on a sailboat in New
York Harbor, noticed fish in nearby waters that were
normally found farther south. He started digging into
the data, and he discovered that marine creatures are
fleeing warming seas, in an epic underwater refugee
crisis.”
Read more about the methodology

The top: Doesn’t have to be all number,
number, number...but sometimes it can.

The Nerd box
● Details of what you did and how you did it
● Keeps story flowing
● Adds transparency
● You don’t always need one
● Sometimes you need something more extensive

Use your words
● Rates versus raw numbers
● Wrong words: salaries versus household incomes
● Making conclusions you can’t back up
● More likely versus as likely
● Percent versus percentage points
● Avoid false precision: 53.14 percent
● Avoid number overload
● Adjust money for inflation
● When analyzing income or home values, use
median rather than average
● Keep numbers to graphics

Don’t forget about the graphics
● Text need to be edited
● Data needs to be rechecked
● Need a workflow – not email

Courtesy Scott Pham, BuzzFeed

Final Thoughts
● You don’t have to be able to do data analyses to be able to

understand, manage and edit them.
● You do have to be an organized, logical thinker.
● Don’t be intimidated by your data reporter’s skills; have
him/her walk you through everything.
● There are no dumb questions!

Thank you!
mbeelman@asu.edu @maudbeelman
jlafleur@irworkshop.org @j_la28
This presentation is available at the conference
site or at bit.ly/datastory19

