Verificado Tipsheet for IRE
Lessons from Verificado 2018: How to create and manage a multiplatform,
multimedia, collaborative fact-checking initiative
Questions and comments, contact Monica Cruz-Rosas
cruzm@aljazeera.net
@MonicaCruzR
How it all came about
Mexico had its ​biggest elections ever​ in 2018.
Viral disinformation and ​bot attacks​ were already common since at least 2014.
Based on that previous experience and examples of disinformation​ in the 2016 US
presidential election​, AJ+ Español came up with a fact-checking project for the 2018
Mexican presidential election.
Could not do it alone.
So AJ+ Español got in touch with ​Pop-Up Newsroom​ and ​Animal Politico.
Pop-Up Newsroom​, a UK-based initiative that specializes in creating collaborative
reporting initiatives.
Animal Político​, an award-winning Mexican online news outlet and at the time the
only national newsroom with a fact-checking project certified by ​Poynter's IFCN​.
The three joined forces to bring in other news outlets and organization to create
what would become the ​Verificado network.
That network was comprised of:
57 media outlets from across Mexico
9 universities and data and research organizations
6 non-profit organizations
5 technology providers
6 sponsors
11 promoters
Verificado's workflow
The Newsroom
Social media team: 4 members

(2 managers, 2 engagement producers)
Text team (managed by Animal Político): 12 members
(2 managers, 10 reporters)
Multimedia team (managed by AJ+ Plus Español): 5 members
(1 manager, 2 producers, 1 graphics producer, 1 video editor)
WhatsApp team: 3 members
(1 manager, also in social media team, 2 reporters)
1) Monitoring suspicious content and selecting based on viral threshold**
2) Editors assign tasks based on format (text or multimedia)
3) Upload content to Check system***
4) Reporting
5) Editing and first approval
6) Notifying on Check when fact-checking/debunking is complete
7) Production (text, graphic or video)
8) Second editing and final approval
9) Schedule publication for next day
10) Send unpublished content to partners for next day
11) Publish next day
The Verificado newsroom did most of the production. Media partners would
replicate information and share news stories and multimedia. In some cases, media
partners would propose their own debunks and fact-checks, which were revised and
approved by Verificado's editors before publication.
Workflow for debates
1) Register fact-checkable statements during debate
2) Assign tasks to reporters and data experts
3) Reporting
4) Editing and first approval
5) Send information to multimedia team for video production next day
6) Story production for website
7) Second editing and final approval
8) Schedule publication for next morning
10) Send unpublished content to partners for publication next day
11) Story publication on website next morning
12) Video/graphic production next day
13) Video editing, revision and approval
14) Multimedia publishing
Workflow for election day (same as regular workflow except everything's
published that same day).
Workflow for WhatsApp

1) Register contacts with numbers, not names
2) Each contact receives an automatic welcome message and a response each time
they request a verification (no message left unanswered)
3) WhatsApp reporters can answer requests directly if information has already been
produced by Verificado or it's relatively easy to solve (Google Search, confirmations
by phone/email/text, etc.)
3) For more complex requests, register in document accessible to Verificado
reporters
4) Editor assigns verification request to Verificado reporters.
5) Reporting/Editing/Approval
6) If it's a highly demanded request, produce graphic or ​veritificado​ (see definition
below)
7) Send answer or graphic to each contact who requested the information
8) Publish daily WhatsApp status with most popular or demanded
debunks/fact-checks (video or ​vertificado​).
9) Send video or ​vertificado​ to each contact who requested that product featured on
WhatsApp status.
Vertificado​: a play on ​vertical a​ nd ​verificado,​ an infographic comprised of suspicious
content a seal indicating if the content is false, true or misleading and bullet points
explaining that verdict. Has a vertical format to be easily read on WhatsApp screen.
Highly demanded debunk or fact check: More than 3 requests in less than an hour.
Formats
Text
Video
Gifs
Infographics (​Vertificados​)
WhatsApp texts
Production
382 entries on website
62 videos
47 graphics (gifs, social cards, Twitter loops)
42 infographics (​vertificados)​
31,679 WhatsApp messages sent
Platforms and Engagement
Website: 5.4 million visits
Facebook: 200,000+ followers
Twitter: 194,000+ followers
WhatsApp:
9,600+ contacts registered

60,700+ received messages

Tools
For debunking multimedia, use the three amigos
Most multimedia content can be verifies with one of these tools or a combination of
these tools: ​Google Image Reverse Search​, ​Tin Eye​, ​InVid​.
At Verificado 2018, we also used other tools recommended by BellingCat
https://bit.ly/2w1Xq1z
For social media monitoring:
Spike
Crowdtangle
Krzana
WhatsApp account management
WhatsApp Business API
Smooch by Zendesk
For project management
Slack (needs no introduction at this point)
Check​ (see tips below)
Other tools
Archive.Today:​ to archive tweets/webpages/Facebook posts in case they get
deleted.
IntelTechniques​: Facebook user advanced search (registration needed).

Tips
Copy the fakers.
Use the same format used for the fake/misleading content. Remember that
fake/misleading content tends to travel faster and more effectively than verified
information or fact-checks. Use formats that are easily shareable and readable to
ensure more impact. Don't write a 1,500 word piece to debunk a 40-second video.
Keep tight quality control.
It's better to have many fact checkers, but only a handful of editors. Every debunk or
fact-check should be approved by the same team of editors to avoid errors of
confusion when dealing with lots of reporters and information.

Establish a viral threshold
Don't direct more attention to fake or misleading content. Only verify or debunk
content that has already gone viral. This was Verificado's threshold:
A
Platform
Facebook

Twitter
Instagram
WhatsApp

A
Platform
Facebook

Twitter
Instagram
WhatsApp

B
Video
+200 000
views in 24
hours
+20 000 views
in 24 hours
+20 000 views
in 24 hours
+20
messages in 24
hours

C
Foto or text
+2 000 shares
in 24 hours
+1 500 RTs in
24 hours
+3 000 likes in
24 hours
+20
messages in 24
hours

B
Video
+20 000 views
in one hour

C
Foto or text
+1 000
shares in one
hour
+2 000 views in +200 RTs in
one hour
one hour
+10 000 views +1 500 likes in
in one hour
one hour
+15
+15
messages in
messages in
one hour
one hour

Create Balance
Balance your debunks and fact-checks based on candidates/political parties to avoid
the appearance of bias.
Give a heads up
Inform the candidates, political parties and electoral authorities about your
fact-checking initiative ahead of the campaign season.
Get key contacts
When possible, create direct communication channels with candidates'
representatives, political parties press officers and electoral authorities to get
quicker responses and thus create quicker verifications.

Communicate your true intentions
Be transparent and open about your financing, members and intentions. FB Lives
are a great tool to communicate this information and gives audiences the chance to
ask questions live.
Take data seriously
Include data experts and academics in your newsroom to ensure accuracy,
especially during debates.
Don't live fact-check during debates
Publish your debate fact-checks the day after the debate to ensure total accuracy,
your audience will understand.
Use a simple fact-checking scale
True, false, misleading, insufficient data. More categories might create confusion.
WhatsApp is key to inform the public during electoral seasons in Latin
America
In Latin America, WhatsApp is basically a news service, not just a text messaging
app. Treat it as such. Use WhatsApp to inform your audience. Get a business account
to create automatic responses and manage a great number of contacts.
Use a centralized system
Like air traffic controls, you need a system accessible to the whole team (main
newsroom and media partners) so everyone knows what's being debunked and
who's debunking it. Verificado used ​Check​.
Presenting your information is not enough
Explain your audience the steps you took to debunk a video/photo/FB
post/WhatsApp chain letter. People want to know how you got there.
Say it with bullet points.
Don't assume your audience has the time and patience to read a 1,500 word story.
Be as on point and pithy as possible when presenting your debunks and fact-checks.
Don't assume your audience knows the basics.
Explaining the nature of disinformation and how things work is an essential mission
for all fact-checkers, especially in a country where sadly, information and education
is still limited.
Encourage the audience to participate.
Let them know from the get-go that they can request verifications. Establish a HT to
tag suspicious content and/or a WhatsApp service where they can ask questions.
Also, encourage them to contribute in the verification process or do their own

verifications. The three amigos are pretty easy to use once you get the hang of it.
People get really excited when they do their own debunks, it’s like baking their own
bread (and it actually tastes good).
But also let them know you’re the journalists.
It’s important to establish that using the three amigos it’s not enough. Journalists
provide context and additional reporting to get a bigger and clearer picture on the
issue at stake. Most of the time, the only way to really verify something is through
old school reporting (digging, making phone calls, interviews, data analysis, public
records), not just some cool-looking tool. Tell your audience that this talent not only
separates you anyone with internet access who can upload a suspicious image on
Google Reverse Search, it also separates you from the dark forces of disinformation,
which never present their sources (real ones) and/or methods.
Show your audience you're human
When you live in a country that has to deal with corruption, violence, inequality and
polarization on a daily basis, it's natural that people are going be very, very cautious
about a fact-checking initiative. Let them know you're only doing your job as a
journalist. As mentioned before, be transparent about your goals, financing and
members. Feature your reporters on videos and FB Lives so people identify them.
Take your work very seriously, but not yourself. It's ok to make a joke once in a
while.
Deal with your mistakes. Even fact-checkers make them.
Accept, correct and explain your mistakes as quickly as possible. Don't keep your
team in the dark, talk thoroughly about errors internally as well.
_​____

