Investigative Research Techniques
JOUR 76008

Spring 2019

Mondays from 2-4:50 p.m.

Room 330

Contact
Prof. Barbara Gray
Cell: 347-603-2610
Email: barbara.gray@journalism.cuny.edu

Office Hours
By appointment ​bit.ly/researchdrs

Welcome to Investigative Research Techniques, where you’ll prepare for the
Investigative Reporting Class in the Fall by learning to dig deeper into stories using
court records, contracts, bonds, social media, ethics filings, advanced NexisUni.com,
Factiva, even the Bloomberg Terminal, as investigative tools. Together, we are going to
begin to hone your research skills into a superpower. ​Wayne Barrett, one of our
greatest muckrakers,​ described investigative reporters as the ”investigators for the
people.” Your whole job is to uncover the truth, no matter how many layers you must
carve through to find it, and this class will teach you how. You will build these skills
across five weeks of classes and through five assignments, designed to immerse you in
investigative research.
Along the way, we’ll deconstruct some complex, impactful investigative stories and
break down the research components. You will also meet some of the best investigative
researchers in the business, who’ll share their investigative research specialties. You’ll
also have some time to workshop some of your investigative ideas and stories in class.
Our mission ​is to help you raise your research skills to investigative levels. I want to
help you further develop:
● Critical Thinking: Ask the right questions, look for the unanswered questions, this
will help you map your investigations, and find story ideas.
● A documents mindset. Is there a record?
● Adaptability: Learn how to brainstorm where the research may take you, what it
might look like, and where it could be.
● Your PACER and other court record tool searching skills.
● Using social media as an investigative tool.
● Skill at digging into city contracts, expenses, municipal bonds, ethics filings, and
lawsuits.
1

● Your adeptness at creating an audit trail to track your research process.
Expectations
Deadlines for weekly research memos: each assignment is due at 9 a.m. the day of
class.
● Class attendance: Be there, on time.
● Bring your laptops, you’re going to do research work in class.
● I’m supposed to warn you about plagiarism, however, you will be compiling
research memos in this class and I want to see all of your work, which you must
grab, screenshot, copy, source and then annotate with your own analysis. I will
be looking for your original research. We’ll discuss this more in class.
Where to find great Investigative Reporting
● IndepthStories - Reddit: ​https://www.reddit.com/r/indepthstories/
● ProPublica: ​https://www.propublica.org/
● Reveal from CIR: ​https://www.revealnews.org/
● The Intercept: ​https://theintercept.com/
● Sludge from Civil: ​https://readsludge.com
● APME- Watchdog Reporting: ​https://www.apme.com/page/watchdog
● This one is for story ideas - Courthouse News: ​https://www.courthousenews.com
Required Readings
● Articles and e-reserve chapters listed week by week below.
Recommended Reading
● The investigative reporter's handbook : a guide to documents, databases, and
techniques. [on reserve for two-day loans, in the Research Center] 2009; 5th ed.
[edited by] Brant Houston, Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.
Research Assignments
You won’t do a lot of pretty writing here, this class is about deeply researching in mostly
primary sources and analyzing what you find. You’ll write five graded memos and will
receive detailed instructions for each assignment on the day of class, but here are the
skills you’ll be flexing:
● Look at contracts, expenditures and audits of a NYC Agency.
● Search PACER for story ideas, and gather information based on a certain case
type in PACER.
● Use social media and open source intelligence techniques to deep background a
phony political operative.
2

● Go deep researching a public company.
● Work with government data sources.
Grading Breakdown:
● 20% of your grade will be in-class participation​, contribution to class
discussions of required readings, topics, etc., and punctuality.
● Each of the five research memos will be worth 16% of your final grade​.
○ You will prepare five memos on the investigative research you did that
week. Include what you found and how and where you found it.
○ Annotate your findings in every memo and elaborate on the info found. I
want analysis from you: ask questions, make connections, note interesting
context, details and history, which would inform an investigation.
○ You will be graded on the thoroughness of your digging, the connections
you made, sourcing of material found, and the details and analysis you
provide in your memo.
Grading Scale: A Note on Grading
You will receive regular, timely feedback throughout the class. Never hesitate to
approach me for feedback on your progress and to discuss strategies to improve your
work.
Grading Scale:
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

A+ (97-100): ready to be published without a single change
A (93-96): excellent work, ready to be published by a professional news organization with only a small
number of changes
A- (90-92): strong work but needs significant additions (and changes or edits) in reporting or writing or both
B+ (87-89): work that is slightly above the class average but needs additional reporting and would be
improved by a rewrite
B (83-86): average work. A rewrite would make sense.
B- (80-82): middling work that is below the class average and should be rewritten
C+ (77-79): substandard work with problems several in number and serious in scope
C (73-76): weak work, bordering on unacceptable in a work environment
C- (69-72): unacceptable in a work environment
D: CUNY does not offer this grade at the graduate level

●

F (0): failure on most, if not all, levels used to measure performance

●
●

A Note on Diversity
Our job as the “investigators for the people” is to seek out underreported stories in
underserved communities. An old adage applies here: We want to comfort the afflicted
and afflict the comfortable. This means incorporating diverse sources and diverse
voices in our research and reporting. Let’s also show tolerance, sensitivity, and mutual
respect in our classroom.
3

Week #1 [March 11] Watchdogging
Prepare for this class - Required readings
● Read this article by Joe Mahr, A​ nonprofit got special loans and tax breaks for
low-income housing. Dealmakers collected millions in fees. And buildings
deteriorated.
● While you are reading, jot down notes about where and how the research for this
story shows up in the reporting.
● Seven Ways of a Watchdog​ by Dan Myers
● Think about your intentions for this class, what problems do you want to solve?
● Think about your own research process, we’ll talk about that.
● We’ll discuss how to identify the unanswered questions that will help you find
story angles and shape your research.
● If you want to, you can download ​Zotero​ software and the ​extension​. We’ll learn
to use this free research management tool to organize your research. The
Chrome extension saves your pages, articles* directly to your browser.
In class, we’ll deconstruct this excellent reporting, and work on some of the tools for
investigating local government.
Assignment Due 9 a.m. Monday March 18th
You’ll pick a NYC agency to investigate. Search agency contracts and
expenditures, agency audits, any mentions of your agency in City Council
committee reports and hearings, and you’ll identify the policymakers in your
agency - the people who file financial disclosures. Prepare a memo detailing
what you found and the resources you used.​ ​Here are the detailed instructions
for assignment #1 Digging Into City Agencies
Week #2 [March 18] Court Case Investigations
Prepare for class - Required Readings:
● Read these Miami Herald stories by Julie K. Brown on Jeffrey Epstein, ​#1​, ​#2​, ​#3
● While you are reading, jot down notes about where and how the research for this
story shows up in the reporting.
● Read some of ​Epstein’s FBI File
● Read ​How the Miami Herald investigated Jeffrey Epstein — and his many
enablers
In class, we’ll deconstruct this incredible reporting, do some work in PACER and other
court record sources, and meet and get some tips from the PACER Whisperer, ​Seamus
4

Hughes​, who discovered in his regular trolling of PACER, that ​Julian Assange had been
charged in a criminal complaint.
Assignment Due 9 a.m. Monday March 25th:​ ​Legal Research Assignment.
You’ll search SDNY via PACER and prepare a memo detailing what you found
and the resources you used. ​Here are this week’s detailed instructions for
assignment #2: summarize and annotate the history of a case in PACER.
Week #3 [March 25] Advanced Social Media Newsgathering
Prepare for this class - Required readings
● Review ​this site​ and ​this tipsheet​.
● Read this article​, which Katie will discuss. She will talk about the interesting
backstory of how she came up with the idea for the story, and how she used
social media n her investigation.
In class, we’ll meet ​Katie Zavadski​, the Deputy Research Editor at ProPublica, who’ll
talk to us about social media for investigations. We’ll work on some of the OSINT and
pay tools for social media investigations.
Assignment Due 9 a.m. Monday April 1st:​ ​You will be assigned someone from
this website​ to background and investigate using social media tools and ​open
source intelligence techniques​. Prepare a memo detailing what you found and
the resources you used. ​Here are the detailed instructions for assignment #3:
background investigation of a person, using social media and OSINT.
Week #4 [April 1]
Prepare for this class - Required readings
● Diana Henriques’ ​Investigative Business Journalism - Prepare for the Hunt​ via
IRE
● Mintz Group’s Building a Background Check on Companies from A to Z
● Chapter 13 & 14 of The investigative reporter's handbook : a guide to documents,
databases, and techniques [in your​ course e-reserves​, pswd: res2019]
● Here’s something to cheer you up: ​https://trac.syr.edu/tracirs/latest/549/
In class, we’ll review the readings, and practice on ​EDGAR​, OpenCorporates, the
Bloomberg Terminal and other business resources.
Assignment Due 9 a.m. Monday April 8th ​You will be assigned a
publicly-traded company to investigate. Prepare a memo detailing what you
5

found and the resources you used. ​Here are detailed instructions for assignment
#4: investigating a publicly-traded company.
Week #5 [April 8th] Federal Government Records for Investigative Reporting
Prepare for this class - Required readings
● Trial and Terror​ by Margot Williams and Trevor Aronson
● The Threat Within​ by Margot Williams and Trevor Aronson
● You can check out the csv files of the data on Github for ​Trial and Terror​ and ​The
Threat Within
● Margot asked that you also read these two old warhorses, and she will talk about
the plane tracking, which led to discovering the CIA black sites:
○ C.I.A. Expanding Terror Battle Under Guise of Charter Flights
○ Jet Is an Open Secret in Terror War
● While you are reading, jot down notes about where and how the research for this
story shows up in the reporting.
● Here’s Margot’s Tipsheet of ​Investigative Research Links
In class, we’ll talk to ​Margot Williams Research Investigations Editor at the Intercept​, an
investigative research and data reporting legend, she’ll deconstruct her excellent
reporting, and work on some of the tools for finding government records and data for
investigative reporting.
Assignment Due 9 a.m. Monday April 15th ​You will work with ​TRAC Reports
data and prepare a memo detailing what you found. ​Here are detailed
instructions for assignment # 5 digging into TRACfed data.

6

