How to retain journalists from
underrepresented groups
An #IRE19 Session

SPEAKERS
Felicia Harris
Manny Garcia
Jyoti Thottam
Matt Thompson
Liz Roldan

@felicialynne
@manny_garcia1
@jyotithottam
@RevealerInChief
@lizroldancbs4

University of Houston-Downtown
USA TODAY Network
The New York Times
Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting
WFOR/CBS Miami

OVERVIEW
While there’s been much talk about diversifying newsrooms for what seems like decades,
recent reports indicate that newsroom employees are less diverse than U.S. workers
overall. Meanwhile, voices from underrepresented groups are leading the way in content
creation and garnering national audiences in spite of the overwhelming sameness
plaguing U.S. newsrooms. Although the next generation of newsroom employees are on
track to be more diverse, the startling lack of present-day diversity requires us to move
beyond the idea of recruitment and address a more pressing question: once they’re on
our teams, how do we support and retain journalists from underrepresented groups?

MENTORSHIP & LEADERSHIP
1. Actively and intentionally recruit journalists from underrepresented groups by
attending targeted conferences (NABJ, NAHJ, NLGJA, AAJA, etc.) and developing
relationships with colleges and universities where members from marginalized
groups thrive (HBCUs, MSIs, HSIs, etc.).
2. Pair diverse reporters with veteran journalists who can mentor and help them
grow. Spend quality time with them as you can. They went to work for you.
3. Make a special effort to retain people from underrepresented groups who are in
leadership roles, who carry a disproportionate mentorship burden.

4. Invest in and develop ​people,​ not just employees. Don’t focus on retention at the
expense of development and promotion.

5. Valorize peer mentorship and support. People should not feel like they are telling
tales out of school when they’re strategizing around issues of inclusion with peers.

PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
1. Create career paths for and with employees from underrepresented backgrounds.
2. Understand the importance of informal, social gatherings. They are really
important to that intangible sense of "belonging" that makes a big difference in
whether people stay or leave a newsroom.
3. Find non-profit funding to send your journalists to conferences. Send rising
leaders to programs like IRE’s journalists of color fellowship, and the News
Leaders’ Emerging Leaders Institute.
4. Make sure to provide everyone with the opportunity to be a part of the big story,
not just the veteran journalists.
5. Pay attention to the assignments that are made ​— who​ is covering what and ​why​.

NEWSROOM CULTURE
1. Be mindful for unconscious bias in coverage and meetings, ranging from talking
over people to micro-aggressions. Include all colleagues in town halls and
appropriate business meetings where strategy and goals are discussed.
2. Make sure people get work time and work incentives to push the organization
forward on matters of inclusion and equity; that's not bonus work.
3. Hold everyone accountable for building an inclusive culture. For example, all
reporters should be responsible for cultivating diverse sources, not just reporters
from underrepresented backgrounds.

LIGHTNING ROUND
1. Treat freelancers fairly! Draft clear, comprehensive pitching criteria and
guidelines with editors, and distribute them to aspiring freelancers. Get internal
agreement and buy-in on how pitches will be evaluated.
2. Invest in clear, equitable pay scales that align with roles and responsibilities.
3. Celebrate successes. Recognize and reward employees who make

above-and-beyond contributions to an inclusive culture.
4. Count. Editors, measure your progress and hold yourself accountable.

