Connect the Dots – From Data and Documents to People
Michael J. Berens – Reuters
IRE 2019
No matter how powerful our findings, we need people to propel our story – dimensional narratives that
deliver emotional punch. But how do we find “people stories” that echo and enhance story themes?
Data and documents can be your compass.
Quantify
Begin by counting. Everything. Do you have hundreds of state group home inspection reports?
Enforcement reports, disciplinary actions, court data, jail logs, and countless more – everything can be
counted. Create your own database (in Excel, for example) and list every inspection by address date and
outcome – and every other countable variable; for example, was there a death or injury? If you can
obtain a database, so much the better. It’s critical to know all the planets in your story universe.
Track extremes
Readers love simplicity and clarity. What is the worst or the best? What school has the lowest test
scores? Which city has the highest murder rates? Which state-licensed group home reported the most
deaths? Which street has the highest number of traffic violations? Think beyond addresses. Which
licensed profession has the highest number of disciplined members? Which type of car has the most
passenger deaths? The more granular the question, the more powerful the finding.
Locate the place, find the people
Once you’ve zeroed in on key location or story theme, now you know where to center the hunt for a
primary story character. Why? Because the best characters echo story findings. If you’re doing a story
about the city’s most dangerous highway, don’t open the story with a victim who died on another road.
Rank potential sources
Not all story characters are equal. If possible, look for people who highlight multiple story findings.
Which victim highlights the most story themes? Which victim is most relatable to readers? Notate
characters that have complicating backgrounds, such as a felony arrest record that might undercut their
credibility – or, perhaps, enhance their story.
Data and documents won’t replace gumshoe reporting
Go back to basics. Once you’ve identified a location don’t overlook journalism 101: pull lawsuits
connected to the location; seek police reports; scour ambulance calls; check out 911 logs; grab coroner
reports; seek death certificates. And find the “guy in the basement,” my euphemism for a source who
has made it their life’s calling to track your story subject. Often, it’s a loved one who is trying to shine a
light on an injustice.

Let’s dissect a real-world example. Here’s the story premise: ​State-licensed group homes care for
thousands of low-income adults, most with disabilities. Rumors abound that the state has ignored or
excused evidence of abuse, even death.
Quantify:​ Obtain a list of every state-licensed group home. Obtain state inspection and investigative
reports. Create a spreadsheet of every address and corresponding inspection/investigations.
Track Extremes​: Identify group homes with the most reported deaths or injuries. Since many group
homes may be owned by the same person or business, track deaths/injuries by ownership.
Locate the place, find the people​: Zero in on the private owner/business who has the worst group home
records. Then zero in on a specific home that is most problematic. Ideally, this is where you want to hunt
for your characters.
Rank potential sources​: Inspection and investigative reports may reveal clues to multiple victims. For
long-term stories, I often list potential victim profiles in a spreadsheet and grade each entry from 1-10 to
determine which anecdotes work best for story purposes.
Gumshoe reporting​: Background your “location” with every available public document. Don’t forget
bankruptcy records, fire inspections, code violations – there are dozens of possibilities.
At my previous job, here’s a Chicago Tribune story (with colleague Patricia Callahan) where these
techniques came to life: ​https://bit.ly/2wPzekW
Note this:
●

●

●

The Day 1 lead was derived by finding the place – a group home owned by the state’s largest
private provider – and scouring public records to find a victim, a man who died from neglect
inside the home. Public records also showed the home had been ordered emptied due to code
violations.
Another prominent victim profile in Day 1 involved a man with disabilities who was left
unattended and choked to death on food in a transportation van. By ranking potential victims,
we could readily find an example to highlight staffing and oversight deficiencies.
One story in the series focused on a privately-owned group home with the state’s worst record
of care. Not only did this location yield one of the series’ most dramatic victim stories, the state
also shuttered the home and moved other residents to safety.

This simple five-step strategy can be applied to most every kind of investigative story, from the hidden
dangers of methadone to captivity deaths of elephants in American zoos. There’s power in numbers but
they only come to life with flesh-and-blood characters.

