Unearthing Secrets
How to Scrub Any Candidate or Public Official

Meet Your Panelists
● Lulu Ramadan, Palm Beach Post, @LuluRamadan
● Roz Helderman, Washington Post, @PostRoz
● Lindsay Wise, Wall Street Journal, @lindsaywise
● Steve Eder, New York Times, @SteveEder

Why we are here
- Whether you are vetting a president, Supreme Court justice, or
mayor, we'll give you all the tools you need to unearth the
secrets of public officials and candidates.
- Using public records and master source-building, we'll explain
how to expose conflicts of interests, untangle financial
connections, and reveal problematic relationships.

Sizing up your subject &
starting the vetting!
Steve Eder
The New York Times

FIVE Big Questions to get you started
1. Who is your subject, really, and what do constituents
need to know?
2. What biz/financial interests does the subject have now?
In the past?
3. Who are the key associates, aides, campaign staff,
donors, and family?
4. Who might help me understand my subject?
5. What records should I request? And from whom?

Read Everything & Start Gathering Records
● Do a thorough clip search for your subject & read as much as you can.
Look for threads where there there might be something more to say
● Gather old bios and resumes, often findable through LinkedIn,
universities, conference packets, board appointments, and archived
web sites.
● Save, download, or screenshot all relevant social posts. Look for
business accounts too
● Collect any financial disclosures & corporate records
● Records, records, records! Lulu will have more on this!
TIP: Don’t forget about archival records and libraries & books by/about
your subject

Find a Helpful Insider (or two)
-

Identify the people who have been around your subject in
various ways
Maybe it is someone who ran against him/her for office in the
past, a former campaign aide, a fundraiser, a political foe
These people can share insights and help you navigate the
network.
Build a rapport and keep in touch as you go.

Begin thinking of your subject in chapters
- It can be daunting to try to take on the whole subject in
one story.
- If you break down his/her story into parts, you’ll be more
focused.
- Examples: A specific campaign, a specific relationship, a
specific business transaction or job
- Roz will have more on this!

Does the subject’s mythology hold up?
- Often, public officials or appointees have a story that they
are trying to promote.
- You can investigate the arch of that narrative and find the
real story.
- Keep an eye out for those key details. They may seem
small at first.
- Lindsay will have much more on this!

Scrubbing officials: the
public records
Lulu Ramadan
The Palm Beach Post

Information and public records to stockpile:
Names of family members (marriage licenses, court records)
Corporate records (Department of State, SEC)
Property records (County property appraiser)
Annual financial disclosure forms (State or local ethics body)
Conflict of interest forms (voting conflict, ethics inquiries, etc.
from state or local ethics body)
● Meeting minutes, agendas, hearing transcripts
● Lawsuits (PACER, county courthouses)
●
●
●
●
●

● Use statements of financial
interests to track
references in contracts,
legislation, etc.
● Compare sources of
income to references in
lawsuits, ethics records,
city/county/state records
etc.

More useful records:
● Divorce records (Courthouses)
● Campaign contributions (state or federal elections commissions)
● Lobbying records (Lobbying Disclosure Act Database, state oversight
body)
● Charity records (IRS, GuideStar, ProPublica)
● Emails, calendars (department of employment, clerks)
● Government-issued credit card records, discretionary fund details,
phone bills (department of employment, clerks)
● Professional licenses (secretary of state)

Tips for reading documents:
● Upload all documents on a public official to one searchable
database
● Highlight/annotate portions you plan to reference
● Make a list of unanswered questions
● Read the footnotes!

Bringing Documents to Life:
People!
Rosalind S. Helderman
The Washington Post

Who do you want to reach?
-Experts: Make sure you find people to explain the
documents before you get too deep. Understand the
rules and whether you’ve found something unusual.
-Whistleblowers
-Observers
-Subject
-Everyone: Of course

The task: After declaring
his candidacy for
president, Ted Cruz
amended his financial
disclosure forms to
reflect he was owed
more than $75,000 by a
friend. He put out a
statement with the basic
facts, explaining the
money came from an
investment he’d made in
a business in Jamaica.
We wondered: Was
there more to this story?

There was a lot more! A rich tale
about an overlooked chapter of Cruz’s
life that we brought to life by marrying
witness accounts to documents.

Finding a source’s motivation
Tip: Think about your approach before every call, looking for why it would help a
source to speak to you, rather than help you if the source speak
-Public interest
-Self interest
-Gossip
-Political advantage/personal animosity
-Cluelessness

Ordering your interviews
-How important is secrecy to your work?
-Outside/In
-Research everyone before reaching out
-When to contact the subject

Designing the approach
-The Door Step
-The Cold Call
-The Friend
-The Written Appeal

A first
hand
witness

A door
step that
worked
out

Strong
whistleblowers

Putting it all together
Lindsay Wise, Wall Street Journal

This GOP candidate told voters he owned a company he built from scratch. He didn’t.

Congressional candidate Steve Watkins inflated his role as a defense contractor in the Middle East
by telling voters he owned a company he built from scratch.
He didn’t.

On the campaign trail, Watkins repeatedly cited his experience starting his own small business in
the Middle East as one of his assets as a future congressman. A political newcomer who had
never held elective office, Watkins was vying with Democrat Paul Davis for a fiercely contested
open seat in Kansas’ 2nd Congressional District, which includes the state capital Topeka.

CLAIM ON CAMPAIGN TRAIL: Steve Watkins repeatedly said he “owned an engineering and securities
company” when he was in the Middle East. “I grew that outfit from three people to 450 people. There were
times when I did not take pay to make sure my employees could make ends meet.” We documented multiple
times Watkins made this claim. (YouTube, Twitter, media coverage)
ASKED CAMPAIGN FOR SPECIFICS: Watkins’ campaign told The Star the candidate was referring to VIAP
Inc. — a wholly owned subsidiary of Versar Inc., a firm in the Washington, D.C., area.
FINDINGS: Records and interviews with company officials showed that company existed years before he
was hired on as a consultant. And Versar’s chief executive officer at the time gave credit for building VIAP to
another person

CONFRONTING THE CANDIDATE: Reporter staked out a campaign event. When asked, Watkins
acknowledged he didn’t own VIAP. He campaign later added that he never intended to imply he owned the
company.

DOCUMENTS
-Incorporation Records:
Incorporation documents showed VIAP was founded under a different name, Versar Services, in
1997, according to incorporation documents filed in Delaware. At that time, Watkins would have
been a student at the U.S. Military Academy in West Point. He graduated in 1999. (Nexis,
Secretary of State filings, Open Corporates, military/West Point records)
-Personal Financial Disclosure Forms
Watkins’ federal financial disclosure forms, required for all congressional candidates, didn’t
mention VIAP as an asset he owned. The forms showed salary payments from Versar listed under
earned income: $27,819 in 2018 and $45,216 in 2017. Under positions, Watkins listed himself as
a consultant for Versar Inc. He gives a description of his duties as “project manager services,” not
owner. (House Clerk’s Office, candidate PFDs)
-SEC Filings:
Watkins’ name did not appear on any of Versar’s Forms 10-K that list board members and
execs.We searched contact info and called everyone listed. (Edgar Database, Nexis)

Human Sources
Incorporation documents and SEC records often don’t reveal ownership stakes. Could Watkins
have founded a company he sold to Versar? Was there some other explanation?

McClatchy reached out to former executives and board members of Versar, none of whom recalled
Watkins as an owner or founder of VIAP. Most had no memory of him at all.
Theodore M. Prociv was CEO of Versar Inc. from July 2000 to February 2010, and president of the
company from 1999 to 2010. Not only did he not remember Watkins, he also gave us the name of
another person who they said actually did create VIAP: Bill Johnson.

BULLETPROOFING
Consult experts, if necessary
Ask the candidate questions directly in person, if possible
Follow up with campaign (in this case, in writing) - no surprises for anybody
WRITE (In this case, we decided the more direct we were, the better: The candidate said he did X. He
didn’t.)
Double check with sources (both documents and human)
Lawyer, if necessary
Follow up with sources and campaign after publication

Meet Your Panelists
● Lulu Ramadan, Palm Beach Post, @LuluRamadan
● Roz Helderman, Washington Post, @PostRoz
● Lindsay Wise, Wall Street Journal, @lindsaywise
● Steve Eder, New York Times, @SteveEder

