Tip Sheet – IRE Houston 2019
Best practices for student-pro investigative collaborations
Rafael Lorente
Associate Dean for Academic Affairs
Philip Merrill College of Journalism
University of Maryland
rlorente@umd.edu
301-405-1084
What are your strengths? What is your mission? What do you want to accomplish?
-

Are you in a news desert? Or do you have strong news orgs around you?
Are you near the state capital? Are there professional sports teams nearby?
Corporate offices/industries?
What can you offer that professional news orgs in your region need? Do you have a
strong data program you can leverage to help local news orgs?
What do you want your students to get out of the experience?
Does your institution value service to the community/state/region?

Advantages of Working with Universities (or, how to convince professional partners they
want to work with you)
-

We may not have the most experienced reporters, but we have lots of them.
Our faculty are sometimes among the most experienced editors in town.
Access to experts. We can do interdisciplinary. Tap computer science, public health,
information schools, etc.
We have time, relatively speaking.
We often don’t have to worry about tomorrow’s front page, or the 11 o’clock
newscast.

Pitfalls and Obstacles in Setting up Partnerships
-

The academic calendar doesn’t always work for professional news orgs. Lead time
and lots of planning is key.
Students have MANY other responsibilities. And we have MANY other
responsibilities to them.
Sometimes it takes 3-5 really good students to do what an above-average
professional can do.
Professional news orgs sometimes just want free labor. Or they want the power to
assign your reporters (students).

Tip Sheet – IRE Houston 2019
Best practices for student-pro investigative collaborations
(page 2)
TIPS for Making it Work
-

-

-

Find a niche that’s close to the intersection of what your students need and what
the local news ecosystem needs.
Start small. Pick a project or a topic you know you can tackle.
Start without a partner if need be. Prove what you can do, then go to a partner for
the second or third project.
Don’t skimp on editing, fact-checking or legal vetting, if necessary. You have more to
prove because your journalists are students. Your credibility is key. Make it clear to
students that the standards are higher and the consequences of plagiarism and
other integrity issues are magnified.
When working on any project, think about having a project manager, not just
editors. Somebody has to keep trains running on time and set workable meeting
agendas.
Communicate – Communicate – Communicate: Did I mention the importance of
communication? Everybody has to know what everybody is doing.
Collaboration is a culture. Cultivate it internally and it will translate externally. Get
your faculty working together across platforms and specialties.
Do you need to set up an MOU template that you can adjust from project to project
or partner to partner? Think about: Text and web style books (colors and line widths
and fonts); fact-checking standards; deadlines and launch dates; clarity about who
reports, writes and edits what; credit and coordination of social media campaigns;
credit and coordination of contest entries; policies for sharing of data; policies for
sharing of clicks and engagement; joint source database; joint repository of
documents and data.
Especially if there are more than two partners, discuss how much each partner can
and wants to do. Not all partners are created equal.
Make sure professional news orgs understand the limitations of the academic
calendar and the limitations of student journalists.
Set your expectations super high, but accept that you will have to make some
compromises.
Make sure you have the backing of your leadership. You WILL get pushback at some
point.
Clarify early who is in charge of reporting assets (ie - student journalists).
Look for outside funding sources.
Don’t reinvent the wheel. Lots of schools and professional news orgs already doing
this. Ask for advice. We and others are happy to talk.

