Best Practices for Student-Pro Investigative Collaborations
IRE 2019
David Armstrong, Director
The Georgia News Lab
darmstrong@csjournalism.org
Student-Pro Partnerships: Tips for Collaborative Investigations
Take the concept of partnership seriously: Successful collaborations are built on great
partnerships, with everybody fully engaged. Buy-in is greatest when everyone feels they benefit
from the collaboration. Look for ways the partners can strengthen each other and make the
whole greater than the sum of its parts.
Pick great students: Make sure students are up to the task. Recruit heavily. Talk to instructors,
editors, internship supervisors and student media advisors. Interview extensively. Look for
students who show real passion. Make sure they understand what they’re getting into and the
commitment that is required.
Start early: To help ensure a good start, before the semester begins provide students with
opportunities to become grounded in the concepts of investigative reporting. This can include
background readings, research tasks, and online training.
Make sure students are prepared: Before students take on full-fledged investigations, be sure
they have the skills they need to do the work. Teach them the basics of records access, data
journalism, interviewing, conceptualizing investigations, media law and ethics. Much of the
training can be built around real-world reporting that feeds into subsequent investigations.
Plan projects carefully: Particularly in the early stages, select investigations that are likely to
yield stories. Are the records students need reasonably available? Are the costs affordable? Are
human sources relatively accessible? Can the project be completed in the time available? Set
students up to succeed. As they gain experience, the degree of difficulty can increase.
Ensure good communication: For partnerships to work, everyone needs to know what’s going
on. Instructors have to let students know what is expected of them. Students must keep
instructors informed of their progress. Professional partners need to know the status of the work.
Establishing effective, reliable lines of communication is essential. Set up systems to ensure
open, regular communication.
Engage students’ strengths: Look for ways to incorporate students’ interests and talents on
projects. If students have co-majors in health, law, business or political science, for example,
consider assigning them aspects of investigations in which their knowledge can be put to use. If
there are photographers, videographers, coders, podcasters or data jockeys among the students,
look for ways to draw on those skills.
Emphasize responsibility: Good students will quickly understand that they are working on real
stories about real people and institutions and that they must take extra care in their reporting.

1

Still, it is our responsibility to remind them regularly that they must be meticulous about keeping
records and fact checking. Most will take that responsibility seriously. But we are ultimately
responsible for their actions. For collaborations to work, we must ensure that their reporting
meets professional standards.
Examples of recent collaborations:
“Georgia’s elected tax commissioners get thousands in undeclared ‘fees’”
AJC and WSB: on-ajc.com/2Ip0gF6
Students explain how we got the story: on-ajc.com/2EZzgej
“When inmates die: Georgia’s jails fail mentally ill”
AJC: http://bit.ly/GaJailDeaths Sidebar: http://bit.ly/JailDeathsSidebar.
WSB: http://bit.ly/JailDeathsWSB
“How the Atlanta Beltline broke its promise on affordable housing”
AJC: http://bit.ly/BeltlineHousing
WSB: http://2wsb.tv/2gMmF4A

2

