Directing the high-stakes investigation
IRE 2019.
Lois Norder, Atlanta Journal-Constitution; Mikel Schaefer, WVUE-New Orleans; Adam Playford, Tampa Bay Times.

High-stakes stories come with stressed reporters, scared sources, big expectations and the need to execute quickly
and precisely. For editors managing those challenges, some simple processes and tricks can make a big difference:

1. Invest time at the beginning of a project to establish clear expectations.
Lay out the key findings you want to establish in writing. Discuss standards of proof. Will anonymous sources be
allowed? What are the rules on getting audio or video recordings? What kinds of bullet-proofing is expected throughout
the process? Who will be checking the data analysis?
Discuss those topics regularly as the project evolves. Make clear what you want reporters to show or tell you.
Talk about deadlines for key parts of a project. Establish a routine of planned check-ins.
Discuss the kinds of visuals needed for the project and responsibilities for assigning them.
Emphasize the “no surprises” rule: No one should learn what you’re publishing about them by seeing it on TV or
reading it online. Prepublication memos with findings are a standard way some reporters handle this.

2. Set up processes for keeping reporters on track.
The more complex the project, the more important it is everyone can find info quickly. Have a common queue or
shared drive where everyone posts notes, documents and data. Invest time talking about that drive’s structure; consider
a set of common folders, or a naming convention for documents. Most projects need at least one chrono.
Make sure the core project team is also meeting regularly to tally up achievements and talk about short-term
goals. What did we achieve last week? What do we want to achieve next?
Have clear divisions of responsibilities: both small (who will contact which sources) and big (who’s going to close
key reporting hole A this week?). Keep a running spreadsheet of those contacted, including their contact information,
and of case studies, including which findings each case represents. That will help with writing and fact checking later.
Have a running spreadsheet of public records requests, with key dates.
No matter how good a data reporter is, never accept that a vital analysis is impossible unless you truly
understand why. Talk it through. Print out and examine a handful of rows. Report out where the data is coming from. If
the data out there isn’t working, can you collect your own?

3. Get others on board.
Communicate up. The most high-stakes work requires firm backing from management. Discuss the story with
them at the start and keep them updated as it develops.
Schedule an early conversation with your attorney, so he/she is advised of the nature of the investigation and
likely scenarios. This also gives reporters an opportunity to understand the rules on obtaining and handling information
and to predict and discuss tricky choices they may have to make as the story unfolds.

Hold regular project meetings with representatives from photo, video, digital, social media and other
departments. Those should be held regularly, but not at the same time as your meetings with the core reporting team,
which should be about setting short-term information-gathering priorities. (The “reporting team” may include
photographers, videographers or data reporters, depending on the project.)

4. Coach reporters on getting vital interviews.
Emphasize transparency throughout dialogues, so the sources understand your intention.
Initially, a relationship can be for background only. The reporter can then work to move at least parts of the
information on the record, or to corroborate it with paper or other sources. “They’ll never go on the record” is a lousy
reason to skip an important story.
Prepare reporters for the toughest interviews by going over question topics, phrasing and even the order in
which they should be asked. Discuss other strategies of the interview.
Have them go armed with important documents, color coded if needed so key pages can be quickly found. Don’t
let them go until they’re in command of the key facts.
Counsel them on never losing their cool.
Afterward, nudge reporters to write a memo summarizing what occurred in simple news copy (including the
best quotes). Require they do so if something sensitive or critical happened and the interview wasn’t recorded.

