This just in: Data for breaking news investigations
Anticipating what you'll want/need when news breaks
●

Experiment and work ahead. Anticipate and run through scenarios
○ Gathering information, organize it and present it internally and externally
■ Internal users that need access to information when the time to report comes.
■ External users that need access to information to help them understand what
happened.
○ Breaking news dashboards/presentations
■ Inspired by a presentation last year from Derek Willis, Jacob Harris and Aaron
Bycoffe
■ Timeline based coverage of breaking news
● Christopher Dorner in Feb. 2013
■ Our internal spreadsheet tool for breaking news events

○

○

●

Fire Tracker
■ Inspired by WNYC's work during Irene and Sandy.
■ Started as a super-simple wildfire story generator
■ When it became a project we wanted to:
● Move from repetitive story-based coverage to building a historical record
of wildfire data
● Offer a tool that would allow us to shift our focus to the human element
and big picture
Searchstagram
■ Based on a ProPublica's QIS tool

Example of running through scenarios
○ Following an earthquake of any magnitude, information & access to communication
systems is at a premium. What is our role in enabling and facilitating?
○ Various agencies - municipal governments, DWP, Metro, CalTrans, etc. - have plans in
place in the event of an earthquake. Should reporting staff know more about those plans
in an effort to be prepared in advance?
○ Data wishlist
■ Critical infrastructure
● schools
● power plants
● water lines
● natural gas lines
● hospitals
■ Demographic data (Census)
● population density
● ethnic data

■
■

■

● income
Shelter locations
Transportation status
● Metro closures
● Freeway status
● Metrolink uptime
● OCTA closures
Social Media Response
● Twitter
● Instagram

Here are some sites where you can find data online to help you with breaking news and
more:
Business – labor, contracts, economy, etc.
● OSHA workplace safety inspections
● DOL enforcement data
● DOL Union data search
● Local Area Unemployment Statistics from the BLS
● Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA)
● Economy at a Glance from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
● Migration data from the IRS
● Tax data from IRS (tax exempt orgs)
● National Agricultural Statistics Service
Federal spending
● Federal contracts (FPDS)
● System for Award Management contractor registration
● USAspending.gov or FedSpending.org – Federal spending data including grants, loans,
contracts, etc.
● Federal Audit Clearinghouse - “Non-Federal entities that expend $300,000 ($500,00 for
fiscal years ending after December 31, 2003) or more in a year in Federal awards shall
have a single or program-specific audit conducted for that year” (Note: full dataset
available from NICAR)
Public health, safety, environment
● Recalls (look at tabs for topics)
● EPA environmental data searches
● Nursing home, hospital and home health data from Medicare.
● National sex offender registry (Department of Justice)
● Firearms data from the ATF
● Import refusals from the FDA
● FBI Uniform Crime Reports

Transportation & infrastructure
● Fatality Analysis Reporting System data (FARS)
● Transportation data from BTS
● Air travel consumer report
● Aircraft data (service difficulty reports, on-time data, aircraft registry, etc.)
○ NTSB Aviation Accidents (and more)
○ FAA accidents/incidents and service difficulty reports (SDRs)
○ Flight tracker from flightaware
○ On-time statistics
● National Bridge Inventory from NICAR

