Integrating CAR into a daily beat, 2012 NICAR conference, St. Louis, MO
(and bonus form letter for salary records request)
Kate Martin, government reporter
Skagit Valley Herald, Mount Vernon, WA
@KateReports, katie.martin.13@gmail.com
We are all busy, but with a few things on hand and knowing the information is out there, you, too can be
armed to report on your daily beat using computer-assisted reporting.

How to find information






What agency might have the record. Who might know where the record is located?
Is your agency doing something wrong? Who watches that agency? Think of state regulatory
agencies like an auditor, attorney general or secretary of state’s office.
Compare information from different sources to gain context of the issue. For instance, if a
mayor complains there are too many 911 calls to one address, compare that address to a
similar business nearby. Ask your local 911 center (it’s a public record) for a list of 911 calls
to that address. They should almost always be able to export something in a text format.
Find the data expert in the office (not the elected official) or someone who has been there
for a really long time. Sometimes they will be exited to talk to someone about their data
because nobody ever takes an interest.

Have on hand: Salary database of all public employees








It’s really easy to ask for salary databases. You just have to fill out a records request and
send it. It’s not always easy to format the data in a form you can use. I request salary
databases from about 20 agencies, and it will take a a couple of hours to create and send all
of the records requests. Washington state requires records to be provided in their native
format (such as text file or Excel).
DO NOT allow anyone to bowl you over by claiming that it’s a “proprietary format.”
Almost ALL software can export documents into a text file, and from there it’s a very simple
process to import to Excel (Google search for instructional videos). You can call the software
company and ask for instructions on data export.
Immediate payoff: Your editors are going to want to have a return on investment. Write
about overtime worked by public employees. Everyone is cutting their budget, but are they
saving money by laying people off? Compare salaries of officials with similar agencies. Are
they being paid a lot more than other cities/departments? Are they top heavy?
You will use this database all year long to fact check officials’ statements about budget cuts.
You can also use it for breaking news. Search it if there is a mass shooting to find victims or
their families, or to find out if someone who was arrested worked for a public agency (and
so much more).

Other tips





Carry a blank public records request form with you. That way if you need to get anything,
you can start the clock ticking right away on their response time.
Know about available data and try to get other databases. Good examples: Corporations
databases from your secretary of state (It is available online in Washington), test scores by
school and year and census.
Anything that can be recorded is probably somewhere in a database: roadkill (state patrol or
DOT), invasive species inventory (where non-native plants and animals are located and are a
problem), liquor license database, which bars have the most DUIs (state patrol); the
possibilities are endless.

To:
From:
Date:

RECORDS CLERK NAME
YOUR NAME, news org
DATE

Personal intro, if needed
This is a request under RCW 42.56, the Washington Open Public Records Act, for the
AGENCY NAME personnel and payroll database, or other document(s) that provides the
following information:
- names of employees (first, middle, last)
- date of hire for each individual employee
- date of termination for each individual employee (if applicable)
- job title for each individual employee
- department for each individual employee
- total amount of wages (including overtime, holiday pay and all other special pay) paid to
each individual employee in the calendar year 2011.
- total overtime paid (as defined by federal law) to each individual employee in the calendar
year 2011
- all other special pay for each individual employee, including but not limited to car
allowances and performance bonuses
- In addition, please provide copies of the record layout, code sheet and all relevant
documentation regarding this data (if applicable)
I would like to receive this data in electronic format. I can accept ASCII text, dbase IV,
Microsoft Access, Excel and many other formats (just let me know and I'll see if we can use
it). I can accept this data on CD-ROM, DVD, via email or FTP.
If some of this material will take longer to provide than other portions, please provide that
information as soon as it is available. If any part of this request is denied, please provide
the specific exemption under the law allowing the denial.
Please let me know if there is anything I can do to help clarify or expedite this request. I
look forward to hearing from you and appreciate your assistance.
Sincerely,
Your name
Position
News org
Phone number
Email address

