Maintaining data integrity
Charles Minshew, IRE & NICAR Director of Data Services
You’ve downloaded a dataset from a government website in order to archive
it, but now what? Before you rush to analyze information for your next
story, it is important to maintain the integrity of the data you’ve collected.
This helps avoid mistakes in reporting and also establishes trust in the data
you are analyzing.
1. Make a note of information about the dataset you’ve downloaded.
This metadata can include the name of the dataset, names of the
data fields, the original source of the data, information about how the
data was collected, how many records there are, any data dictionary
that explains codes and information in the data, when you
downloaded the dataset and where you downloaded it from. If there’s
something you know about the dataset, it doesn’t hurt to document it.
Others might be wondering the same thing.
2. Look for any reports or tables produced by the original data source.
When you’re running an analysis on data later, you can recreate the
queries using the original data and check your work.
3. Save your original file on your computer, to the cloud and maybe even
burn it to a disk. Ensure that you note this file is the original and
make no changes to it. If you’re going to edit the dataset, duplicate the
file first.
4. Do no harm to the original data. If there’s a coded field that is hard
to comprehend and you want to change it for ease of understanding,
do not edit it. Instead, create a new column and enter the desired
value. When naming the column, note that this is a user created field.
Never pass it off as the original dataset after you’ve added a
field. Be transparent about any value you might add to the dataset.
5. If you’re sharing a copy of a dataset, always provide the original link
information so a user can compare your source to what is publicly
available.
6. When it comes time to check your data before using it in a story, do a
four-corner check. Essentially, this helps you look for an abundance

of missing records and to ensure that your data is complete.
7. Group by each column to see what values are in the field. This allows
you to see a few things: How many blank records are in each field, the
count of records and a breakdown of each value by their frequency in
the table. In SQL, this can be accomplished with a query like this:
a. SELECT fieldname, COUNT(*) FROM tablename
GROUP BY 1 ORDER BY 2;
8. If you see a field’s value that does not match the data source’s
dictionary, it is important to ask questions about the data. It
might have been entered incorrectly or there could be a code that was
left out of the data dictionary.
9. Make every effort to verify the data’s “chain of custody.” Know where
the data came from. If from an agency, be sure to include who
provided you with the data. If the data is provided by a third party,
always go back to the original source for more information if possible.

