MaryJo Webster
St. Paul Pioneer Press
Computer‐Assisted Reporting Editor
mwebster@pioneerpress.com
Twitter: @mndatamine

What is a data state of mind?
Approaching story ideas with the mindset that you are going to quantify or measure
something, rather than just getting the facts and all sides of the story. This requires that
you analyze some data on your own, making you less dependent on public officials to
give you the straight story and oftentimes giving you a story that wouldn’t have been
possible without the analysis.
The data could be a very simple table with summary information (i.e. total budget
figures for each city department this year compared to last year) or it could be very
detailed information (i.e. the city’s accounting logs with one record for every
expenditure).
How do you develop this mindset?
Think of data as people too.
The database you get from a public agency is just like a human source. It can answer
questions, raise questions, point you in the right direction, or even mislead you if you’re
not careful in not only how you ask the question, but also in how you interpret the
answer. It can be a tipster or it could be the key source in your story or it could just offer
some background or context.
Define your story ideas as questions, not statements
Instead of saying, I want to do a story about unsafe bridges…say I want to find out
what percentage of bridges in the state are unsafe? This frames your story into
something that is quantifiable and helps you figure out how to get started.
Tune your radar to pick up opportunities to quantify
z Trend stories that vaguely say something has changed over time or is bigger or
different here versus there
z When interviewing sources, listen for times when they refer to something that was
measured – when they talk about something increasing or decreasing; when they clearly
make it sound like there was some analysis to get that answer. Ask them, where did you
get that? And then, perhaps, you might also want to ask to get the raw data yourself.
z When you find yourself asking a source to give you summary numbers for a story,
stop and think whether it would be better to get the data that those numbers are based
on. For example, if you are writing a story about how overtime has caused the police
department’s budget to go through the roof… instead of asking the city to give you total

figures on overtime this year versus last year (or some other breakdown), ask yourself if
you’d get a better story if you had data showing how much overtime each employee
got?
z A local government (city, county, state, etc) created a program to do something last
year.. Can we find a way to measure whether it has succeeded?
z A breaking news story. How often has this occurred in the past?
z Use IRE’s Extra Extra to find ideas that others have done
z Look at your own past stories and look for missed opportunities – could you go back
and do a deeper or broader look at the topic using data?
z That rumor/myth that is always circulating. Can you figure out whether it’s true?
Learn what datasets are available on your beat
What is collected and why? How does the government agency use the data? What
reports are generated from it? This will prove useful in a couple ways…first, it might give
you more insight into your beat and second, it might set the stage in case you need
some of this data down the road (especially if the story is time‐sensitive).
Visit the agency or office when you aren’t working on a story. Talk to your contacts
there — find out what information they track and how they track it (paper? database?
spreadsheet?).
Read the agency’s annual reports to get clues about what information they collect.
Read auditor reports
These are great for seeing how the professionals tackle a topic. They almost always
measure something, and most importantly, they usually have a question they are trying
to answer. Be sure to check out the methodology. Minnesota Legislature Auditor’s office
allows you to sign up for email alerts when they put out new reports (best ones are
from the Program Division). You can also go to their website to see the list of things they
are working on. Nationally, check out reports from the GAO.
Get to know your public records law
Requesting data is a bit trickier than requesting paper documents. It’s very helpful to
know how the appropriate public records law works. If you’re requesting federal
government data, you go with the Federal FOIA. If it’s from a state or local agency, then
the state law applies. In Minnesota, the state law is called the Data Practices Act
(Chapter 13 of the state statutes). It applies to all government entities EXCEPT the
legislature, the courts and townships. The courts have their own public access rules. The
legislature is sort of a wild west — you get what they are willing to give you.

A couple good things to know regarding data requests in Minnesota:
z If the information you want is stored electronically, they are required to give it to you
electronically (if you so wish). However, they are not required to create something new
that doesn’t exist.
z They are allowed to (but not required to) charge you “actual cost” for copying the
data. They can’t charge you for redacting, or verifying the accuracy of the data or for
CPU time. They can only charge you for the time it takes someone to write a query to
export the data.
z The hourly rate must be the rate for the lowest‐paid person CAPABLE of doing the
job, even if that’s not the person actually doing the work.
z It’s a good idea to include this in your request so you don’t get surprised by a big bill:
“If there will be a charge for my request, please provide me the cost estimate writing, in
advance of filling my request. Please include the amount of time expected to copy the
data and the hourly rate.

Go‐To Sources — State/Local:
Voter Registration data
Public salaries
z Education — test score, student demographics, teacher demographics, teacher
salaries
z Financial — budgets, check registers
z Campaign finance reports
z Property records — deeds, liens, mortgages, etc.
z Incorporation records, UCC filings, Tax liens
z Contracts for public officials (i.e. school superintendent contracts)
z
z

Go‐To Sources — National:
Census (American FactFinder2)
IRS 990 Forms (Guidestar or ask the charity for it)
z FEC Campaign Finance
z
z

Plane Crashes:
Find out info on flight origination and destination, takeoff times, etc. on FlightAware
(you
need to get on there quickly, though. The free stuff is only for a limited window of
time):
http://flightaware.com/
z

Find out who owns a plane and other details. It works best if you have the tail number
(also called the N number): http://registry.faa.gov/aircraftinquiry/
Airport‐Data.com: http://www.airport‐data.com/ (search everything from tail
numbers, to airports, to serial numbers, etc)

NTSB Accident Database:
http://www.ntsb.gov/ntsb/query.asp
Landings.com: Searchable databases of pilots and registered aircraft, and service
difficulty reports‐‐
SDR’s (note: the reporting requirements for SDRs are not very comprehensive).
http://www.landings.com/
Car accidents:
FARS‐Fatality Analysis Reporting System has a query tool that allows you to find
summary data on fatal accidents in your locality, going back a number of years. You
can
either view the results online or download to a txt file:
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/ncsa/fars.html
z

Also check with your state highway patrol — they likely have their own database of
accidents.
Commercial trucks and buses:
The U.S. Department of Transportation has a database called SAFER that has
information
on interstate trucking and bus companies. You can find out safety records of a trucking
company and more. http://www.safersys.org/
z

Vehicle recalls: Download data files of all complaints filed with NHTSA, defect
investigations, recalls, and
technical service bulletins (updated regularly). http://www‐
odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/downloads/
z

Bridge Collapse
The National Bridge Inventory database, kept by the U.S. Department of
Transportation’s
Federal Highway Administration has inspection data on all bridges in the U.S. The data
is
usually a year or so behind, so it might be worth checking with your state agency that
oversees bridges to see if you can get a more current copy of this same data for your
state (MN keeps one on their website). Best way to get the national dataset is from
NICAR: http://data.nicar.org/node/2521
z

Workplace safety:
OSHA’s website allows you to search their inspection database online.
http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html
This would be useful following workplace accidents at local businesses. You can also
get the raw data from the NICAR database library.
z

Bad Weather
Storm Events database (kept by NOAA) has data on all kinds of weather events,
including tornadoes, hail, high winds, etc. The NICAR database library also offers the raw
data for purchase. http://www4.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi‐win/wwcgi.dll?wwEvent~Storms
z

Check with your local branch of the National Weather Service to see what they might
have. One in MN keeps an Excel file with all the past tornadoes and details about each
one.
Also check with your state climatology office to see what they have. The MN one has
data on precipitation, temperature, etc. on a daily basis going back decades.

