Finding data online
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE/NICAR
Jaimi@ire.org
Louisville CAR 2013

Use Advanced Searches in Google
This doesn’t find much because it isn’t specific at all.

Make sure you look at the advanced search in Google to see your options. It will help you save time and get better
results.

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

You can change the original search to show only results from government domains

You can be even more specific. For example, instead of showing results for all government sites, now I am only looking
for the word “inspection” in results from websites that end in “ky.gov”

This is the same search as above, but I’m only looking for results that are spreadsheet files. You can use the “filetype:”
narrower to specify results by filetype (spreadsheets, word docs, PDF files, PowerPoint presentations, etc.):

If you get rid of any search terms, you can find all of the spreadsheets (or any other file type) that Google has found on
one specific site like this:

In addition, I like searching for ftp and other fun words in a URL. In the example below, I combine an “allinurl:” search
with a domain narrower using “site:”:
©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Clues that data exist
 Major Information Systems – request a list from government agency: example US Marshall’s list here.
 Something in a “chart” format may mean that a database exists: example California West Nile Virus here.
 Online forms to submit information because data: example Wisconsin Insurance Complaint form here.
 Actually read a web site – don’t let it force you into predefined roles: example North Carolina Department of
Revenue here. (Read through the site. Look at the site map. Use their own search to search for keywords
related to data: download, database, information system, submit, searchable, inspection, enforcement, Excel,
etc.)

Things to keep in mind
 Never hesitate to request information you find in a more up-to-date format.
 Some searchable databases do not include the entire dataset.
 Just like everything else, you must report out this information.

Downloading and converting data
(Once you’ve found it, what do you do with it?)
 In Excel format – example IRS Exempt Organizations here.
 From the web – example California West Nile Virus here. (See “Importing into Excel: HTML charts” section at the
end of this handout…)
 In text format – example from data.gov search on “inspection” here.
 PDF to Excel – try cometdocs.com
 Using other tactics such as web scraper for Chrome or just creative searching in forms. (Remember, for creative
searching in search forms, try not using any search terms or use wild cards like * or %.)

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Searchable and downloadable data that already exist online
 OSHA workplace safety inspections
 DOL enforcement data
 Federal contracts (FPDS) (ex. Border protection)
 Recalls (look at tabs for topics)
 Economy at a Glance from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
 Local Area Unemployment Statistics from the BLS
 EPA environmental data searches
 Fatality Analysis Reporting System data (FARS)
 National sex offender registry (Department of Justice)
 Transportation data from BTS
 Aircraft data (service difficulty reports, on-time data, aircraft registry, etc.)
 NTSB Aviation Accidents (and more)
 FAA accidents/incidents and service difficulty reports (SDRs)
 Flight tracker from flightaware
 On-time statistics
 Aviation consumer reports (PDF file)
 Bureau of transportation statistics
 Nursing home, hospital and home health data from Medicare
 Firearms data from the ATF
 Migration data from the IRS
 Tax data from IRS (tax exempt orgs)
 Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA)
 National Agricultural Statistics Service
 The Census
 American FactFinder for quick data profiles.
 Datasets from IRE– download profiles, comparisons and more.
 Get information on the Census from ASU’s Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and IRE
 Federal information
 Fedstats – A to Z list of statistical data from the government.
 Data.gov – Searchable catalogs of government data. (Search for business, contracts, inspections, etc.)
 USAspending.gov or FedSpending.org – Federal spending data including grants, loans, contracts, etc.
(Ex. Coca Cola)
 State and local data
©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

 State Government Databases wiki from the American Library Association
 BRB Publications links to public records sites
 Portico

Grab someone’s Twitter history
 Paste this URL into your browser (note – doesn’t work on Macs):
http://api.twitter.com/1/statuses/user_timeline/account.xml?count=n
 Replace “account” with the user’s Twitter Handle and replace the “n” with the number of tweets you would like
returned. Or you can leave that be. Like this:
http://api.twitter.com/1/statuses/user_timeline/JaimiDowdell.xml?count=n
 XML data appears. Save it and open it in Excel.
 Each Tweet has an ID (you’ll see it in the Excel file you open). You can use the following URL to collect tweets
since the most recent ID: http://api.twitter.com/1/statuses/user_timeline/account.xml?since_id=ID

Search for International information using US data
Federal Contracts
Search the FPDS site for contractors based in a country:
https://www.fpds.gov/fpdsng_cms/
You can narrow your search by any field in the federal contracts data. Data is exportable to CSV.
Energy administration information
International energy statistics:
http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/IEDIndex3.cfm?tid=5&pid=54&aid=4
Net imports of petroleum to US:
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_move_neti_dc_nus-nda_mbblpd_a.htm
Department of State
Weapons authorizations by country:
http://www.pmddtc.state.gov/reports/655_intro.html
Federal Aviation Administration
Aircraft registry: http://registry.faa.gov/aircraftinquiry/country_inquiry.aspx
Securities and Exchange Commission
EDGAR search by country:
http://sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/webusers.htm
Internal Revenue Service
IRS tax exempt organizations – international file can be found here in Excel:
http://www.irs.gov/taxstats/charitablestats/article/0,,id=97186,00.html

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Legistorm
For foreign gifts and trips by U.S. lawmakers: www.legistorm.com
Foreign lobbyists
Search by country: http://www.fara.gov/quick-search.html
Department of Homeland Security
Removals and returns:
http://www.dhs.gov/files/statistics/publications/YrBk10En.shtm

International data
 UNdata - data.un.org – This is a portal to a collection of international databases. The data is searchable and
downloadable. This site is good at pointing out where the data came from so you can track it down at the
source.
 International Data Base from the U.S. Census Bureau - Demographic data including growth rate, population and
gender. This site also has a ranking option and describes, in detail, the methodology behind the data.
 International trade and tariff data from the World Trade Organization - Statistics on international trade as well
as country profiles.
 The UJIMA Project - This site brings together databases and documents in the hopes to bring more transparency
to African countries. Data includes information on spending by the U.S. Agency for International Development,
foreign government lobbying of U.S. politics, weapon sales, disbursements from the Global Fund to fight
HIV/Aids , and much more. This site also links to the source of the data so you can see or download the original
information.
 Data from the World Bank - Search for data by topic or country. Topics include environment, energy & mining,
health, economic policy, and more. Use the “Data Catalog” to download data sets.
 NationMaster - Much like Wikipedia, this site is a good way to get quick information and find sources for data. It
contains searchable encyclopedic and statistical information for countries. It also has a lot of information about
sports. Be wary, though, and make sure you always check the source of the information – sometimes it is
Wikipedia - nonetheless, a good place to start.
 World Health Organization Global Health Observatory (GHO) database - Find health statistics around the world
for things such as mortality, life expectancy, poverty and more. Individual country statistics are also available
and downloadable.

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Importing into Excel: HTML charts
Often when you search for information online or peruse a site, you come across a chart such as this:

Anytime you see data in nice, neat columns and rows you should think several things:

1) You can get this data into Excel fairly quickly and simply.
2) This is summary data aggregated by county; you can always request the data they used to create this
summary chart.
3) The government agency may have much more information than shown.
4) The government agency may have more current information than shown.
The newer versions of Excel have made it incredibly easy to grab data from the Web. Try it out yourself by following the
steps below:
Note: The following instructions will work only for Windows versions of Excel.
Step 1) Identify a Web page you’d like to pull into Excel. For example, go to California’s West Nile Virus page here:
http://westnile.ca.gov/.
Once you’re at the page, scroll down and look at the left-hand navigation until you see “WNV Activity by County” as
shown in the following figure:

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Select the 2011 printable version and you’ll be taken to a chart as shown in the beginning of this document. This chart
definitely looks like a spreadsheet with columns and rows.
Step 2) Highlight the URL for the page and copy it:

Step 3) Open up a blank worksheet in Excel.
Step 4) Click on the “Data” tab. Under “Get External Data” look for “From Web.” Click on that icon.

Step 5) When the “New Web Query” window opens, paste the URL in the “Address” box and click on “Go.”

Step 6) That should bring up the page. Notice the yellow arrows throughout the page. These arrows indicate different
html tables in the page. If you want to pull in the entire page, simply click “Import.” If you’d like to select certain tables
then click on the arrow next to the table(s) you’d like and the arrows will become green checkmarks. For this example,
just click “Import.”

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Step 7) Excel will ask you where you’d like to put the data. This is why we started with a new worksheet. Just click “Ok”
here and your data should appear in the worksheet.

Step 8) Save the sheet as an Excel file. I also like to add a worksheet to the workbook that I name “Notes.” In this sheet I
paste the download link for the data and I list the download date for future reference.

More Practice: Pick and choose
For more practice, try importing data from the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. Go to their enforcement
division page here: http://www.dnr.state.mn.us/enforcement/index.html.
Select “Game & fish license revocations” or just go here: http://www.dnr.state.mn.us/enforcement/revocations.html
You should see a page similar to this:

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

Notice that there are different sections, or html tables for “Big Game,” “Small Game,” “Fishing” and “Trapping.” Go
through the import steps listed above and notice that there will be yellow arrows at each of these sections in the New
Web Query window. Play around with importing all or portions of this data to get a better understanding of how the
import functions.

©2013 Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

