Jim Miller, The Press Enterprise
jmiller@pe.com; @jimmiller2
Mc Nelly Torres, Florida Center for Investigative Reporting
torres@fcir.org; @WatchdogDiva
2012 CAR Conference
St. Louis, Mo.

Getting intimate with government data to produce hardhitting stories
Budgets, audits, contracts, businesses, sweet deals and corruption are all part of government
coverage. Whether you work in a large newsroom or one-person bureau, we'll show you how to
use all the technology available to follow the money and produce quick hits and/or in-depth
stories.
How do I get started?
Government agencies collect and produce lots of data you can tap into. Whether there’s a school
district or a state agency, information is stored on computer systems.
-Learn how your government works: Which agency is in charge of what?
-Always assume is public and try to get data for free.
Government budgets
It’s a statement of officials’ priorities. What programs are getting cut or, even in these tough
times, getting more revenue? Spot trends.
Contracts
Governments at all levels write thousands of checks a year. Where are local governments
spending their money? How do they compare
CAR what? Some states make this publicly available.
U.S. http://www.fedspending.org/
California http://www.dgs.ca.gov/pd/Programs/eprocure/SCPRSData.aspx
Excel spreadsheet, Google Documents, Open Office
Education (Mc Nelly Torres)
As public agencies that serve a great number of students, school districts produce lots of
document, and hence, data. From vendors’ contracts (food, supplies, vending machines) to state
test scores you can find a variety of topics to look into as you follow the money and follow the
data.
Some of those include:

 Contracts: Superintendent contract, businesses like food providers, school construction.
 Traveling expense records: Superintendent, top level administrators and board
members.
 Audits, bids: Familiarize yourself with the procurement departments and how the bid
system works. Keep an eye on audits and what they say.
 Inventories: buildings, properties, equipment and land. You can find lots of waste.
 Inspections: School buildings (fire safety), cafeteria (health). Out of education you can
check gas inspections, restaurant inspections, supermarket inspections and nail salon
inspections. I’ve done stories about all these inspections, a goldmine for stories.
 Test Scores, spending per school (federal grants like Title I, homeless), spending per
student, number of kids qualifying for subsidized meals, Title I schools data, poverty
data, GED rates, and dropout rates.
Mc Nelly’s tips:
 Records mindset probe records
 Be organized –make time each day or week to review records or work on
something
 Be curious
 Don’t be afraid to ask questions
Payroll, pensions (Jim Miller)
Government payroll data is always good to have on hand. Some news organizations post
employees’ names. Just as newsworthy is using the data to illustrate trends. For example, stories
can look at changes in government compensation year-over-year. Are agencies, notwithstanding
any pledges of hiring freezes, still growing?
California’s state controller, for example, makes this data available for all city, county and
special district employees. http://www.sco.ca.gov/compensation_search.html
Retirement system information is also valuable. There can be enlightening stories from
comparing retirees’ annual pensions to what their final salaries were.
Campaign contributions (Jim Miller)
There is so much potential here. Campaign contribution and spending data is often downloadable
in Excel or .csv format. If not, there are ways, using .pdftoExcel or xpdf
(http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/) to convert .pdfs into a format that can be pulled into a
spreadsheet. I also like Omnipage, which allows you to make templates for campaign finance
forms.
http://shop.nuance.com/store/nuanceus/pd/productID.229120300?link_name=standard
More .pdf conversion options are at reporterslab.org.

Worst-case scenario, you have a candidate who handwrites their reports (this is sometimes done
to thwart easy analysis) and you have to type in the data.
Why go to the trouble? It’s vital to know who’s giving to elected officials. Find patterns in the
data. Sort, filter, sum by frequency. Categorize donors. Is the money coming from in or out of
the jurisdiction the candidate seeks to represent?
These are good general-pupose campaign-finance sites:
http://maplight.org/
http://www.opensecrets.org/
www.legistorm.com
http://www.followthemoney.org/
Voter registration
Your states or counties produce reports showing voter registration statistics. Using Excel or
Access, you can show registration trends over time. Which party is adding voters are the greatest
rate? Is the percentage of independent voters growing?
The state also should estimate the populations of eligible voters. Which counties have the lowest
registration rates? Is government doing enough to get people to participate in democracy?
In addition, a lot of states and counties make their voter registration databases available -usually for a price. This can be negotiable. The databases are invaluable for people finding. At
election time, the data also can be the genesis of interesting stories involving real people, i.e.
first-time voters or people of opposite parties in the same house. In addition, examining the
registrations of people who changed their party affiliation as part of an organized voter
registration drive can revail claims of fraud.
Elections
It’s an election year and many people who would presume to lead us – whether at the local, state
or federal leves – will be on the ballot. There are lots of CAR opportunities.
Some large papers have done some great election result maps and visualizations. But this isn’t
the domain of only the big media outlets. No contest is too small to map, or chart out. Google
Fusion Tables is a quick and free way to map election results by combing a precinct map
(uploaded to Google via www.shpescape.com) and link to a spreadsheet of precinct results. The
map can be embedded into a web story or blog post.
Google charts, Microsoft Sydrive and Tableau also offer ways to visually present election
results.
Census/redistricting

Census data is an effective way to add context to your stories. The new American FactFinder
offers easy-to-locate demographic information about different levels of geography.
A product of the decennial census is redistricting. In the case of seats with four-year terms, the
new lines can leave some voters without a senator for two years. See
“New lines leave some voters without a senator”
http://tinyurl.com/7yd3jgd
Resources
U.S. Department of Education
http://www.ed.gov/
National Center for Education Statistics
http://nces.ed.gov/
Convert PDF to Excel
http://www.pdftoexcelonline.com/
U.S. Census: Lots of data here including education data
Census.gov
National Freedom of Information Coalition:
http://www.nfoic.org
First Amendment Center:
http://www.firstamendmentcenter.org
The Reporters Committee for the Freedom of the Press:
http://www.rcfp.org/index.php
Federal Open Government Guide (RCFP):
http://www.rcfp.org/fogg/index.php?index.html
Student Press Law Center:
(Check the FOI letter generator and information on FERPA)
http://www.splc.org
Sunshine Review:
http://sunshinereview.org/core/home

