Making health data sexy:
Ways to spice up your reporting
Charles Ornstein, ProPublica, charles.ornstein@propublica.org
  
One  of  the  wonderful,  and  frightening,  things  about  the  proliferation  of  health  and  medical  data  is  the  
number  of  stories  that  can  be  told  from  it.  Hospital  quality  and  finances.  Nursing  home  inspections  and  
fines.  Community  health  indicators.  Pharma-­‐doctoƌƌĞůĂƚŝŽŶƐŚŝƉƐ͘ŶĚŽŶĂŶĚŽŶ͘KǀĞƌƚŝŵĞ͕/͛ǀĞĐŽŵĞ
to  realize  that  the  closer  we  can  come  to  our  audience,  the  more  we  can  engage  them  and  the  more  
time  they  will  spend  with  the  stories  and  news  apps  we  create.  I  often  view  data  sets  hierarchically:  
State-­‐level  health  data  is  fine;  local  data  is  better.  Data  on  individual  hospitals  and  nursing  homes  is  
fabulous,  but  information  on  my  doctors  trumps  them  all.    
Why  is  this?  The  relationships  we  build  with  institutions  are  less  meaningful,  in  general,  than  the  
relationships  we  build  with  people.  That  said,  below  are  five  useful  data  sets  that  are  fonts  of  story  
ideas.  
x

x

x

Nursing  home  inspection  reports  and  penalty  information:  Perhaps  no  other  institutions  are  as  
closely  watched  as  nursing  hŽŵĞƐ͘dŚŝƐŝƐůĂƌŐĞůǇďĞĐĂƵƐĞƚŚĞƉĂƚŝĞŶƚƐƚŚĞǇĐĂƌĞĨŽƌĂƌĞƐŽĐŝĞƚǇ͛Ɛ
most  vulnerable.  The  government  in  recent  years  has  produced  a  website  called  Nursing  Home  
Compare  (www.medicare.gov/nhcompare),  includŝŶŐŵĂŶǇŝŶĚŝĐĂƚŽƌƐŽĨƌĞƐŝĚĞŶƚƐ͛ǁĞůů-­‐being.  
The  site  includes  the  results  of  home  inspections  and  penalties  meted  out  by  regulators.  This  
past  summer,  the  U.S.  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  added  narrative  details  of  
nursing  home  inspection  reports  to  that  website.  ProPublica  took  all  of  these  varied  data  sets  
and  combined  them  to  create  Nursing  Home  Inspect.  Using  our  tool,  you  can  easily  track  the  
quality  of  homes  in  your  area  and  whether  they  are  improving  or  getting  worse.  More  than  that,  
you  can  assess  how  seriously  your  state  treats  serious  problems  in  nursing  homes.  Is  your  state  
like  Kentucky,  whose  average  nursing  home  fine  is  $39͕ϬϬϬ͕ŽƌŵŽƌĞůŝŬĞtǇŽŵŝŶŐ͕ǁŚŝĐŚŚĂƐŶ͛ƚ
issued  any  fines  in  the  past  three  years?  Our  site:  http://projects.propublica.org/nursing-­‐homes.  
Drug  company  payments  to  doctors:  Long  a  hidden  secret  in  medicine,  drug  companies  have  in  
recent  years  begun  disclosing  the  payments  they  make  to  doctors  for  speaking,  consulting,  
research,  meals,  travel,  etc.  This  data  is  a  gold  mine  to  explore  the  financial  relationships  in  your  
community.  Who  are  the  key  opinion  leaders  and  main  speakers  for  companiesͶand  are  those  
ƚŚĞƌĞƐƉĞĐƚĞĚŵĞĚŝĐĂůůĞĂĚĞƌƐǇŽƵ͛ǀĞŚĞĂƌĚŽĨ͍  So  far,  15  companies  have  reported  this  
information,  and  in  mid-­‐March,  ProPublica  will  update  its  website  to  include  more  than  $2  
billion  in  payments.  (Currently,  our  website  includes  only  $750  million.)  WĞ͛ǀĞĨŽƵŶĚthat  
patients  are  very  interested  in  knowing  about  whether  their  doctors  accept  money  from  the  
drug  companies-­‐-­‐and  that  the  data  stimulates  conversations.  Our  site:  
http://projects.propublica.org/docdollars.  
Hospital  quality:  Much  like  it  does  for  nursing  homes,  the  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  
Services  runs  a  website  called  Hospital  Compare  that  provides  statistics  on  hospitals  

x

x

(http://www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare/).  The  information  in  some  ways  is  more  robust:  
death  and  readmission  rates  for  patients,  satisfaction  figures  and  stats  on  the  use  of  
questionable  imaging  tests.  But  the  hospital  site  ŝƐůĞƐƐƌŽďƵƐƚŝŶƐŽŵĞǁĂǇƐ͕ƚŽŽ͘zŽƵĐĂŶ͛ƚƌĞĂĚ
inspection  reports  for  hospitals  online.  Some  non-­‐government  websites  have  used  the  Hospital  
Compare  data  to  build  apps  for  consumers.  One  such  site,  http://whynotthebest.org,  allows  
users  to  compare  hospitals  over  time  and  view  them  compared  to  benchmarks.  
Hospitals  finances:  DĂŶǇŽĨƵƐƵƐĞ'ƵŝĚĞ^ƚĂƌ͛ƐǁĞďƐŝƚĞƚŽůŽŽŬƵƉŶŽŶƉƌŽĨŝƚŽƌŐĂŶŝǌĂƚŝŽŶƐ͛
filings  with  the  IRS,  called  990  Forms.  The  Association  of  Health  Care  Journalists  has  partnered  
with  GuideStar  to  make  available  data  on  all  organizations  that  run  hospitals  in  the  U.S.,  
including  their  revenues,  expenses,  charity  care  and  their  executive  compensation.  The  
ŝŶĨŽƌŵĂƚŝŽŶŽŶ,:͛ƐƐŝƚĞ͕ĐƵƌƌĞŶƚůǇĂǀĂŝůĂďůĞƚŽŵĞŵďĞƌƐŽŶůǇ͕ĐŽǀĞƌƐϮϬϬϵ͘^ŽŽŶ͕ƚŚĂƚĚĂƚĂ
pool  will  be  expanded  to  include  tax  years  that  began  in  2010.  Using  this  data  helps  put  your  
ŚŽƐƉŝƚĂů͛ƐƉĞƌĨŽƌŵĂŶĐĞŝŶĐŽŶƚĞǆƚ͘ZĂƚŚĞƌƚŚĂŶǁƌŝƚŝŶŐĂďŽƵƚũƵƐƚƚŚĞůĂƚĞƐƚĂĚǀĂŶĐĞƐĂƚǇŽƵƌ
hospital,  looking  at  real  financial  dataͶin  contextͶcan  make  for  front-­‐page  reading.    The  site  
address  is:  http://healthjournalism.org/resources-­‐data-­‐details.php?id=16.    
State  health  snapshot:  The  U.S.  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and  Quality  each  year  releases  
a  report  card  that  compares  states  on  a  variety  of  health  indicatorsͶfrom  the  rate  of  breast  
cancer  deaths  to  the  quality  of  nursing  homes  (http://statesnapshots.ahrq.gov/snaps11/).  The  
AHRQ  survey  gives  overview  information  and  also  allows  users  to  download  the  datasets  to  look  
for  themselves.  Another  place  to  get  state  health  data  is  http://healthindicators.gov.  /ƚ͛ƐŽŶĞŽĨ
ƚŚĞĨĞĚĞƌĂůŐŽǀĞƌŶŵĞŶƚ͛ƐŵĂŶǇŚĞĂůƚŚĚĂƚĂƉůĂƚĨŽƌŵƐ͘  The  data  tables  can  be  found  here:  
http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/qrdr11/index.html.    

