MIKE REZENDES LUCKY 13 TIP-SHEET FOR GETTING SOURCES TO TALK
1) Everyone wants to talk. It’s your job to find a way to get them to open up. Never assume someone won’t talk.
It can become a self-fulfilling prophesy.
2) Be sincere -- don’t pretend to be sincere. If you’re really interested in what people have to say, they’re more
likely to talk.
3) Swallow your pride. If a source wants to complain about the news media or your news organization, let them
vent. Once they get it all out of their system, they’ll start telling you want you want to know.
4) Put your ego aside. Especially with a reluctant source or someone who’s not used to being interviewed, be
humble and go slow.
5) Hand-holding. Sources are often anxious and fearful. It’s your job to re-assure them – or to frankly asses the
risks of talking to you and explain why taking a risk is the right thing to do.
6) Creating a comfortable space. It can be tedious, but sometimes you just have to spend time letting a source
get to know you before they feel comfortable enough to talk.
7) Read voraciously. Before you approach your source, devour everything you can about the subject so when
something is mentioned in the interview, or appears in a document, you’ll understand its significance.
8) Flattery will get you everywhere. It’s okay to inflate a source’s ego by telling them how important they are to
the story. Once they start talking, you may find they’re more important than you realized.
9) Be accessible. Make it easy for people to find you, whether through a tip-line, social media, email, or
telephone.
10) Indulge the crazies. Some tipsters may be genuinely disturbed – they may be calling direct from a
psychiatric ward – but sometimes a tipster has literally been driven crazy by an injustice they’ve suffered. You
won’t know unless you listen.
11) If a source refuses to take your calls or return your email, write them a letter explaining yourself. If that
doesn’t work, write them another letter to say you’re still interested and still need their help.
12) Convey the big picture. Many people are willing to share information if they believe it will help right a wrong
or otherwise contribute to society.
13) The cold door-knock. If a source refuses to talk, you might try showing up on the front porch. Don’t think of
this as a hostile confrontation (although it can be). Sometimes sources will be impressed because you took the
time and made the effort to pay them a visit. If they don’t answer the door, leave a hand-written note with your
business card and cell phone number.
BONUS TIP: Moving a source from off the record to on the record is often a matter of time and trust.
THREE KEY TIPS FOR DECIDING WHICH STORIES TO CHASE
1) Does the story have the potential to make change (have an impact)?
2) Is it systemic? (Or something that affects only one person, or a very small group of people?)
3) Can you get it? (Are there documents or authoritative sources who will go on the record?)
***

