Data Privacy Scorecard: What To Watch in 2012
As data privacy debates unfold in Washington, concerned users of data should monitor the
new privacy rules and regulations that are being offered from four different sources. Businesses
should pay special attention to how certain key data privacy issues would be handled within
each proposed regulatory scheme.

Regulatory Plans and Proposals
Mark Sableman

Thompson Coburn LLP

msableman@thompsoncoburn.com
314.552.6103

Mark Sableman is a partner
in Thompson Coburn’s
Media, Internet and
Intellectual Property
practices. His practice
focuses on facilitating clients’
communications, in media,
marketing and business.
He has been engaged with
privacy law for more than
30 years and has worked
closely with a national media
trade association since 2005 in
connection with recent online
behavioral advertising and
data privacy initiatives.

Industry: Four advertising industry groups (AAAA, ANA, IAB, and DMA), together with the
U.S. Council of Better Business Bureaus, have created detailed principles for industry selfregulation of Online Behavioral Advertising (OBA). The self-regulatory principles, based on
an opt-out model, call for notifying consumers of third-party behavioral advertising practices
primarily through the Advertising Option Icon, which can take consumers to various ways for
expressing their behavioral advertising preferences.
Regulatory Agencies: The Federal Trade Commission’s December 1, 2010 report,
“Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change,” promotes a government-mandated
browser-based “Do Not Track” system for OBA, and a new “privacy by design” framework
in which privacy considerations assurances will be built into a company’s default mode of
operations. Though unclear in some respects, the FTC framework seems to attempt to hoe a
middle line between opt-out and opt-in privacy protections.
Executive Branch: The Department of Commerce December 2010 “Green Paper” generally
suggests that government could assist in helping industry participants set appropriate
standards, and in coordinating and harmonizing foreign and domestic data privacy standards.
The international harmonization could become especially important as the European Union
moves forward on data privacy regulations.
Congress: Current data privacy bills include:
•

Rep. Jackie Speier (D-Cal.)’s H.R. 654, a “Do Not Track” bill, focused on online
behavioral advertising.

•

Rep. Cliff Stearns (R-Fla.)’s H.R. 1528, the “Consumer Privacy Protection Act,” which
would require clear and full disclosures of privacy practices, and largely recognize optout methods.

•

Rep. Bobby Rush (D-Ill.)’s H.R. 611, the BEST PRACTICES Act, which would recognize
a safe harbor for the advertising industry behavioral advertising self-regulatory
program, impose opt-in requirements on many consumer transactions, and permit
private litigation enforcement.

•

The Kerry-McCain “Commercial Privacy Bill of Rights Act,” S. 799, which would
mandate “robust” notices to consumers of Internet data collection practices, give
individuals broad rights to opt-out of having information about themselves collected
or used, and impose even stronger controls (such as opt-in requirements) on sensitive
medical and financial information. The bill would also seek to minimize use of data—
for example, by requiring limited use, in accordance with the original purpose of the
data, in cases where data is transferred to third parties.

Common Data Privacy Issues
Who will set the rules? More specifically, will we rely on industry self-regulation, agency
rules, Congressional enactments, or some combination? Industry self-regulation would likely
provide more flexibility and room for techniques like OBA, but government regulation would
likely give consumers stronger protections.
What data will be protected? In addition to traditional “personally identifiable information,”
today even Internet identifiers such as Internet protocol addresses, and geo-location data
transmitted by mobile devices, are sometimes claimed as personal data. How protected data is
defined will have a big impact on new technologies. For example, if geo-location information
is viewed as protected data, or as “sensitive” data deserving of enhanced protection, mobile
marketing technologies may be stymied.
How will data be protected? The traditional “notice and choice” model (seeking only to
ensure that consumers were told how data would be used, and given choices about limiting
uses) generally worked on an opt-out model. Many consumer advocacy groups seek a more
restrictive opt-in model, which could significantly limit data collection and use, and thereby
correspondingly limit commercial uses of data.
How broadly will the rules apply? Many data regulation proposals would cover even
data already publicly available, or data concerning individuals in their business capacities.
Businesses, media, and academic and investigative researchers are likely to object to such
coverage, as overbroad and likely to limit customary and non-intrusive data usage.
Who will enforce the rules? Here the choices range widely, from industry self-enforcement
procedures (akin to those of the advertising industry’s National Advertising Division, which
regulates advertising content disputes) to civil actions and class actions. Many class actions
have already been asserted in data privacy cases, typically based on federal and California
statutes and on contract claims derived from privacy policy promises. Several of the proposed
bills take a middle-ground approach, committing enforcement to state attorneys general and
the Federal Trade Commission.
Will public access to government data be affected? Although all current proposals focus
on collection, use, and transfer of data in the private sector, new expectations of privacy of
personal information could spill over into more aggressive assertions of privacy exemptions in
freedom of information laws.
How will aggregate and anonymized data be treated? Because of the usefulness of
maintaining, analyzing and using data, many entities collect and maintain data in aggregate
or anonymized form, thereby protecting individual privacy while utilizing the data for business
purposes. Because of recent studies concerning methods by which such data can be
reconnected to individuals, however, even such data may end up falling under restrictive rules.
What kind of disclosures will be mandated? While most websites currently disclose their
“privacy policies,” current law requires only limited disclosures. Some privacy advocates charge
that privacy policies are often too difficult for consumers to read and understand, and as a
result have sought to require standardized or “plain English” privacy policies. Standardized
policies, however, could prevent flexibility and impede use of new online business techniques.
Note: The foregoing materials are derived in part from an article, “We Know What You Like”: Online
Behavioral Advertising and the New Focus on Data Privacy, in the Summer 2011 issue of the St. Louis Bar
Journal.

