Global Investigative Journalism Conference
Copenhagen 1-4 May 2003
Session: Killing of a Journalist: How to effectively investigate the murders of journalists
AN EXPERIENCE FROM MOZAMBIQUE
By Marcelo Mosse

Introduction
I will talk about my personal experience in Mozambique, related to the murder of my editor
Carlos Cardoso and what have been done, so far, by the his colleagues and the civil society in
order to ensure that the people responsible for the assassination should been in court.
Carlos Cardoso was the editor of Metical newspaper, which was a small fax sheet with a great
influence in Mozambique. He was murdered in November 2000 in a cold bloody crime. In last
January, seven people have been convicted with his murder and are now in jail.
This result was not a direct consequence of the work done by the authorities of Justice; this result
was a consequence of the pressure made by the class of journalists in Mozambique as well as
national and international civil society.
So my presentation it’s my personal experience in this case. I have worked with Cardoso since
1992 and we create together “Metical”, which has been seen as the best in Mozambique in terms
of investigative journalism..
Contextualization
As you might know, Carlos Cardoso was the top investigative journalist in Mozambique. He
used to investigate cases of corruption, money laundry and appropriation of the public funds by
corrupt people in the Power as well as fight against poverty and trying to find alternatives for
development of the country.
He had a strong voice in our society and, therefore, his murder became a big test to our
democracy in terms of see whether our democratic institutions ( I am talking about the Judiciary,
police investigation) are relevant or not; see if they are working properly or if they represent the
hole society or just the mafia, or just corrupt elites.
Mozambique was socialist country until 1992. The transition from that system to democracy and
to market economy was very violent but the country, in my opinion, is doing well in terms of
political stability.
Although the transition was important step to bring the peace in terms of not have war, it did not
yet led to strong institutions in Mozambique. There a lot of problems in terms of public security;
the capacity of the cops to investigate crimes are very weak; there are not sufficient capacities to
investigate crimes and bring criminal people to the justice. In the other hand the judicial sector
are not independent from the political power, from the elites in power.

1

In the whole system of the state, corruption and organized crime are present.
So what can an investigative journalist does in Mozambique is exposing corrupt practices and
criminal networks that prejudice the state, that use the state resources in their own benefits. The
major task of an investigative journalist in Mozambique is not yet terrorism; its corruption,
money laundry, human trafficking, car thieves, etceteras.

Among people that were target of Cardoso’s investigative journalism, were top politicians,
attorneys, judges, business people, police officials that allegedly were involved in corruption,
bank frauds, money laundry, drug traffic, and other criminal activities.
This means that the state in Mozambique was, two years ago, controlled, in part, by corrupt
people, by the mafia. So Cardoso was fight against this situation. And that’s the reason he was
shot dead.
The murder of Cardoso was an economic and political crime, because it was ordered by business
people with well connections in the political and judicial power.
What has been done after the murder?
This situation of a state controlled by personal and criminal interest was confirmed just after the
murder of Cardoso and determined the course of the investigations and our attitudes as a
colleagues.
There were no any investigations at all from the police officials. The first team that take over the
case were police officials with strong links with the people that has been convicted now. Their
task was to clean all evidences that could led to people that ordered and executed the
assassination. Fortunately we at Metical were aware about these connections. So we decided to
denounce the situation in a strong way and the team was replaced.
*Probably this is one of the things that should be done in similar events. We, as a journalist, have
to be aware about who is who in the investigation of an assassination of a journalist; we have to
be sure if the investigation team is trustfully. For instance, this is very important in recent
democracies in Africa, like Mozambique, with weak State institutions and a lot of corruption,
were the penetration of the criminals groups in the state is very deep.

Another evidence confirmed after Cardoso murder was that, despite the fact that the first
investigations team had been replaced, the investigation remained slow and we found out that
there were a lot of political interest that was trying to influence the process. (That’s why the case
takes two years to be in the trial)
There was a political political that tried to silence the case and the investigations of the press.
As a colleague of Cardoso, I have done my best to investigate his assassination, but a lot of
pressures came over me. For example, I have been prosecuted by the soon of the President
Chissano after I wrote about is dirty business. As you might know, Nympine Chissano is under

2

investigation in relation with Cardoso murder, after one of the business man that have been
sentenced appoint him as the order of the killing. I believe that the political forces that tried to
silence the case were intended to protect Nyimpine Chissano. So our solution was to keep
investigating the case and bring civil society to our site.
*This is another thing that has to done in similar cases: do your own investigation as a journalist,
follow your paths BUT bring the civil society with your, not just in local level but in
international level. This is very important because the pressure to the authorities can be stronger
and because of the political consequences of that they will do efforts to bring the assassinations
to the justice.
In this case we used many ways to keep the issue on the people’s mind. In Metical, just after the
assassination of Mr Cardoso, we start to count the days, everyday, the days with no response
from the authorities about the identity of the criminal that did the job.
The Mozambican civil society has done two big public campaigns asking for an appropriate
investigation; letters of appeals to the President Chissano and to Prime Minister has been signed
by thousands of people.
And there a peculiar issue in this regard. Because of the importance of Mr Cardoso in the society
and because of the strong pressure from the media and the civil society, some donors have
threatened the Government with cut of some aid to Mozambique if the investigations still going
unclear. I believe that these kinds of threats from the donors are very useful because the social
reproduction of the elites in power depends a lot on the foreign aid (see corruption: one of the
sources of corruptions in Mozambique is cooperation funds).
Another important tool to ensure that the authorities are investigating the assassination is, apart
of your own investigation, is to have an independent lawyer working with you and assisting the
judicial authorities. Just after the murder, Cardoso’s family has hired a lawyer, Dra. Lucinda
Cruz, to follow ever step in the investigations and this was very important.
The staff of Metical has assisted the lawyer with information about the people that could be
responsible, about the investigations that Cardoso were doing and, with a lot of information that
she collected from other sources she was able to verify if the authority’s investigation were
conducted in appropriate ways. This is very important: to have an independent lawyer,
representing the journalist that has been killed, following the case.

Conclusion
The investigation of a murder is first and foremost the responsibility of the authorities in the
country in question. But often these authorities are not capable or willing to bring the criminals
to justice. This is what happened in Mozambique: a lack of capacities and an absence of political
will.
So its very important that to have an international network which can follow the investigations
and can highlight the case in the international community as well as make pressure over the
authorities.

3

In the Cardoso’s case there was a good job made by Committee to Protect Journalist, in New
York, and Reporters without Borders, in Paris.
They have push hard to make governments live up to their responsibilities.
But is this enough? I do think so.
It can be enough if we just need the interventions of international organizations in terms of an
reaction approach. We have to move from this reaction approach to a proactive one. We have to
move from been worried after the things happen to and approach that could help us to avoid
more assassinations.
So my suggestion is that we can create an international network of investigative journalists to
share not just information, sources and so on, but in which we can highlight our concerns in the
field.
In Africa we still have a lot of barriers to our job; the environment to practice investigative
journalism is very bad. We often face threats with assassination, jails and etcetera. I believe that
an international network can help in order to show to our enemies that our big brother is
watching their activities.

4

