The Secret Marks of the Primary and Lower Secondary Schools
By Nils Mulvad, CEO Dicar, 3 May 2003
Ask for a press lawyer’s assistance
Ask for a press lawyer’s assistance to assess whether a case is of general public importance and for
assistance with the reasoning of the case. If the risk of losing is too big, the case should not be run at all as
the case will set a precedent if you are unlucky. However, one argument in favour of running the case after
all would be that the act could be subsequently amended.

Complete the case
Be determined to complete the case. Do not leave remains of cases behind, which you did not complete due
to heavy workloads.

Work with the authorities
Work up a good working relationship with the authority against which you want to complain. Both parties
have got an interest in focusing on the case in order to get a decision in principle instead of spending time on
arguments and little things.

When it is impossible to work with the authorities
In some instances it will be impossible to co-operate with the authorities because of a glaring decision. Make
sure to inform the public.

Planning
At the reception of data, a schedule should be made allowing for delays. Files are often very big and
complicated and the authorities often make mistakes. The responsibility should be distributed precisely.

Plan new stories
When data is published annually, a long term plan must be made in order to avoid making the same stories
every year. Which new elements can be used and how may the data be used to vary the stories?

Time Lapse
October 2000:
A request for access to documents regarding the final year marks of the state and private primary and lower
secondary schools is handed to the Danish Ministry of Education. The data is to be used for a storey on the
Danish primary and lower secondary schools and is to be published in the web version of the largest Danish
newspaper, Jyllands-Posten, my then employer. If the right of access to documents was refused, I initially
contemplated running the case as a matter of principle due to e.g. experiences from the Netherlands.

December 2000:
The Danish Ministry of Education dismisses my application for access to documents and I ask the
ombudsman for en assessment of the decision. I co-operate closely with a press lawyer and the Danish
Ministry of Education on focusing the complaint on the case being of general public importance, however,
the Danish Ministry of Education concentrates on their refusal correspondingly.

January 2001:
Instead of waiting for the decision, I figure out that this type of storey may be retrieved by means of figures
and data from Statistics Denmark. I define a group of pupils from the schools to which they went as eight
grade pupils and, a few months later, I receive data on their subsequent whereabouts in the educational
system, parental income and a number of additional conditions.

1

May 2001:
Based on the data, Jyllands-Posten runs a storey on the schools and the data is published on the Internet. The
data indicates which schools send the most pupils on to upper-secondary level education and which schools
send the least.

November 2001:
The ombudsman makes his decision and I succeeded in my claim. Shortly afterwards, the Danish Ministry of
Education releases data on the summer 2000 school leaving examinations, which consequently forms the
basis of new stories and a school guide in Jyllands-Posten. I am, however, not allowed access to data from
previous years. Dicar publishes the data on the Internet. The release of data was the beginning of a cooperation with the Danish Ministry of Education. The Ministry has published a certain amount of data on the
Internet already, however, continues to publish more and more.

April 2002:
I receive data on the 2001 school leaving examinations. Having analysed the data with the statistician,
Kenneth Thue Nielsen, and having found a number of conclusions, which could be used for stories, Dicar
publishes the data on the Internet.

September 2002:
Statistics Denmark recognises Dicar as a private research unit and Dicar is granted access to analysing
school backgrounds, marks, place of residence, parental income and other private and personal conditions for
pupils admitted to further and higher educations in 1990 and 1998. This analysis has not yet been finalised.

December 2002:
I receive the data on the 2002 school leaving examinations and, having made a statistic analysis, Dicar
publishes the data on the Internet. We assist a number of media in making school guides, however, this time
the date of publication is coordinated and the data is combined with a query to the head teachers.

February 2003:
The Danish Ministry of Education publishes the final marks on its website.

July 2003:
An act enabling the release of average marks from the upper-secondary level education takes effect.

Links:
The Danish Ministry of Education’s marks:
http://www.uvm.dk/statistik/karakterer/?menuid=55

Link to marks for every year can be found in Dicar’s databank. The link also gives access to our
analyses:
http://www.dicar.dk/research/databank/index_uddannelse.htm

Jyllands-Posten’s school guide:
http://www.jp.dk/data/skoleguide2001/karakter/

Politiken’s school guide:
http://politiken.dk/karaktergennemsnit/forside.asp

2

Open Doors to Data
– how we changed access in Denmark
By Nils Mulvad, executive director at Danish Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting, April
2003, translation of story from German magazine “message”.
The use of Computer-Assisted Reporting is growing fast in Denmark. A Danish institute for
training and helping with stories have five employees. Last year more than 300 journalists
were trained, and the flow of simple and advanced CAR-stories are increasing.
“No,” said the leading employee in the Danish education ministry. “We wont give you the list of
every mean exam result from all the basic schools in Denmark.”
This was autumn 2000. I was journalist at the biggest Danish paper, Morgenavisen Jyllands-Posten,
and inspired by the stories about schools from US and UK and the fact that a journalist from The
Netherlands, Marjan Agerbeek, got data out about schools after a long fight and did a lot of good
stories.
Now was the time to open the doors to the secrets in the schools.
But the ministry didn’t think the same. This would spoil the exam system and it would get all
parents to focus on exam result, forgetting the most important things at the schools. So the public
better not know these things, was the argumentation.
As in other areas in journalism we didn’t take no for a no. We did two things. First we found
another way to do the story. It turned out that it was possible to get data about how many pupils
from each school was in higher education, and how many had left the school-system. We used this
for comparing results.
And then we complained. We were working in a good shape with the ministry to focus this
complaint, got deep into the argumentation on the laws of open access to records in Denmark. We
got help from experts in press-law and both sides knew about the important issues in this case,
which could open for a lot of other possibilities to get data.
In November 2001 we won the case and soon after the ministry gave us data for the first year. Then
from that time and today we got data for two more years. The ministry has turned to be much more
open and cooperate with us. Without any request they now publish a lot of data on the web-site, and
just some days ago also the exam results was published for the first time at the ministry’s web-site.
Dicar has helped many Danish medias doing stories with this exam results. Last time was in
January this year with the exam results from last summer. We made several statistical analysis on
the data, combined them with a web questionnaire to the leaders at the schools. This resulted in
stories at TV, radio, paper and on the web.
This is somehow typical for the situation in Denmark. There are still many reluctant authorities and
not a perfect law admitting access for data, but we pick out special cases and go for them in order to
change things. This has been done with luck on data on e.g. judges sidelines, income for authors for
their books on libraries, a list of people who wants to donate their organs.
But we also see an increasingly number of authorities, which actually want to be open and to work
with medias to make electronic openness. This is the situation in the regional authority in Northern
Jutland. This authority has together with the local press, Dicar and specialists in press law this
authority has made a totally new system for getting access to ingoing and outgoing mail and other
parts of their administration through the web. There has been set up some generel rules for the
access and the members of the group have then together worked through all the areas where with
the problems are solved them. The politicians have accepted the new system, and it will be open for
the public around 1st of April.

3

We hope that the idea will spread to a lot of other authorities – now we have shown in practice how
it can be handled. The new system will be demonstrated for a committee under the Danish Ministry
of Justice that works with new rules for openness, especially in the area of electronic openness.
It all began on a barbecue restaurant in Kansas City in the spring of 1996. Flemming Svith and I
were in US on a CAR-training course at IRE/Nicar. We were frustrated although there existed all
these good new methods, nothing could be done in Denmark, we told Mike McGraw from Kansas
City Star, while eating sandwiches with thin-cut barbecue meat.
“We’ll not get any data,” we told the leading investigative journalist.
“Have you tried,” he asked several times until we understood that we had to go back and try.
In the beginning the answers from the authorities were always no. But slowly things began to
change. We made some small CAR-stories. It turned out that we could get some data. The
environment began to change. In some of the stories, we actually compiled the data ourselves – e.g.
in a story on sidelines for the judges in the Supreme Court.
Slowly the method grew. There was done training in Denmark, and there was a little group of
journalists who saw the possibilities in the new methods.
We then formed Dicar in the spring 1999, after we for a year have had an organization for
computer-assisted reporting. In the beginning the board was formed by three different groups.
Besides the CAR-journalists, there were the law-experts, who could see this would be one of the
new big area for change (the other was EU-impact). And there was a group of journalists that for
many years had worked for getting better access to paper-files at local authorities.
Now Dicar are working in three areas.
1. Dicar is project leader of two Danish projects on doing in-house training of journalist in use
of IT in research, getting data from authorities, using them in stories, getting practical
experience on how to cooperate between medias and authorities and using this for proposal
for legal changes. One of the projects is supported by the Danish Government, the other by
the European Social Fund.
2. We are working together with the Danish School of Journalism to transfer this knowledge to
the Balkan area with support of the Danish Foreign Ministry. October 2002 the group of
journalists formed South East European Network for Computer-Assisted Reporting,
SEENCAR. The network consist of people and training centers from Albania, Bosnia,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia.
3. We have established a close connection with the American organization Investigative
Reporters and Editors. Furthermore we have been practical responsible for the first
international conference in investigative journalism in 2001 and are also the head of the next
conference May 2003 and will now together with IRE facilitate an international network to
support cross-border contacts between investigative and computer-assisted journalists and
provide them with other tools as training material on the net, archives etc.
From the beginning no money was the situation for Dicar. Last year with the two projects we had an
annual turnover on 2,9 mio DKR and a small positive result on 100.000 DKR.
We are running a database-archive on the web. Last year in total 54 set of data was included in this
archive.
Last year we opened an archive over handouts and descriptions of methods in stories using these
techniques. At the end of the year 200 registrations were included here.
We had made training material in internetresearch, excel, access, GIS, use of source system and
web questionnaire. Most of this training material is translated to English and also used as a basis for
similar material on Balkan and in the Baltic Area.

4

The home-page of Dicar has a growing number of visits. In January this year 12.000 people visited
www.dicar.dk, and the web-site got 87.691 number of hits. This means in average 400 visits a day
on a web-site focused on journalistic methods in Denmark, where the population is around five
million people.
We also feel a heavy demand on training. Last year 300 journalists were trained. Not all of them are
Danish. We have made a program for the two biggest Norwegian paper VG and Aftenposten
together with the institute for supplementary training in Norway. We are preparing a formal
education in computer-assisted reporting and social science methods. We have also made programs
for a group of CAR-trainers at Balkan.
Somehow we thought that the need for us in Denmark would stop in a few years. But it’s the
opposite. Getting the first data and using simple CAR-methods are just the very first step.
If journalists should preserve their position in the society and the press the democratic role, there is
a lot of new methods necessary. They could be picked up form other professions describing the
society. We started with computer-assisted methods using spreadsheets, and for us it were the first
systematic step for using quantitative methods in journalism. Now we are going further. As
journalists we have the best conditions to develop new methods in the medias, which is highly
necessary with the developing society. The shifting from the Industrial Society to the Information
Society is a highly challenge to journalists, but it is also a opportunity to exploit other professions
skills in the service of press.
We have now done the first story getting access as a private scientific research company. Hereby
we got data on death records for a specific group of people – in fact journalists - to investigate if
they have a higher mortality than the rest of the society, which turned out to be one of the often told
myths in our job. It wasn’t true. We are now having the same access to data on an individual level at
the Danish Census Bureau.
We have helped medias doing the first stories using web-questionnaires. We are using statistics in
stories.
The next step will be use of spatial analysis in GIS, use of specific software to describe social
network as e.g. the terrorist cells. And it will be to work with the editorial leaders to secure high
standard for editing CAR-stories and that this technique is integrated in the newsroom in the best
way.
We don’t have all the answers for these new areas yet, but we feel working together with IRE from
US give us lot of inspiration on new themes. Then we also ourselves develop new methods together
with the medias, we’re working with. This methods we share with IRE and other organisations
especially in Europe.
I’m sure the time has come to spread this to the rest of Europe. EU is pressing very hard to make
better access to databases in all countries. And it must be possible to use that to in fact get some
data and make the first stories – also in Germany.
And if you’re not sure on all this, please join the Global Investigative Journalism in Copenhagen.
Mike McGraw from Kansas City Star is one of the speakers. I’ll tell him it worked. Working for
data is not always a easy step, but you have to begin and then slowly things are changing.
Perhaps he’ll inspire you to think the same way.
Eating the elephant is only a question of taking it bite by bite.

5

