TIPSHEET: INTERNATIONAL REPORTERS’ RIGHTS
IRE Global Journalism Conference, Copenhagen, 3 May 2003
Bruce E. H. Johnson
Davis Wright Tremaine LLP
brucejohnson@dwt.com
Today, given extensive United States legislation and the aggressive role played by the United
States government both within the United States and overseas in connection with the war on terrorism,
and the related wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, international reporters’ rights may depend on rights that
are, or are not, available under United States law.
This tipsheet covers three areas of interest regarding US law and international journalists’ rights:
libel, privacy, and access. Other areas of interest (which this outline does not directly address) include
reporter’s privilege, criminal libel, and newsgathering liability.
I.

LIBEL

In recent years, U.S. courts have refused to recognize foreign libel judgments that have been
entered without sufficient compliance with free press norms (i.e., the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution).
The two leading cases (in which lawyers in our firm were involved supporting First Amendment
protections that prevented registration of foreign libel judgments), are Matusevitch v. Telnikoff, 877 F.
Supp. 1 (D.D.C. 1995), aff'd, 159 F.3d 636 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (including the decision in Matusevitch v.
Telnikoff, 702 A.2d 230, 347 Md. 561 (1997)); and Bachchan v. India Abroad Publications Inc., 154
Misc.2d 228, 585 N.Y.S.2d 661 (Sup. Ct. 1992).
The non-enforcement decisions in Matusevitch and India Abroad flow from traditional principles
of international comity, which are now codified in the Uniform Foreign Money-Judgment Recognition
Act (the “Uniform Act”). Under the comity doctrine, American courts will ordinarily enforce the
judgments of foreign tribunals. Nonetheless, recognizing that in exceptional cases enforcement of a
foreign award may offend American principles of individual liberty, the Uniform Act expressly provides
that comity need not be accorded a foreign award if it is based on laws that are “repugnant to the public
policy of [the] state.” And, as noted by Maryland’s highest court in Matusevitch, English libel law “is
totally different” from First Amendment principles “in virtually every significant respect” and these
“differences are rooted in historic and fundamental public policy differences concerning freedom of the
press and speech.” These fundamental differences resulted in hefty English jury awards in India Abroad
and Matusevitch arising from statements that would never have been actionable here—an outcome that
the American courts found “repugnant” and, hence, declined to enforce.
The India Abroad court ruled that:
It is true that England and the United States share many common law
principles of law. Nonetheless, a significant difference between the two
jurisdictions lies in England’s lack of an equivalent to the First
Amendment. The protection to free speech and the press embodied in [the
first] amendment would be seriously jeopardized by entry of foreign libel
judgments granted pursuant to standards deemed appropriate in England
but considered antithetical to the protections afforded the press by the
U.S. constitution.
SEA 1351090v1 14826-6

1

A similar conclusion was reached by Maryland’s highest court in Matusevitch. There, Soviet
émigré turned English citizen, Vladimir Telnikoff, complained in an op-ed column published in
London’s Daily Telegraph that the BBC’s Russian Service had too many “Russian-speaking national
minorities” and too few of “those who associate themselves ethnically, spiritually or religiously with
Russian people.” Later, Telnikoff obtained a libel judgment in London and sought to enforce it in
America. Similar to the India Abroad court, the Maryland state court in Matusevitch broadly held that
[t]he principles governing defamation actions under English law … are so
contrary to Maryland defamation law, and to the policy of freedom of the
press underlying Maryland law, that Telnikoff’s judgment should be
denied under principles of comity.
Finally, a similar case is now pending in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in California. There
is one difference: the plaintiff, Yahoo, obtained an order from a United States court prior to the
completion of the foreign proceedings. Yahoo v. La Ligue, 169 F. Supp.2d 1181 (N.D. Cal. 2001).
Given the December 2002 ruling by the High Court of Australia in Dow Jones & Co. v. Gutnick, [2002]
HCA 56 (10 Dec. 2002), extending jurisdiction (and apparently applying Australian substantive law)
over American journalists in a libel action filed by an Australian property developer who also did
business in the United States, these jurisdictional issues may recur. (Similar jurisdictional cases relating
to internet-related libel claims against the media have, in the United States, gone the other way from
Gutnick, including very recent decisions by both the 4th Circuit and the 5th Circuit.)
II.

PRIVACY

Privacy regulation in the United States has also taken a different course from elsewhere, in large
part (again) because of the First Amendment. The basic premise is that communicating and sharing
factual information is speech. Therefore, any privacy regulations imposed by government will generate
First Amendment concerns. To the extent that the privacy regulations are not content-neutral or
viewpoint-neutral, additional First Amendment objections may arise.
The best summary of the First Amendment issues presented by government efforts to regulate
the use of consumer data (and other information) in the name of privacy is Professor Volokh’s
magisterial article on freedom of speech and information privacy.
Privacy is a popular word, and government attempts to “protect our
privacy” are easy to endorse. Government attempts to let us “control …
information about ourselves” sound equally good: Who wouldn’t want
extra control? And what fair-minded person could oppose requirements of
“fair information practices”?
The difficulty is that the right to information privacy – my right to
control your communication of personally identifiable information about
me – is a right to have the government stop you from speaking about me.
We already have a code of “fair information practices,” and it is the First
Amendment, which generally bars the government from controlling the
communication of information (either by direct regulation or through the
authorization of private lawsuits), whether the communication is “fair” or
not. While privacy protection secured by contract is constitutionally
sound, broader information privacy rules are not easily defensible under
existing free speech law.

SEA 1351090v1 14826-6

2

Eugene Volokh, Freedom of Speech, Information Privacy, and the Troubling Implications of a Right to
Stop People From Speaking About You, 52 STAN. L. REV. 1049, 1050-51 (2000) (footnotes omitted)
(hereinafter “Volokh”).
Prof. Volokh suggests that “the possible unintended consequences of various justifications for
information privacy speech restrictions” are “sufficiently troubling” that he is opposed to any such
regulations. Volokh at 1053. He believes that broad privacy regulations cannot be justified under
existing First Amendment doctrine, even if they are promoted as protections of property, regulations of
commercial speech, or restrictions only speech of purely private concern.
There are few cases, thus far, that address the free speech interests presented by government
privacy regulation – and their holdings are by no means consistent. At least one major American court
case has refused to apply a privacy regulation to journalists’ communication of allegedly “private”
information. In Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532 U.S. 514 (2001), the United States Supreme Court ruled that
the application of a federal wiretap statute and a Pennsylvania wiretap statute, 18 U.S.C. § 2511(1)(c)
and 18 Pa. C.S. § 5725(a), was unconstitutional as applied to the media because the intercepted
communication concerned a matter of public importance and the media played no role in the illegal
interception of the communication. The Court found that both wiretap statutes were content-neutral
laws of general applicability because the communications are singled out by their source (illegal
interception) rather than by subject matter. However, it also found that the statutes’ “naked prohibition
against [illegally intercepted] disclosures is fairly characterized as a regulation of pure speech.” The
Court cited Smith v. Daily Mail Publishing Co., 443 U.S. 97 (1979), for the proposition that government
action to punish the publication of truthful material can rarely satisfy constitutional standards. The
Court also referred to New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. 713 (1971) (the so-called
“Pentagon Papers” case), for its holding that the press has the right to publish information obtained from
a third party when it involves a matter of public concern.
III.

ACCESS

The following is a brief summary of some recent American legal developments affecting
journalist access rights since the terrorism attacks of 11 September 2001.∗
One of the best resources for staying current on these legal issues is the Reporters’ Committee
for Freedom of the Press website, which includes the RCFP’s recent “Homefront Confidential” white
paper, which is available at http://www.rcfp.org/homefrontconfidential/, and the “Behind the
Homefront” weblog, available at http://www.rcfp.org/behindthehomefront/. (Another useful product is
the RCFP’s summary of American reporters’ privilege cases, http://www.rcfp.org/privilege/index.html.)
A.

Access to INS Deportation Proceedings
1.

Detroit Free Press v. Ashcroft, 303 F.3d 681 (6th Cir. 2002) (First Amendment-based
public access to INS deportation proceedings).

§ “Creppy Directive” – Chief INS judge directed blanket closure of any INS deportation
proceedings if deemed by government to be of “special interest.”
Court Holding:

§ First Amendment right of public access applies to INS deportation hearings because
hearings are historically open. Richmond Newspapers.
∗

The author wishes to thank Susan Seager, an attorney in Davis Wright Tremaine’s Los Angeles office,
who has provided the research and information contained in this portion of the summary.
SEA 1351090v1 14826-6
3

§ INS hearings walk, talk and squawk like judicial proceedings.
§ Creppy Directive was unconstitutional because not narrowly tailored, although
government demonstrated compelling interest in closure.
Government Argued:

§ Not really judicial proceeding, but executive-branch administrative proceedings.
§ Government required special deference.
Government “Mosaic Theory”:

§ Snippets of information revealed during proceeding might tip terrorists off to
government investigations. Seemingly innocuous information might harm U.S. No
way to know what information could help terrorists -- even government could not
identify which information would be harmful. (Complete speculation by
government.)

§ INS proceedings are not equivalent to judicial and administrative/executive
proceedings; the government deserves deference:

– Bits and pieces added up to show terrorists U.S. intelligence.
– Terrorists would alter M.O.
– Terrorists would know that government didn’t know certain information.
2.

North Jersey Media Group v. Ashcroft, 308 F.3d 198 (3rd Cir. 2002) (no First
Amendment-based access to INS deportation proceedings).
Court Holding:

§ First Amendment does not apply to INS deportation hearings.
§ Administrative proceedings are not equivalent to judicial proceedings.
§ There is no history of openness in administrative proceedings.
§ Access is “granted by a matter of executive grace.”
§ Even if the First Amendment applied, openness would impair the public good and
national security. The court adopted Mosaic theory.

§ Detainees have privacy interest in keeping detention secret.
§ Inadequate “significant positive role” in allowing public access.
– understanding of systems
– therapeutic value
– exposure of judicial process
SEA 1351090v1 14826-6

4

§ Must look at whether openness impairs the public good; court concluded openness
would harm public good.

– Government argument: like exposing CIA deliberations to public hearings would
hurt national security sources and methods of investigation.
3.

Center for National Security Studies v. United States Dept. of Justice, 215 F. Supp.2d
94 (D.D.C. 2002) (FOIA requires public access to names of terrorist detainees).
Facts:

§ FOIA request made for identities of 1,000 9/11 detainees:
– INS detainees’ names and their lawyers
– Reasons for detentions
– Location and charges
– Material arrest warrants
– Charged with federal crimes
§ Argument: U.S. has history of public arrests – not secret.
§ Danger of secret arrests.
Government Arguments:

§ Disclosure would interfere with enforcement proceedings.
§ Disclosure would harm cooperation and reveal investigation strategies.
§ Terrorists would create false evidence.
§ Cannot rule out possible connections to terrorists.
Court Holding:

§ The FOIA requires the release of detainees’ names, as well as the names of their
lawyers; detainees can ask names to be secret, as well as the names of their lawyers.
Government appealed to D.C. Circuit. Decision not yet released. (On behalf of the Washington
Post and other media organizations, DWT has filed an amicus brief based on a First Amendment
argument for the same information.)
B.

INS “Gag” Rule
§

Finalized April 2002

§

Trumps local and state FOIA rules

§

Prohibits local jails from releasing:
–

Name of INS detainee

SEA 1351090v1 14826-6

5

–
C.

D.

E.

Details of INS case v. detainee

USA Patriot Act II
§

Center for Public Integrity released draft legislation

§

Furthers secrecy of USA Patriot Act I (which affected libraries)

§

Would:
–

exempt terrorism investigation detainees from FOIA

–

prohibit subjects of terrorism investigation from revealing that fact

–

limit access to COB reports on hazardous chemicals

Shoe Bomber Case
§

Federal judge refused to release letters from shoe bomber Richard Reid.

§

FBI affidavit might contain coded messages to Al Qaeda (mosaic theory again).

California Legislature Considering Law Changes
§

Bill recently introduced that would make all police officers’ names secret (exempt from
CPRA). Now being amended; unclear whether it would still make their names secret and/or
require burdensome process for obtaining their names and verify employment.

§

Another bill has been introduced that would allow emergency meetings by local and county
legislative bodies (city councils; board of supervisors) to be announced and held without
much advance warning.
–

§

§

How much advance warning? 1 hour

Allows closed sessions for:
–

“Dire emergency”

–

Threats to safety and essential public services

–

Water

–

Wastewater

–

Natural gas

California records – local impact
–

Bakersfield Californian newspaper. Successful CPRA request for firefighters and cops’
names, plus salary. Bitterly legal and political battle fought by cops and firefighters,
claiming it was unpatriotic, would endanger their security (9/11 influence). Newspaper
bombarded by angry faxes, letters, phone calls, boycott.

–

ACLU. DWT providing assistance in lawsuit recently filed in San Francisco under FOIA
against federal government seeking information on how government and airlines operate
“no fly” list and “watch list” to keep some passengers from flying, or extra searches.

SEA 1351090v1 14826-6

6

Want to know: list is based on what? Arab names? Criticism of Bush Administration?
How can person get self removed from list if it is in error?
–

F.

Alarm case. LAPD Police Commission refused to give information on false burglar
alarms at City Council members’ houses and offices (response by LAPD is paid for by
taxpayers), which city previously gave to reporter several years ago. Cited security fears.

§

Booking photos – AG now considering issue.

§

As of 1 May 2003, the Los Angeles Times has reported that the LA police have arrested 180
people since the 11 September attacks. Normally, these arrests are matters of public record
under California law. “LAPD officials said the 180 were arrested mostly on suspicion of lowlevel crimes before being charged with such offenses as perjury, credit card fraud and
forgery. Miller declined to name the people arrested, disclose the suspected links to terrorist
groups, say how many are still in custody, or reveal how many of those arrested were
prosecuted and convicted. Most of the cases were turned over to immigration officials,
LAPD Cmdr. Mark Leap said.”

§

Other states considering similar legislative changes.

Prince George’s County v. The Washington Post Co., 2003 WL 186529 (Ct. of Spec. App.
Md. 2003). Held: Maryland state public records law requires release of names, rank and badge
numbers of local police, rejecting claim that information would jeopardize police safety.

SEA 1351090v1 14826-6

7

