INVESTIGATING THE HOME TEAM
Not everyone has a professional sports team in their area, but college teams abound, and
they're rarely covered adequately beyond feature stories and accounts of games. Here's a tip
sheet to help you get started on meaty investigative stories about college sports in your area.

Getting Started
First, get over the notion that college sports is amateur sports. While players aren't supposed
to get more than tuition, board and books without jeopardizing their "amateur" status, college
sports is a multi-billion-dollar industry; some college teams are valued at more than some pro
teams (see Richard Sheehan's book "Keeping $core1').
The irony is that, despite huge revenues, most Division I college athletic departments spend
more than they earn. Consequently, they. must depend on subsidies financed with tax dollars,
higher tuition and higher student fees, often paid for with cutbacks in academic programs.
The governing body, marketer and collection agent for college sports is the 900-member
National Collegiate Athletic Association, a private, non-profit, unincorporated association based
in Kansas City (but slated to m w e next year to Indianapolis.). The NCAA is grossing $270
million this year, earned on the backs of more than 300,000 student athletes nationwide. But
that's only a fraction of total college sports revenue, and only part of the story of college sports.

Issues to Explore
Finances

Especially in big time Division 1 football and basketball, see if your athletic department runs
annual deficits, see where subsidies come from and what, if any, other university programs
suffer;
See how much the booster clubs contribute and what's in it for them (are some boosters also
vendors?); do boosters often benefit, at taxpayer expense, from post-season play (check travel
records to see who the schools pay for re: travel to tournaments).
Check to see how much coaches get in perks and outside income, who provides it and why
(check to see if your school or conference requires the money to flow through the university or
whether the coach gets it directly), and whether he is allowed to use university facilities for
outside endeavors such as basketball camps;
See how much the school pays compliance officers and outside lawyers to keep them out of
trouble or get them out of trouble with the NCAA; ask for billings;
See how much the school spends on travel costs for the teams, including costs of the school
plane.
Chart the growth of athletic costs over time and compare to growth in inflation/tuition.
The NCAA continues to gobble up NAlA schools; check to see if that is happening to local
colleges and see what the financial impact is.
Check building permits. College sports is in the midst of an arena and stadium arms race, often
partially funded with taxes, whose costs are rivaling those seen in the pros.

Conflicts of Interest
Check the state ethics agency, building permits and university purchasing documents for conflict
cases involving athletic department employees (the company that re-roofs the basketball arena,
also re-roofs the athletic director's home, etc.)
Student Welfare

he NCAA was established in 1906 for the sole purpose of cutting down on student athlete
injuries and deaths and still claims student athlete welfare is its top priority. See if they mean it.
Check school injury records, especially for spring football, and talk to current and former injured
student athletes and their parents about medical care and insurance coverage;
Talk to trainers and.see if there is an adequate number and whether they are properly trained.
Some states have passed laws requiring trainer certification;
See if coaches are CPR and/or first-aid certified;
Academics
The NCAA also says academics is a top priority, but many professors on most Division I
campuses laugh at the notion.
Check athlete graduation rates for your school, and if they are better than the student body as a
whole, look at the majors of student athletes; are they plugged into easy majors with little value
in the job market? Check rates by race and major sports;
Interview former student athletes who didn't go pro about the value of their degrees;
lnterview professors in required courses about pressures to pass star athletes;
Talk to clerks in the registrar's office and elsewhele about special breaks and technical advice
for meeting academic requirements given student athletes by athletic department academic
advisers and others;
Check on whether student athletes have multiple tutors while non-athletes have to wait for tutor
availability.
All Division I schools get $50,000 a year from the NCAA for academic enhancement, but many
schools spend the money on other things; check with the athletic academic adviser.
Infractions
Check your school's overall infractions record on the NCAA or KC Star websites; see where
weaknesses are and look for continuing problems. Also look for a weakening of rules under a
new, reorganized NCAA.
Some schools require car registrations by student athletes to be filed with the athletic
department. Ask to see them, or check with the state.
Always look for signs of activity by boosters, agents, runners and/or gamblers. Nice cars,
expensive jewelry, frequent trips home, nice apartments etc.

Ask for copies of reports on file that are required by NCAA rule 11.2.2. That rule requires that
coaches get approval from school presidents for any outside income. Some schools keep them
on file, others try to get around the rule under a verbal interpretation that permission can be
given without a dowment being produced.
Private schools are a problem, although they must release their 990s and gemdersquity reports.
Hel~fulBooks

"College Sports, Inc.,, The Athletic Department vs. The University," by Murray Sperber
"Keeping $core," by Richard Sheehan
"Unsportsmanlike Conduct, Exploiting College Athletics" by Walter Byers
"Undue Process, The NCAA's Injustice For All," by Don Yaeger
"The Sports Lawyers Journal," by the Sports Lawyers Assn. 703-437-4377

Mike McGraw
The Kansas City Star
1729 Grand Bfvd.
Kansas City,Mo. 64108
816-234-4423
mcgraw@cstar. corn

Eaual treatment
Compare male and female team facilities and equipment, and travel modes and policies;
Check salary differentials between men and women coaches;
Check the NCAA gender equity certification documents for your school; the NCAA has never
failed to certify a school for gender equity, yet most schools dong meet Title 9 requirements.
How much are students, who often help subsidize college sports teams, required to pay for
tickets; what kind of seats do they get; are they allowed to use sports facilities they help pay for?
How many foreign students are r e c ~ i t e d
for various teams, especially track and tennis? Do instate students get the same chance at sports scholarships as non tax-paying foreign students?
Criminal Behavior
Criminal activity by some star athletes has gotten to the point where at least one state b a n
student athletes with criminal records. Check for athletes in city and campus crime reports and
see if athletes get special treatment.
Check for high-powered lawyers representing student athletes; who pais their fees? Ifit's the
school, or the service is fre*, it could violate NCAA mles unless such representation is available
to all students.

Helpful Documents/Sources
Check out the NCAA web page at ncaa.org/. It includes, under membership services, a database
of infractions cases for all member schools.
Check out the Star's Money Games web page (kcstar.com). It also includes an infractions
database, and other databases.
Get hold of the 3-volume NCqA rules manual from the NCAA (913-339-1906) and a copy of the
1997-98 National Directory of College Athletics from the National Association of Collegiate
Directors of Athletics (440-892-4000).
Ask for a copy of the athletic department 's and the conference's audited financial report.
Get a copy of your school's gender equity report, which includes financial data, including
comparative salaries for men and women coaches. ,
Conflict of interest forms from the state ethics agency, if there is one.
Check for company affiliations for athletic department officials and waches.
Use open records laws with member schools and FOlA with the service academies to leverage
out helpful documents, including reports of NCAA committees, self-reported infractions,
academic reports, compliance reports, certification documents and.more.
Form 990s for the booster club and, if it is a separate nonproff entity, the school's athletic
department.

