Models for training the newsroom in CAR

Page 1 of 4

Models for training the newsroom in CAR
Jennifer LaFleur
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
jlafleur@postnet.com
(314) 340-8296

F

rom veteran nerds to those just learning the basics of computer-assisted reporting, we are all in the process of developing

better ways to spread these skills throughout our newsrooms. Many models are developing, no single model is the answer.
That’s why sharing experiences at gatherings such as this is so important.
Here’s an outline of some training models and the benefits and drawbacks of each.
Throw it at everyone and see where it sticks: Almost five years ago, when the Mercury News first put computers on
desktops in the newsroom, we did intensive training in all the basics (Internet, spreadsheets, databases) for everyone.
Benefits:
Everyone gets exposed
z Most basic skills are widespread
z Get a lot of buy-in from the whole newsroom
z

Drawbacks:
A lot of skills spread very thinly
Very time-consuming
z Less pay-off, training a lot of people to create a few users
z
z

The fellowship/the specialist: The Post-Dispatch plan requires reporters to apply for a six-week specialist program. They
must have a story idea, data and be pulled of their beat to work with the CAR editor. Addition at the P-D: they are then
required to go back and be the CAR coordinator for their team and are part of a larger virtual CAR team.
Benefits:
Greater pay-off
Other people serve as mentors for their team
z Skills level is more indepth
z
z

Drawbacks:

file://C:\Documents and Settings\sam\Local Settings\Temp\notes8B29B1\1158.html

9/5/2006

Models for training the newsroom in CAR

Page 2 of 4

Difficult to get team editors to commit
Fewer skills throughout the newsroom
z Others may feel left out
z
z

Outside training
Benefits
"Prophet in his own land" – outsiders are smarter
Better commitment from participants
z Someone else is doing the work
z
z

Drawbacks
Cost
Follow-up
z Specialization to your needs – for example, corporate spreadsheet training won’t focus on journalism.
z
z

Dos and Don’t for training:
Tailor the training to the reporters who will be using it. Use data that are relevant to them.
Use real data that can be used to do real stories.
Don’t train more than 8 people at one time, unless you have a coach.
Don’t train reporters unless they will have access to the same software very soon afterward on which to practice their new
skills.
Don’t hold a "gee whiz" CAR session if the reporters will not have hands-on training shortly afterward.
Conduct a skills evaluation BEFORE designing the training program.
Don’t train folks with very different skills in the same room.
Don’t train reporters how to use resources that you don’t plan to have available.
Start CAR with some small projects with realistic goals.
Don’t expect too much immediately -- everyone needs practice.
If you use a commercial vendor, have them model your training around journalism.
Provide lots of examples of what others have done.
Encourage lots of questions.

file://C:\Documents and Settings\sam\Local Settings\Temp\notes8B29B1\1158.html

9/5/2006

Models for training the newsroom in CAR

Page 3 of 4

Provide follow-up with someone to turn to as they set out on their first projects.
Don’t just explain how, explain why and show them the process. Save shortcuts for later.
Use workbooks they can practice with later.
Evangelize and find experts.
Don’t make it seem too easy. Don’t make it seem too hard.

Setting goals
You probably have a lot of projects you’d like to do using CAR, but setting realistic goals and sharing them with your
management can balance expectations with reality. These goals should be divided between personal goals for yourself or
others and goals company-wide for your CAR program.
Personal goals:
1. What do you want to be doing regularly (city budget, school budget, city salaries)?
2. What small project can you do within the next 6 weeks? This should be something you know you can get the data for.
3. What larger project to you want to have done within the next 6 months?
4. What 3 databases do you want to try to negotiate for future projects?
Company goals:
1. When will you have a computer and basic software?
2. Find the core group of 5-10 interested folks to train first -- when will they have spreadsheet training? When will they have
database training? When will they be able to do their first small project?
3. Beyond the core group: will there be resources for more computers?
4. When will the next tier be trained?

What can you do to save yourself headaches?
1. Develop evangelists throughout the newsroom. We have a couple of folks who have developed strong skills in select areas.
They will start encouraging those around them.
2. GET CAR STORIES IN THE PAPER. This is the one thing that will encourage folks to train in computer-assisted
reporting more than anything else. They want to be "able to do that too."
3. Get information out to folks in MANY different ways.
Do an in-house CAR newsletter
z Develop a help group
z Develop customized help Windows.
z Use Screencam to do quick demos of basic tasks.
z Let others know about good CAR work being done in the newsroom.
z

file://C:\Documents and Settings\sam\Local Settings\Temp\notes8B29B1\1158.html

9/5/2006

Models for training the newsroom in CAR

Page 4 of 4

2. Get everyone involved.
5. Put up a CAR bulletin board.
6. Dig the knife in -- publicize great CAR stories that other news organizations have done.
7.
8.
9.
10.

DO A SPECIAL "RETREAT" session for upper management.
Don’t train in the newsroom if possible.
Show people immediate uses for these skills on their beat.
ABSOLUTELY: don’t do work for them.

11. Get folks a database to work with immediately after training, otherwise they will forget.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Check out what reporters already use.
Do refresher sessions.
Use silly tricks to make it more festive and to illustrate points.
Remember: people don’t like to look dumb – help them decide what training they need.

Nytrain.doc; 5/2000

file://C:\Documents and Settings\sam\Local Settings\Temp\notes8B29B1\1158.html

9/5/2006

