Tracking the money in the 2000 Elections
IRE TIP SHEET
from Larry Makinson
Center for Responsive Politics

Watch for the outside money in competitive races:
“Black Hole” Committees May be coming to a race near you
Because of a major new loophole in the campaign finance laws, an entirely new form of political
committee is beginning to emerge as a major new source of campaign activity in the 2000 elections. New
organizations called “527 committees” (named after their paragraph in the tax code) have begun popping
up in competitive states and congressional districts across the country.
They can collect money anonymously from any source whatever – including corporations, labor unions,
even foreign governments – and there are no restrictions on how much they can spend, or how much their
donors can give. Their only limitation is that the ads they produce can’t use the “magic words” of “vote
for,” “vote against,” “elect,” “defeat,” etc. That doesn’t mean they can’t attack candidates by name – in
fact, the “issue ads” they produce tend to be more negative than those produced by the campaigns
themselves.
Several bills have been introduced in Congress to require disclosure of donors to these 527 committees, but
nothing has passed so far and the odds of passage this year appear dim. You won’t see issue ads by these
committees everywhere – probably only in states and districts with competitive races. But because they
offer no restrictions whatever on who can give – and complete anonymity for their donors – they are the
hottest loophole on the block, and will likely have a major impact on the 2000 elections.
The first widespread appearance of issue ads by 527 committees was in the days leading up to Super
Tuesday, when a heretofore unknown group – Republicans for Clean Air – spent $2.5 million on ads in
New York, Ohio and California that helped torpedo the campaign of Republican Senator John McCain. The
ads were paid for by Texas billionaire Sam Wyly, one of George W. Bush’s top financial supporters. If
Wyly hadn’t stood up and said he’s the one that put up the money, we’d still be scratching our heads
wondering where the money came from.
The 527 loophole is being exploited by both sides in this election – the Sierra Club’s was one of the first.
They’re also being used as stealth “leadership PACs” by influential members of Congress. Most notably,
House Republican Whip Tom DeLay formed the Republican Majority Issues Committee in spring 1999,
announcing he wanted to raise $25 million to help the GOP retain control of the House of Representatives.
That’s $25 million from anonymous sources. The campaign has steadfastly refused to reveal who’s paying
its bills.

Presidential candidates raise money in two distinct phases…
During the primary season, all the action is in direct hard-money contributions to the candidates.
Strict limits apply: $1,000 per individual donor and $5,000 per PAC. Candidates who survive to the general
election can raise an additional $1,000 from individuals (and $5,000 from PACs) for something known as
the “GELAC” or “Compliance” Fund. (General Election Legal & Accounting fund, that they can use to pay
for lawyers, computers, accountants and other expenses that allegedly are required to offset the cost of
complying with federal campaign filing requirements). If a candidate doesn’t make it to the general, they
have to pay this money back.

1

At this stage of the campaign, the real power doesn’t lie with the $1,000 donors – there are simply too
many of them – but with the fundraisers who gather large numbers of $1,000 donors. The George W. Bush
campaign set up a formal organization called the Pioneers, each of whom raised $100,000 or more for the
campaign. The campaign has released the names of the Pioneers, and you can find them on the Center’s
opensecrets.org website. (Click the “Other Data” link on the George W. Bush profile page). Al Gore had a
similar, though smaller, group. Click “Other Data” on his profile page to see the names.
You’ll want to keep those lists handy after the election – they may be our next generation of Ambassadors,
cabinet officials, etc. They may also be recipients of big favors from the next administration.
After the primaries are over – which is to say, now – the real fundraising shifts to the parties, and
soft money is where the biggest action is. The party conventions are traditionally the place where the red
carpet is rolled out for these top-dollar donors, and the most intensive period of fundraising begins. This
effort will continue, and intensify, right up to election day. Historically, September and October have
always been the peak months for political contributions. Again, you need to know who the top donors are
because they’ll be the ones the new administration is most grateful to. It’s awfully hard to say no for
someone seeking favors when they’ve given $100,000 or more to help you win.
You can find the top soft money donors to both parties on the Center’s website at www.opensecrets.org.

Tracking the cash will get easier after the 2000 elections, except for the Senate…
Beginning in 2001, all federal candidates, PACs and party committees will have to file electronically with
the Federal Election Commission, if they raise or spend more than $50,000 in a calendar year. (Final rules
will be set by the FEC on June 8). This will include both contributions and expenditures.
The US Senate is EXEMPT from this requirement, however, because Senate candidates file their reports
with the Secretary of the Senate, not the FEC. The net effect: LONG delays in having electronic access to
contribution records (4-8 weeks during the busiest election season), and NO electronic access whatever to
campaign expenditure data.

If a candidate is putting large sums of money into their own campaign…
Check to see if they’re DONATING the money to the campaign, or merely LOANING it to the campaign.
You can get this information from the summary pages of their FEC report.
If they’re loaning it, they may hold a post-election fundraiser to pay themselves back after they win. Many
millionaire candidates try to turn their self-funding into an asset by saying it makes them less dependent on
special interests than their opponents. But that’s only true if they don’t hold post-election fundraisers to pay
back their loans!
OpenSecrets.org is the website of the Center for Responsive Politics, a non-partisan, non-profit
research group based in Washington, DC that analyzes money in American politics.

Here’s some of what you’ll find at www.opensecrets.org:
Contribution profiles for all current members of Congress
House member profiles cover two years, Senate profiles span six years. Each profile has the following
information:
Summary numbers

Total raised & spent, breakdown of totals from PACs, individuals & the member’s own funds
Quality of disclosure. This shows how good a job they’re doing fully identifying their donor’s
occupations/employers (as required by law).

2

Geographic breakdowns

In-state vs. out-of-state totals, top 5 metro areas, top 10 zip codes
Industry/interest group/contributor breakdowns

Sector breakdown (broadest categories, e.g. Transportation, Health Care, etc.)
Top 20 industries (more specific: air transport, pharmaceutical industry, etc.)
Top 20 contributors (by organization). This list combines both PACs and individual donations.
Other
Personal financial disclosure reports (the scanned images of reports they file annually)
PAC contributions. The full list of PACs donating to their campaign, arranged by industry
Individual contributions. The full list of donors giving $200 or more to their campaign
Race Profiles for every congressional district
Same elements as member profiles (except personal financial disclosure reports), with all candidates
compared side-by-side.
Presidential candidate profiles for George W. Bush, Al Gore & Pat Buchanan.
Donor lookups – by name, occupation/employer, state, zip code, recipient. Goes back to 1989-90
election cycle.
PAC contributions – All political action committees are categorized by industry/interest group. All their
contributions are shown for the current election cycle and for 1997-98.
News alerts – Every Monday while Congress is in session, these alerts draw the connection between
campaign contributions and issues currently being debated in Congress. The on-line archives of these alerts
go back to 1996, and cover dozens of issues, many of which recur frequently. You can sign up on-line to
receive the alerts weekly by e-mail.
State profiles – Here you can find out a wealth of information on political contributions for each state.
The summary numbers show how much the state’s residents have given overall in individual, PAC and soft
money contributions, as well as breakdowns by party and where they rank compared with other states. You
can also find the top soft money donors, a full list of the congressional delegation and current races, money
maps that show where the dollars are coming from, breakdowns of contributions by metro area and county,
and the state’s most generous zip codes. Also the top 10 industries donating from within the state, and the
20 biggest overall donors.
Congressional committee profiles – Ever wonder who the top donors are to the tax-writing Ways &
Means Committee, or the Senate Commerce Committee? Here’s where you can find out. You can also see
mini-profiles of each committee member, to see how their contributions relate to their committee
assignments.
Lobbyists – A searchable database of all registered lobbyists and their clients for 1997 and 1998. The
1999 data will be up on the website once it’s been fully processed by the Secretary of the Senate, and coded
by the Center. This takes several months to produce, as the Senate still has no electronic disclosure of
lobbyist records, except within their offices in Washington, DC.
COMING SOON – Industry profiles, going back 10 years. Party profiles, showing who’s giving to each
of the main political parties in the 2000 elections. Our navigation system is also being overhauled, to make
it easier than ever to find exactly what you’re looking for, quickly and easily.

3

Update schedule for the website
On the first of every month, the FEC posts updated contribution databases that the Center downloads and
processes. We attempt to standardize and categorize as many contributions as possible, then incorporate
that data into the profiles on the web. Donor lookups, summary and geographic data are updated within a
few days after the first of the month. Coded and standardized industry & top contributor data is updated
around the 20th of each month.
LINK to OpenSecrets.org
If you’re setting up an Election 2000 section on your news organization’s website, feel free to link to
www.opensecrets.org – either to the home page or to specific congressional races in your area. If you’re
interested in framing the site or further integrating your website with ours, contact Steve Weiss at 202-8570044.

4

