Census 2000:
Getting help to get ready
Prepared for IRE National Conference
New York, June 1-4, 2000
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-276-5427
Each month, more resources appear for journalists getting ready to analyze and report on Census 2000 data.
They include Web sites, books, magazine articles, workshops, free data and specialized software. Below are a
few of the best, many of which contain links and references to much more.
Web sites
Each site has links to scores of others that will be useful.
Census 2000 home
http://www.census.gov/dmd/www/2khome.htm
Press releases, testimony, forms, reports, data and map files, lists of contacts, partners, etc.

Reporting Census 2000
http://cronkite.pp.asu.edu/census/
Steve Doig, an IRE member who holds the Knight Chair in Journalism at Arizona State, compiled this site with
help from a Russell Sage Foundation grant. He drew on his experience analyzing the 1990 Census as the Miami
Herald's CAR editor.
Journalists' guide to Census 2000 Web site and related sites and resources
http://www.gannett.com/go/newswatch/nwwebtips/census.html
National Conference of State Legislatures: Redistricting
http://www.ncsl.org/programs/legman/elect/redis1.htm
A wealth of detail on nuts and bolts: policy, technology, law, etc.
Training
IRE's National Institute of Computer-Assisted Reporting will hold at least two more weekend Census
training workshops this year. The first, held April 7-9 at Arizona State, drew more than 50 reporters, editors and
graphic artists from across the country. Also scheduled:
-- Aug. 4-6 at the University of Missouri in Columbia, Mo.
-- Dec. 8-10 at the University of Maryland in College Park, Md.
The sessions will be led by Steve Doig of Arizona State and Paul Overberg of USA TODAY. Registration is
$75 for IRE members, $115 for non-members (but that includes a one-year membership.) Details at
http://www.ire.org/training/censusworkshop.html
In addition, Census training is planned for NICAR's annual conference Sept. 14-17 in Lexington, Ky. Details
at http://www.ire.org/training/lexington.html.

There's also a self-paced online course called "Getting Started with Census Data." It's hosted by ESRI, which
makes ArcView mapping software, and prepared by Chris Williamson, an associate professor at the University
of Southern California and a former Census Bureau employee. A free intro serves as the first of six modules in
an $80 course. Details at http://campus.esri.com/campus/catalog/courses.cfm.
Reading
Key books would include:
-- "America's Demographic Tapestry: Baseline for the New Millennium," edited by James Hughes and
Joseph Seneca. (Rutgers 1999). Expert contributors detail trends and effects on public policy.
-- "Who We Are: A Portrait of America," Sam Roberts (Times 1993). Chapter-length subject reports on 1990
Census data.
-- "The American Census: A Social History," Margo Anderson (Yale 1990). Good perspective on the
enduring role that politics and race have had on census-taking since 1790.
-- "Who Counts? The Politics of Census-Taking in Contemporary America," Margo Anderson and Stephen
Fienberg. (Russell Sage 1999). Detailed account of planning for and lawsuits after the 1990 Census, which
produced the policy and law that has shaped Census 2000: statistical sampling, racial gerrymandering, etc.
-- "Counting on the Census? Race, Group Identity, and the Evasion of Politics," Peter Skerry (Brookings
2000). Shows how dispute over sampling and adjustment is overblown, and says we need to accept that politics
will always influence how race is counted.
-- "Generations: The History of America's Future: 1584-2069," William Strauss and Neil Howe (William
Morrow 1992). Popularized generational typing. Read with a grain of salt.
-- "Rocking the Ages: The Yankelovich Report on Generational Marketing," J. Walker Smith and Ann
Clurman (HarperBusiness 1998). Dissects how "matures", "boomers" and "Gen Xers" act as voters and
consumers.
-- "Crabgrass Frontier : The Suburbanization of the United States," Kenneth T. Jackson (Oxford 1987). The
definitive history, back through auto and streetcar suburbs to the railroad suburbs of the mid-1800s.
-- "Edge City : Life on the New Frontier," Joel Garreau (Anchor 1992). His handful of examples have
become common, the term part of the language of our landscape.
Key periodicals:
-- American Demographics. Focuses on business potential, but plenty of insight and reference material for
journalists. http://www.americandemographics.com
-- Population Today and Population Quarterly, both from the Population Reference Bureau, carry
authoritative articles on trends. http://www.prb.org/
-- American Journal of Sociology. Don’t laugh. Topics of recent articles: gender gap in presidential
elections; effects of street design on segregation; migration and high-poverty neighborhood growth from 19701990; sentencing guidelines in drug crimes; interlocking corporate boards. Tables of contents at
http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/AJS/home.html
-- DirectionsMagazine. An online magazine covering mapping software and its uses.
http://www.directionsmag.com

