First data from Census 2000:
Can you say “PL 94-171?”
Prepared for IRE National Conference
New York, June 1-4, 2000
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-276-5427

The very first data to come out from Census 2000 is formally called PL 94-171 data because that's the 1975
law that requires it: Public Law 94-171. More commonly, it's called redistricting data because that's why it's
made: To let state legislatures redraw congressional and state legislative boundaries. The law was an
amendment to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and it reflected both the law's concern for minority representation
and a series of 1960s Supreme Count decisions enshrining the one-man, one vote principle.
This data both very detailed and very sparse in detail:
-- Very detailed: You can get data for everything from your state or metro down through counties, cities,
neighborhoods (tracts) to census blocks. That's the atom in this universe. The classic example is a city block.
There are also counts for other kinds of areas, including reservations and voting districts.
-- Sparse in detail: There's just race and Hispanic origin totals, both for the whole population of wherever
and for its voting age (18+) population. And all of the preceding will come out both in unadjusted and adjusted
(The Census Bureau prefers to call it "corrected.") versions.
By law, this data's due out a year after Census Day, which means April 1, 2001. The Census Bureau
estimates it will begin releasing this data about March 1.
It will do so on a state-by-state basis. The schedule isn’t set. The bureau says it will try to first do states with
short legislative seasons. Two states with statewide elections in 2001 -- New Jersey and Virginia -- also may get
preference. In reality, small states like Wyoming, Delaware, Vermont, South Dakota and North Dakota may
also emerge sooner than later.
Each state's officials will get two CDs, one with unadjusted data and one with adjusted data. The Census
Bureau is still setting mechanics of the data release for media, but expects it to occur the following day -- live to
the Web and on CD. Stay tuned (http://www.census.gov/mp/www/subscribe.html#PR).
How you deal with this data depends on what you want to do:
-- Just a little. You could just pull the press release for your state from the Census Bureau Web site, extract
the list of big cities and counties. Do some quick calculating and reporting and you’re set.
-- A fair amount, but just for my two-county area. Learn American FactFinder (http://factfinder.census.gov),
which will let you download the data you need. But it won’t be fast. And you'll probably need 1990 Census
data ready in a database or spreadsheet, and know how to match it based on geographical codes.
-- A fair amount, with detail for our area and county-by county race totals for my state. You might do best to
get the CDs. If you plan to do deadline analysis, better have: local 1990 data ready in matchable form; software
that can handle 288 data fields and a record length of almost 3,000 characters; a way to compare census tracts
that have split since 1990; a plan to compare multiple-race checkoff data from Census 2000 to single-race
checkoff 1990 Census data.
-- A lot, right away, including mapping in print and on the Web. See above, but you'll need a mapping
infrastructure as well. It’s no small task. Talk to your local planners.

