INVESTIGATING SPRAWL:
TECHNIQUES AND REVELATIONS
Page 1

Investigative Reporters & Editors/Pew Foundation for Civic Journalism
Atlanta, Ga.
March 11, 2000
Greg Reeves, database editor
Kansas City Star
greeves@kcstar.com
816-234-4366
Rose Ciotta, assistant director, Computer-Assisted Reporting/Analysis
The Philadelphia Inquirer
rciotta@phillynews.com
610-313-8106

Sprawl is not new unless you haven’t done the story in your town. Americans have been moving to
the suburbs since before World War II, but the impact of this exodus has often been hidden. Here’s
a list of data sets to help you dig out how sprawl has affected your coverage area:
1) U.S. Census—There’s valuable info here even as we wait for the first Census 2000 data on Dec. 31. The Census Library in
Washington D.C. can send you population and other demographic data for your area back to pre-Civil War days. Charting
county-to-county population moves by census tract since World War II gives the basic picture of sprawl for most areas.
http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027.html
http://www.census.gov/population/www/estimates/countypop.html
2) U.S. Census building permits—Place-level data on the number of housing units from single family to doubles, triples and
buildings with more than five units built every month or every year. Data is collected in a mail survey of localities that issue
the building permits. Dates to 1980 easily, some earlier years available on paper. Can be compared to units in structure in
census. Annual and monthly data dating to 1980 available on diskette from the bureau’s Construction Division, (301) 4571321.
http://www.census.gov/ftp/pub/const/www/c40index.html
3) Local property roll including sales data---Tracking number of housing units and property values year by year in your area
can provide real-life contrast between urban and suburban trends. Also, property taxes in some areas become grossly
inequitable between newer and older homes because of the lack of updated reassessments. This is an important public policy
question and can make for a high-impact story. Property assessment databases in most areas are public record, and should be
part of your basic CAR data set.
Data on the relationship of assessment to sales will help you pinpoint areas usually in the inner ring that are losing their value.
The result is often lower valued homes pay a higher proportion of taxes than expensive homes.
Look for public ownership of buildings. As population shifts, more residential property is abandoned in the inner city and
inner ring .
Use the roll to examine who is selling and who is buying the land where development is occurring.
4) HMDA (Home Mortgage Disclosure Act) data—Who applies for home loans, by census tract, income and race, who gets
approved and who gets denied. Issued annually by the FFIEC (Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council) – one loan
application, one record. This data will allow you to illustrate the impact of sprawl on minorities. The data shows where banks
have loaned money for home purchases and the demographics of the buyer including race, income. The purpose of the
disclosure law is to help the feds determine whether banks are serving local housing needs, and to identify discriminatory
lending patterns.
http://www.ffiec.gov

INVESTIGATING SPRAWL:
TECHNIQUES AND REVELATIONS
Page 2
5) FHA and VA mortgages--Say hello to your local recorder of deeds office. Pick a subdivision that sprang up during the big
move to the suburbs. Look up the mortgage on each parcel – federally subsidized Federal Homes Administration and Veterans
Administration mortgages are easy to spot. How much of a role did the federal government play in your area in contributing to
the move to suburbia?
6) IRS Migration Data—Tracks yearly movement of people from counties. This data is especially useful if your area has
seen the movement of people from a city county to a suburban county. Provides demographic information on the persons
moving including age range and education. Issued yearly, with 1984-1998 the data currently available. Includes the number of
tax returns (which can be used to approximate the number of households), number of personal exemptions (which can be used
to approximate the population), and, for the first time, adjusted gross income (AGI) and median AGI. (202) 874-0410.
http://www.irs.ustreas.gov, http://ftp.fedworld.gov/pub/irs-soi/prodserv.pdf
7) Highway volume data—Most states and counties keep track of traffic volume. Looking at travel over time can reveal
changing residential patterns. Also examine the type of road, what it was designed to carry and the volume it does carry.
8) FBI Uniform Crime Reports—Annually issued data reveals the frequency of crimes by cities and towns. If you analyze
this data over time, it will likely reveal the increasing crime in the inner city. Suburban residents often cite increasing crime to
justify their move to the suburbs. http://www.fbi.gov
9) Campaign finance—Contributions by builders to local officials making decisions about new developments; to county level
officials who often drag their feet on county-wide planning and to state lawmakers who often refuse to impose planning
requirements on localities. Also look for contributions from environmentalists lobbying for smart growth initiatives.
10) Business Property Tax Breaks—Look for property data to show special exemptions for new businesses that locate in new
residential areas. Calculate how much in local property taxes they are saving.
11) County and Zip Business Patterns—County level data that reflects the number of businesses by category, number of
employees and payroll value from 1988 through 1997 for county data. ZIP code level data has been published annually since
1964, and is updated annually on the Census Bureau web site. This data is especially useful to show how businesses move
from the inner ring to the outer ring and the growth of businesses in new residential areas.
http://www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/view/cbpview.html http://tier2.census.gov/zbp/zbpinfo.htm
12) Other data—School enrollment and cost per pupil; construction and commercial building permits.
Contributions by builders. Voter registration data. Census of Governments and Census of Government Finance by the Census
Bureau. Local and regional planning departments and agencies often have much data on urban and suburban growth. Some
newspapers have also conducted polls on public attitudes toward development and quality of life issues.
13) American Housing Survey--A wealth of information about the nation’s housing - apartments, single-family homes,
mobile homes, vacant housing units, household characteristics, income, housing and neighborhood quality, housing costs,
equipment and fuels, size of housing unit, and recent movers. National data are collected every other year, and data for each of
46 selected metro areas are collected about every four years, with an average of 12 areas a year. The national sample covers on
average 55,000 homes. Each metropolitan area sample covers 4,800 or more homes. The Census Bureau conducts the survey
for HUD. You can’t get tract-level data from AHS, but you can divide your metro area into several parts, and report hundreds
of data items, including estimated cockroaches-per-household.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/ahs.html
14) Agricultural data—Track the (shrinking) agricultural acreage in your area over time. The U.S. Department of Agriculture
puts out the Census of Agriculture with data on farms from which at least $1,000 of agricultural products were produced and
sold in a year. Data is available on a county and state level. The census is taken every five years covering the years ending in
“2” and “7”.
http://www.nass.usda.gov/census/

