Environmental data at the state level
IRE National Conference, New York City
June 1, 2000
By MaryJo Sylwester, IRE and NICAR Database Library, maryjo@nicar.org

Six things to keep in mind:
1) There are literally tons of databases on environmental issues, both at the state and
federal level, and many have had little scrutiny from the media. Federal data are
typically 2 years old by the time it is released, while you can usually get more current
information from the state level.
2) Budget extra time to get the information. It could take months from your first request
until you actually get the data. Environmental agencies at the state level seem to be
even less experienced than other state agencies in handling FOIA requests. This will
also make it more difficult to get the data in the format that you want.
3) Beware that environmental laws can vary from state-to-state, which will change not
only the record keeping but also the interpretation of the data. This will also make it
difficult to draw comparisons between states.
4) Study the topic thoroughly before diving into the data – particularly the regulations for
the topic and state/region you’re looking at. Covering the environment has enough
stumbling blocks because of the technical jargon, but computerized environmental
data can be even more cryptic.
5) The usual warnings about dirty data are even truer when it comes to environmental
data. The state-level environmental data I’ve worked with have had more flaws than
any other datasets I’ve seen, both in terms of typing errors and missing data. Note
also Louisiana New York Times papers’ experience with enforcement records
(“Polluter’s Paradise,” IRE Resource Center story # 16455 or online at
www.dailycomet.com) and USA TODAY’s look at drinking water (“Drinking
water’s hidden dangers,” IRE Resource Center story #15145)
6) Budget time to look through as many paper records as physically possible. The data
gives a good overview, but can’t tell the whole story about environmental situations
because each site is unique in its problems. The compelling stories and humaninterest aspects will come through in the paper records and by talking to people who
work in that arena regularly.

Topics to look at:

• Chemical releases (Toxic Release Inventory data or Emergency Response Notification
System data – both maintained by EPA)
• Drinking water: Private and public wells; Septic system contamination (a growing
problem in rural areas because of sprawl)
• Air pollution
• Groundwater pollution (non-potable sources)
• Hazardous Waste: Superfund sites; Underground storage tanks; Generators and
transporters of hazardous waste; Brownfields (also a hot topic because of the strong
economy and urban renewal)

Sub-topics:

• Violations.
• Enforcement actions.
• Inspections.
• Costs for cleaning up contaminated sites. Who pays?
• Effectiveness of regulations.
• Contamination levels.
• State resources versus the oftentimes-formidable tasks they face.
• Health dangers

Where to look for data:
The EPA Web site www.epa.gov is loaded with more information than you can ever sort
through. It often has links to state agency web sites (or at least addresses and phone
numbers) within the various divisions. For example there is a list of state contacts for
Toxic Release Inventory at: http://www.epa.gov/tri/statecon.htm
All of the data that is eventually reported to the EPA – Toxic Release Inventory
(TRI), Superfund sites (CERCLIS), hazardous waste generators/handlers (RCRIS),
air pollution (AIRS), drinking water, (SDWIS) etc – are first reported to state
agencies, who in turn pass the information up to the federal EPA. You may find more
detail at the state level, as there may be some things not required to be reported to the
federal level.
State environmental agencies. Each state is set up a little differently. Some have
different agencies monitoring different environmental issues, but most have one large
agency that is broken down into divisions and sub-divisions. The divisions often fall
along the lines of air, water, hazardous waste and maybe parks/wildlife. Then there
are sub-divisions or units. For example, the water division may have one unit that
monitors public drinking water supplies and another that deals with private wells.
Most state sites that have data available on the Web will only include a small portion
of the data, usually worthless for our needs. But this will give you a clue as to what
kind of data is available and who maintains it.
International: Databases similar to Toxic Release Inventory (listing of releases of
certain chemicals) are available in other countries under the name “Pollutant Release
and Transfer Registers,” including Canada, United Kingdom, Mexico, Australia, and
Czech Republic. Check out http://www.epa.gov/tri/prtrs.htm for more information.

