2000 IRE National Conference
Tip Sheet: Policing the Police panel
To:
From:

Date:

Reporters who cover the police
Clea Benson, Mark Fazlollah, Michael Matza
and Craig R. McCoy, reporters, The Philadelphia
Inquirer
June 2, 2000; updated June 9,2000

Re:

How to examine how police handle rapes cases.

Katie Roiphe to the contrary, not all feminist battles
were won in the 1970s. Many police departments, while
publicly claiming to take rape seriously, continue to dump
cases and dismiss victims.
In some cities and towns, the only thing that has
changed is the tactics used to hide rapes.
How do you determine if your city has a problem?
Talk to current and retired police, victims and their
advocates, prosecutors and defense lawyers, academics and
other experts, and so on.
Moreover, see how your town compares statistically with
norms for the nation.
Some keys to detecting a problem . . .
Take a look at the overall rape rate in your area.
For example, the latest FBI statistics for 1999 show
that Minneapolis reports four time more rapes per capita
than New York. That can’t be true.
Year after year, Minnesota (along with Nevada and
Washington) reports about 50 rapes per 100,000 residents.
Yet New York (along with New Jersey, Wisconsin and West
Virginia) reports about 20 rapes per 100,000 population.
In reality, women are not twice as safe in New York than
Minnesota. In fact, the Minnesota numbers are driven by the
stats out of Minneapolis. We learned from our reporting
that Minneapolis is considered to operate a model program
in the official response to rape – thereby encouraging more
women to come forward.
Philadelphia Police Commissioner John F. Timoney came to
Philly after many years as a top commander in New York. As
we questioned him about Philadelphia’s practice of
dismissing victims, he defensively pointed out to us that
Manhattan, with about the same population as Philadelphia
(even excluding the inflow from tourists and commuters),
was reporting two-thirds fewer rapes.

“Can you believe that?” Timoney asked us.
Obviously, Timoney had his doubts.
Rape isn’t like murder. A low reported rape rate is
not necessarily a “good thing.” It may simply reflect
police hiding complaints or a fear by victims to report
attacks in the first place to unsympathetic departments.
Conversely, a “high” rate may reflect an excellent job
by officials.
The point is if your town’s reported rape rate is
dramatically lower or higher than national norms, that’s a
sign that you should start asking questions.
How to go deeper . . .
Here are some further tests to see if things are funky.
Look for erratic changes in a crime from year to year.
That may be a pointer to a change in how police count
crime, a reform or a regression, and not a real change in
actual crime on the streets. In Philadelphia, we noticed a
16 percent surge in rape in 1998, even as it was falling
elsewhere in the United State.
Police had assured us that they didn't dismiss rape
complaints. At the same time, they said privately that the
increase was due to better reporting, not a real increase
in rape. Both things couldn’t be true. The change was a
pointer to a long-standing Philadelphia practice of burying
rape cases.
When police reject too many complaints. . .
Check out the FBI’s “Report A” data, a far more detailed
source of information than that made public each year in
the agency’s better-known Crime in the United States
printed publication. This data, only available in digital
form, can be purchased from NICAR, as well as the FBI.
It shows, among other things, the rate of “unfounded”
crime reports – police jargon for saying a victim filed a
false report.
Nationally, police departments say about 10 percent of
all rape reports are lies. In 1998, Philadelphia reported
that 18 percent of all rapes were “unfounded.” That was the
highest rate of any of America’s 10 largest cities. After
we reported that, Philadelphia police reviewed all
“unfounded” rapes for 1998. The commissioner announced that
many rapes were wrongly classified as “unfounded.” And in
1999, the Philadelphia department’s “unfounded” rate
dropped to 10 percent.

Other departments, however, still report high rates of
“unfounded” rapes. “Report A” shows, for example, that
Milwaukee has consistently reported that nearly 50 percent
of all rapes were “unfounded.”
Milwaukee police insist that the department’s numbers
are accurate, just as Philadelphia insisted before our
reporting. In reality, Milwaukee women don’t lie about rape
any more than any other city.

When police reject too FEW complaints . . .
By the same token,, department who report
extraordinarily low rates of “unfounding” may be fiddling
with the numbers, too.
For instance, Houston “unfounds” only one-half of one
percent of all rape reports. But, police there have told
us, it has a separate method for discarding rape reports
they feel are not crimes. If Houston police don’t think
reports are really a crime, that don’t need to write up a
formal police report. Instead they write an unofficial
account, which they said need not be included in any
statistics submitted to the FBI.
Houston police insist their approach is legit.
Philadelphia police followed a similar procedure. In
response to our reporting, department auditors examined
2,500 complaints from victims similarly coded as “noncrimes” – and determined that only about 150 had been
correctly coded.
The “exceptionally cleared” dodge . . .
“Report A” also gives “clearance” rates - the number of
crimes solved. This data too can be a pointer to problems.
Nationally, about half the rapes are solved. When
Philadelphia police were hiding rape reports, the
department’s clearance rate hit an astounding 80 percent.
That’s because the unit boosted its grade by dumping tough
cases into non-crime codes or declaring them “unfounded.”
Many department’s still report astronomical clearance
rates. St. Paul, Minn. consistently reports that it clears
around 100 percent.
In 1997, for example, it reported that it solved 105
percent of its rape cases.
Another point to check in “Report A” is the raw number
of arrests made by police.

(Don’t be confused between arrests and “clearances.” The
latter technically means solved. Under the FBI rules,
police may include in their “clearance” percentages cases
they consider solved, even though no arrest was made.
Police frequently do this in cases where a woman has
reported a rape and identified the suspect but doesn’t want
to prosecute. In cop-talk, such a case is listed as
“exceptionally cleared.”)
In 1997, when Saint Paul reported its fabulous 105percent clearance rate for rapes, it arrested only 47
suspects in the 240 cases it claimed to have solved.
The rest of the cases were “exceptionally cleared.”
Nationally that year, police reported one arrest for
every three reported rapes. In St. Paul, police made just
one arrest for every five rapes.
Lastly, the FBI’s “Report A” lists both attempted rapes
and “completed” rapes.
Nationally, 12 percent of all rape reports are attempted
rapes and 88 percent are “completed” rapes.
If a city varies dramatically from that norm, something
may be amiss.
Consider San Antonio. “Report A” data shows that the it
is a city where police consistently reports low rates of
attempted rape. San Antonio has routinely reported that
about 3 percent of its rapes are attempts and 97 percent
are “completed.”
What’s going on?
It could be a police effort to keep the rape count down
– FBI rules are that both attemps and “completed” rapes
count as rapes. By insisting that the intention of an
attacker was not to rape but rather to molest, police can
lower the count. This tactic at times was used in
Philadelphia.

What else can you do . . .
Use the online database of the justice reference
service of the federal government. It is a goldmine of many
years of government-funded research on cops and courts.
The address is http://www.ncjrs.org/
File a FOIA seeking correspondence between federal
justice regulators and your police department. By
interviewing Justice Department experts beforehand, you can
learn how to fine-tune your request to get results. People
who cannot give you hard information directly may be a lot

more comfortable advising you on background how to ask for
it.
Harvest from the dusty fields of academe. Seek out
professors who are former cops. They should be thoughtful,
secure and committed to public understanding of police
work. By the same token, hunt for academic works on your
police force. Two key documents that helped us understand
the history of how the Philadelphia police handled rape
were a 1968 article in the Penn Law Review and a 1979 book,
The Aftermath of Rape, published by an obscure press. We
learned of both via bibliographies in more well-known books
on rape.
How to put flesh on them statistical bones . .

.

Unless you are churning out a dissertation, statistics
alone will win you no readers.
You need to talk to people – most especially cops and
victims.
No more than a newspaper, Congress or any other
organization, police forces are not monolithic. Your job
is to seek out the police who are willing to break ranks
and speak to you.
To understand a special police unit, begin by tracking
down retired officers who once served in the unit.
Unhampered by reprisal from bosses, they can talk openly
about the practices of the unit. They can alert you to
specific cases that need inquiry and direct you to other
officers, both former and current.
Hunt for payroll information, etc., that lists police who
serve in the unit under scrutiny. Then call them at work
or visit them at home. Sure, many will decline to talk to
you, but some will. Interview – and reinterview. Some
people will only open up when you confront them with what
you have learned since you first spoke with them.
As police and others tip you to specific cases or crimes
worthy looking into, learn as much as you can about the
department’s paper record-keeping procedures. Understand
who writes an initial patrol report of a crime (called a
“48” in Philadelphia), and who writes the follow-up
detective report (called a “49” in Philly.) Where are
these filed? How many copies are kept? In which offices?
Are you entitled to them?
(We learned, to our surprise, that we could order any
patrol crime-report, from the same police office that
released car-crash reports. At $15 each, we ordered
hundreds).

Unravel how these written reports make their way into
the final citywide totals for crime in the FBI’s Uniform
Crime Reporting (UCR) program. In Philadelphia, after
prodding by the media, the police have made public the
underlying crime-by-crime database used to construct the
UCR report. Even though the police stripped it of case
numbers, victims’ names and specific addresses, it has
proved a important resource. We now have a monster
database of more than 1 million crime reports from 1991 to
1999. We have actually made it public. Along with our
articles and other information, the database can be checked
out at http://www.philly.com/packages/crime.
Also, consult the civilian groups that deal with crime
victims – town watch groups, state and local victimassistance agencies, hospitals.
For our work on rape, victims without hesitation signed
consent form that permitted us to obtain their emergencyroom records – neutral, contemporaneous accounts that were
invaluable in evaluating what had happened to them.
Then, learn how to throw out 80 percent of your work,
especially the statistical stuff, to focus on writing
stories that are about people, and not just numbers.
-30-

