IRE 2000 Idea List

06/06/00

Abortion Clinic Violence
KPIX-TV, San Francisco - Christie O'Connor, Jon Taylor
Every year there are hundreds of bomb threats, burglaries and assaults on abortion clinics that go unoticed. States have
strict laws against harrasment at clinics but the laws are often broken by protestors who intimidate some abortion patients
right up to the front door. Doctors who perform abortions fear for their lives after the nationally publicized deaths of several
abortion doctors. But the violence is getting worse in many states. And abortion laws are constantly changing.
Tips: Interview doctors and planned parenthood adminstrators whose lives have been threatened. Open records request all
violence incidents at all your clinics in the last year. Asked planned parenthood for its private "threat list" which contains
dates, places and times of bomb threats etc. Get the 9-1-1 tapes that bring the violence to life. Then for part two..go
undercover in abortion clinics to see what so-called counselors" are telling patients about what can happen during an
abortion. One religious counselor told us that abortion "rips out organs like the liver". Show how your states abortion laws
compare to those in other states. You will see how endangered a procedure is despite its legality.
Pitfalls: Abortion is a very personal and private discussion. It is difficult to overcome privacy laws We sidestepped the laws by
always keeping the door open ( I told each counselor I had closterphobia and was hot.)

Airport Security
WLS-TV, Chicago - Chuck Goudie
WLS examined poor security practices at Chicago's airports. It was prompted by a security breach which resulted in the
evacuation of part of the airport. Their findings include: A piece of candy was incentive enough for guards to allow people
through unchecked; electronic doors that did not relock; thousands of employees and their vehicles who had unchecked
access to the airfield.

Animal Liberation Front
KGO-TV, San Francisco - Dan Noyes
THE A.L.F. is the secret underground society on the fringe of the animal rights movement which uses crowbars, fire bombs
and video cameras. With some prodding, they will provide tapes of their actions that will play well with incidents in your
area.

Armed Forces Recruiting Fraud
WFAA-TV, Dallas - Byron Harris
WFAA's investigation uncovered widespread recruiting fraud among Marine, Navy & Air Force recruiters in north Texas. Not
only were recruiters lying about the academic qualifications of their enlistees, they were teaching enlistees to lie about their
background, thereby planting the idea that the Armed Forces are corrupt.

Auto Sales: Spot Delivery
WXYZ-TV, Detroit - Shellee Smith
WXYZ investigated Mel Farr, a car dealer who owns the largest African-American business in the country, and is a big
advertiser with the station. They started their probe after complaints of illegal activity at Farr's dealerships. forging
documents, selling lemons, overcharging customers. In particluar the charge they pursued was Spot Delivery. That's the
illegal practice of delivering cars to customers before financing is complete, then when the financing falls though, Farr
reposesses the car, leaving customers stranded, and their credit histories ruined. The reports prompted a state investigation,
forced Farr to stop illegally reposessing cars, and gave voice to who are often ignored because of their credit history.

Background Checks
WTMJ-TV, Milwaulkee, KOMO-TV, Seattle - Sports Illustrated
We've seen criminals in the classroom, day care, ambulances....But here are a few new ones you might consider trying by
running state criminal records against other databases or lists.
WTMJ (Scott Friedman) looked at camp counselors at summer camp. They discovered that many camps have been written up
for failing to do background checks, and pointed out those who had not done the checks. Also discovered that no checks were
even required for overnight camps.
KOMO (Emily Langlie) looked at nursing assistants. These are the licensed semi-professionals working in nursing homes. They
found cases of convicted molesters who had worked in the homes, and continued their crimes by victimizing helpless patients.
And discovered that the state--while insisting that criminal history be disclosed--wasn't bothering to do any background
checks itself.
Sports Illustrated examined youth sports coaches...soccer, baseball, etc. While they didn't do the database thing, they did an
exhaustive search of cases that had been prosecuted across the country. This is harder to do, because central lists of coaches
and volunteers are hard to find. But you may be able to find them on the internet, or through many of these groups, which

Page: 1

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

may provide the lists.

Bandit Cabs
KCOP-TV, Los Angeles - Christina Penza
Bandit cabs are taxis whose drivers are not licensed by the city. They often drive without insurance and charge whatever they
want, and passengers have no recourse. KCOP found there were quite a few of them in LA, and little was being done to stop
them.

Billion Dollar Ripoff
KCBS-TV, Los Angeles - Joel Grover
For five months, KCBS went undercover to expose an elaborate scam across Los Angeles. Its investigation reveals how
wealthy doctors are recruiting the poor to steal from taxpayers. It's a scam the state has done very little to stop. The scam
starts in poor neighborhoods. Recruiters roam the streets looking for people on Medi-Cal. The people only have to say they
have back pain, becoming just one of many people, from recruiters to clinics to wealthy doctors making money fraudulently
off of state taxpayers.

Campus Crime
WFXT-TV, Boston - Deborah Sherman
Many Universities under-report the crime that happens on campus. So students get a false sense of security walking around.
Check out the crime stats posted on the school’s web site under the Campus Security Act or go to
www.securityoncampus.com to learn more about campus crime. Then, compare your local schools. In our case, we found
one major university that was safer (had lower violent crime stats) than colleges half its size. We also have one university
that has been making a real effort to report crimes more accurately, placing it at the top of the list of dangerous schools.
Now it has a bad reputation and worries about losing future students. (Damned if you report, damned if you don’t.) On
another twist there’s a website called apb.com that lists neighborhoods around campuses that are the most dangerous.

Cause for Alarm
WHDH-TV, Boston - Hank Phillippi Ryan
Any firefighter will tell you: saving people's lives and property is not only their job, it's their calling in life. But our investigation
found these men and women who are willing to risk their lives for us- are being forced to live and work in shocking
conditions. WHDH examined the station houses where they live, and found crumbling buildings, moquito infestations, exposed
to carcinogens, and fire traps.

Cell Extraction Teams
KGO-TV, San Francisco - Dan Noyes
KGO uncovered the use of cell extraction teams in a local county's jails. Neither prison rights advocates nor the county
supervisors knew they were being used. Cell extraction teams are specially trained groups of jail guards in riot gear, who use
force to subdue the most dangeous inmates. Critics call the use of the teams a violation of human rights. Law enforcment
officials believe they are a necessary tool. Further, the stories sparked protests by AIDS rights advocates after they revealed
that cell extraction teams were also handling AIDS patients.

Charity Theft From Within
WSMV-TV, Nashville - Nancy Amons
We've seen the stories of people ripping off charities from the drop containers. But WSMV found the employees were the ones
stealing donations. They had a tip that a Salvation Army employee was walking out with the best of the day's donations and
taking the stuff home or selling it at flea markets. They watched for three nights, seeing the manager load items in his car
every night. But they took it for further because they wanted to know what he did with the stuff. If he was personally
delivering it to needy families, they didn't want to wrongfully accuse him. With the help of NBC's technical staff, they donated
two items with tracking devices inside. The hidden cameras watched him move the items (a TV and a boom-box) to his
trunk. The tracking device showed the items were still in his home a week later. Some time later, we found the TV had moved
to a second location. By homing in on the signal, and asking questions of the person whose apartment we tracked it to, they
found out the manager had sold the donated TV to his mother in law. Without the tracking devices, they never would have
known for sure what happened to the items they donated.

Classroom Crimescenes
KTRK-TV, Houston - Wayne Dolcefino, Steve Bivens
KTRK fought six years to obtain open records from the Houston School District showing dozens of teachers with a history of
sexual misconduct remaining on staff. One of the teachers was a convicted rapist who was allowed to teach in a middle
school classroom. Then found victims and family members to turn documents into human stories.

Page: 2

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

Coffee
KGO-TV, San Francisco - Dan Noyes
No matter where you get your morning cup of coffee -- whether you brew it at home or buy it at one of those trendy chains -chances are you've had coffee from Guatemala. It's often children who are doing the hard labor there, picking coffee beans.
KGO-TV introduced our viewers to the "coffee kids", some as young as six years-old. No story they've done has had such an
impact on the ratings; it nearly doubled their normal 6pm numbers.

Coffee Taste Test
WCNC-TV, Charlotte - Jacqueline McLean
How much money do we spend on coffee? But do we really notice the difference? WCNC bought coffees from all over.
gourmet like Starbucks, Dean & Deluca, as well as regular like Burger King, Circle K and did blind taset tests coffee drinkers.
Many were surprised they liked the cheaper coffees. WCNC's experience is that most any kind of coffee story works. Stories
that involve viewers is usually a high interest hit.

Cookie Dough
WCAU-TV, Philadelphia - Larry Mendte
Station caught a city councilman using city staffers to deliver cookies for a side business. An obviously unique situation, but
why not look at prominent officials who have side businesses, and see if there is some abuse, or even a case of these officials
using public paid staff to run personal errands. Best bets...sniff around city hall, legislature, good sources with an axe to
grind.

Cop Gun Dealers
KCAL-TV, Los Angeles, KING-TV, Seattle, CBS News - Eric Longobardi
Police departments want to get guns off the street. Then why are the departments themselves selling guns? Great irony here.
Look at the different departments in your area. Find victims of gun violence, get their reactions. Find video of govt or cop
officials supporting restraictions on guns. Find video of govt gun buybacks, point oout the contrast. Find out how much
money govt spent on this.

Courthouse Blues
KTRK-TV, Houston - Wayne Dolcefino, Steve Bivens
KTRK's investigation caught cops cheating on their time cards in traffic court. They'd show up for the hearings, but then leave
but stay on the clock. Hidden cameras in courtroom hallways caught them leaving, but time cards showed them in court, and
they were collecting time and a half. Required a lot of patience and surveillance, but a fun piece to watch.

Crossing Districts
KPRC-TV, Houston - Tony Kovaleski, Matt Goldberg
What happens when one school district fires a teacher? As the KPRC-TV investigators found, many teachers end up working
at other school districts in the same city. Through a computer analysis, The Investigators cross-referenced the Houston
Independent School District's list of employee's ineligible for re-hire against the employee rosters for the ten largest Houston
area school districts. The results, more than twenty employees dismissed and discarded from one district working in another.
The investigative team uncovered personnel records of teachers who had admitted to doing drugs, using profanity and hitting
students with metal rulers, and helping student s to cheat on a national achievement exam. As of this writing, Houston area
school districts are reviewing The Investigators findings and making changes to their hiring policies in an effort to close this
loophole.

Diet Centers
WFXT-TV, Boston - Deborah Sherman
Check out the biggies in your area to see who they’ll sign up and put on a diet. We found they’ll sign up everyone, including
a fitness model. The catch here is that most places, like Weight Watchers, are still putting people on a scale and referring to
an old height/weight chart to determine what they should weigh. But fitness experts say diet centers should also be taking
people’s body fat, so that they’re not telling people to lose muscle instead of fat. Using the height-weight chart, people like
boxer Mike Tyson are overweight and need to diet. But testing body fat too shows exactly how much fat, if any, he needs to
lose. In our test, our muscle-laden fitness model weighed a lot; but could not have been in better shape. Still, every diet
center we took her too said she could lose 30 pounds.

Dry Fire Hydrants
WFXT-TV, Boston - Deborah Sherman
Firefighters are losing the first critical minutes in a fire because the fire hydrants that they tap into run out of water pressure
or are dry. It’s happening more and more because water departments aren’t testing hydrants for adequate water pressure
and flow. It’s also happening because the water pipes in most cities are more than a hundred years old. Do a quick search
and you’ll find fire after fire where firefighters frantically searched for water. That means the building burns and people inside

Page: 3

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

are waiting to be saved. Talk to the firefighters union; they’ll complain. Talk to the city Water Department in charge of the
hydrants. You’ll probably find they just check a few hydrants, but not all of them. Sometimes they just grease the threads on
the hydrant, but never bother checking the water pressure and flow. Interested in investigating this story in your city? Email
Investigative Reporter Deborah Sherman from WFXT Boston at D.K.Sherman@Worldnet.ATT.Net

FBI Files
KGO-TV, San Francisco - Dan Noyes
Files released under the Freedom of Information Act reveal that the FBI was watching the two most popular bands during San
Francisco's Summer of Love -- the Grateful Dead and the Jefferson Airplane. Fun piece, which gave us the opportunity to
interview some stars and replay that great, old file film. Choose any major figure in your city, and chances are they've had an
FBI file.

Fake Handicapped Telemarketers
KPRC-TV, Houston - Tony Kovaleski, Matt Goldberg
Telemarketers pretending to be handicapped on the phone. Catch it on hidden camera. These groups are operating all over
the country. A great scam to expose. Has been done in several cities, but the groups keep popping up. Tips are great starts,
but also check with BBB to try to find. Groups called things like Lifeline Industries, Challenged Workers of America,
Handicapped Workes, etc.

Feed the Children
WTVF-TV, Nashville - Jennifer Krause, Susan Niland
WTVF's investigation exposed problems at the local office of the international charity Feed the Children. Over several months,
undercover cameras caught the administrative staff of the Nashville warehouse regularly loading up their personal cars with
donated goods and taking the items home.

Fighting for a Smile
WCCO-TV, Minneapolis - Julie Kramer
WCCO examined problems in the VA System. Veterans were waiting more than a year for dentures. A tough story for them
because of the VA's stature in the community, and the it played hardball. But they got results and caused reform in the
system.

GI Lies
WAGA-TV, Atlanta - Dale Russell
Military recruiting story showed how recruiters intimidate, mislead, and lie to recruits to keep them signed up. Can be an eye
opener for young people ambilivilent about signing upfor the military. This can be done in any town with a recruiting center.

Golf Clubs
KOMO-TV, Seattle - Chris Heinbaugh
You get a call from a golf club manufacturer looking for golfers of just your skill level. They want you to test a new prototype
of clubs for 90 days, just wanting feedback, that's all. They overcome your objections, with extra strokes to your golfers ego,
and you agree. But before they can send you the clubs, they need your credit card number, just for protection to make sure
they get the clubs back. They bill you $1200 to $1500 just for the period, and then promis to credit it back. You get the clubs,
(they're not that great) and at the end of the 90 day period, try to return the clubs and your evaluation, only to find...you
can't get through, or there's no one at the other end any more. So you call your credit card company, only to find, you're out
of luck. You tested for 90 days, but the period to contest charged ended at 30 days. You've been had, and all you have to
show for it is a set of clubs worth about $200, and a bill for $1500. Ouch. There are victims in every state. After KOMO aired
this report, they got calls from others saying the same scam is being used for other things, such as software. Good source is
the Better Business Bureau in Southern California.

Governor's Travels
WSMV-TV, Nashville - Nancy Amons
WSMV's investigation that the Tennessee's Governor and his family were taking free flights around the country on private jets,
courtesy of big business...many of which had business pending before the state or legislature at the time. WSMV found the
Governor had taken 52 free trips during his years in office. While it's not illegal, it is raising some citizens’ and political
organizers’ eyebrows because these businesses have unlimited access to the governor during these flights. Since there is no
oversight, WSMV used daily schedules to help track down the flights.

Handicapped Parking
KOMO-TV, Seattle, Emily Langlie - Seattle Times, Eric Nalder
KOMO-TV looked at healthy people illegally using temporary handicap parking tags to park in handicap spots. After some
surveillance, one of those caught by KOMO turned out to be a Assistant AG formerly in charge of disabled issues.
The Seattle Times then broadened the story, taking a database of temporary handicap parking licenses, and running them

Page: 4

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

against a death records database, and found many dead people still applying for, and getting these licenses. Or rather family
members were. They caught people using the stickers to get hard to find downtown parking in 2 hour slots, but staying all
day.

Hazard in the Sky
WHDH-TV, Boston - Hank Phillippi Ryan
WHDH's investigation found thousands of cases where hazardous materisal shipped as passenger cargo on passenger planes
resulted in problems including evacuations, emergency landings, fires, injuries and even deaths. The story reveals that illegal
air shipments are a growing problem, because commercial cargo is not routinely x-rayed or physically inspected. If shippers
decide to save time and avoid red tape, they send their cargo illegally unmarked and unlabelled. They FOIAd quite a bit of
information from FAA and NTSB, and the NTSB web site lists many of the hazardous materials incidents.

Hidden Badges
KHOU-TV, Houston - David Raziq, Anna Werner
Nobody likes getting a ticket, but most of us accept them, and pay the fine. But KHOU discovered a secret that local law
enforcement didn't want the public to know about. It's a group of people who get out of these tickets using a badge given to
them by police officers. Police officers can buy these for family members, friends, girlfriends...it goes in the wallet, so when
you pull out your license...the officer sees the badge and off you go.

Holes in the State Crime Computer
KTVT-TV, Dallas - Bennett Cunningham
KTVT found that many convicted sex offenders had no criminal record on the state's crime computer. They exposed a large
hole in the system. Schools, day car centers, state licensing agencies all rely on the state's crime computer for criminal
background checks. We found a school crossing guard was a convicted felon (indecency with a child) and was a school
crossing guard.

Hospital Security
WBTV-TV, Charlotte - Jeff Keene
5 a.m. in the morning. A man walks in off the street into a local hospital. On the fourth floor he rapes a 76 year old patient.
He leaves the building and to this day the crime is unsolved. It is a growing problem across the country. Hospitals are easy
marks for criminals. Security in many hospitals is slack at best and the trend towards down sizing and consolidation is not
helping. Many hospital security departments are having their budgets slashed meaning fewer guards and less equipment.
We tested that security by wondering through local hospital at all hours of the night. We focused on the hospital where the
most recent crime had occurred. We visited that hospital on 6 different nights. Not once were we stopped or even questioned
as we wondered pretty much anywhere we wanted. We always had access to patients. We also picked 5 other hospitals
throughout our viewing area and tested them at least twice each. The same story. We also talked with national experts and
hospital crime victims. And we examined the fine line hospitals face between having good security and not turning hospitals
into prisons.

Identity Fraud
KOMO-TV, Seattle - Chris Heinbaugh
New twist on a story that has high interest for viewers, but has been done and done again. KOMO-TV decided to look beyond
the victims, and look at the criminal. They took one fellow, and tracked his history of identity theft, and found a string of
victims and crimes stretching back 30 years. He had used stolen identities not only to bounce checks and abuse credit, but
also used someone's identity to become certified as a teacher in Arizona, California and Washington; pose as an author with a
Random House contract-in which he got victims to invest $10,000; posed as a manager of the Harlem Globetrotters; posed as
a phsychologist and actually treated patients; and when he really did write a book, had a forward written by Stephen King,
which of course Mr. King knew nothing about. Despite a string of crimes and guilty pleas, he'd spent almost no time in jail.
The criminal, who eventually agreed to talk with us, said police and prosecutors never seemed to take it seriously, so he
didn't either, and just kept doing it. Admittedly, we had a great character, but it's worth pursuing with others as well. Your
results may be more chilling.

Insult to Injury
KMSP-TV, Minneapolis - Jeff Baillon
A year long investigation by KMSP exposed the cozy relationship between some doctors and insurance companies. They found
some of them make millions of dollars offering medical opinions which allow insurance firms to avoid paying injury claims to
car accident vitcims. Some insurance companies use the same doctors over and over again to get opinions which justify
termination of benefits. Some doctors make up evidence to support their findings.

Jail Tapes
KGO-TV, San Francisco - Dan Noyes
Security tapes from one of our county jails reveal they are using "cell extraction teams", elite units trained to handle the most

Page: 5

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

dangerous criminals. One AIDS patient was stripped bare and tossed into a laundry
basket with a riot shield on top. AIDS rights activists went ballistic. No one on the Board of Supervisors knew the teams
were in use -- they called for an investigation. Good pictures and controversy.

Kid Candy Peddlers
WMAQ-TV, Chicago - Dave Savini, Michelle Rubenstien - KOMO-TV, Seattle - Chris Heinbaugh,
Dateline NBC
Adults are exploiting kids by getting them to sell candy door to door, not for charity, but for profit. These adults are violating
child labor laws, threatening the safety of kids, and playing on the sympathies of adults who think they're supporting charities.
These operations are going on all over the country, and are worth exposing, and there are a number of ways to approach
them.
Dateline NBC examined this from a consumer fraud standpoint, showing how kids are used to deceive consumers.
KOMO examined the threat to the childrens' safety. By going through newspaper archives, and state labor records, it found
cases of kids being abandoned miles from home, robbed at gunpoint, sexually molested and killed.
WMAQ & KTVU also found possible links to organized crime.
Check with you state's labor dept, attorney general, and the US Dept of Labor. Try the local police too.
A warning...These groups are hard to follow without getting caught. KOMO used its station's helicopter to track, while the
unit's car kept the distance. Once the kids were dropped off and the driver left, they were able to find out how old the kids
were, and get the video and consumers they needed.

Kids in Confinement
WMAQ-TV, Chicago - Dave Savini, Michele Rubenstein
WMAQ's investigation found that a severe form of "time out" was being used on school kids, who were being locked into a
room smaller than a closet for hours. In some cases for an entire day without water, food, or access to a bathroom. It's
happening nationwide. If a parent did this, they'd probably be accused of child abuse. But the station discovered there are no
regulations regarding the use of the rooms.

Legal Loansharks
WAMI-TV, Miami - John C Mattes
Some title holders have the ability to charge obscene interest rates, some as high as 264% to those unfortunate enough to
get involved with them. The company is run by a man with ties to organized crime. The loan is at 22% a month, and if the
person is literally so much as a minute late, the car is repossesed.

Library Legends
WFXT-TV (Boston Globe) Here's a fun one. One of the local Boston Newspapers did a story I wish we had thought of about how old and outdated books
are in local libraries. They found books that refer to penicillin as a new drug. Other books called a man on the moon a real
possibility someday. There were books that taught women how to be the perfect wife and mother for their husband. Imagine
your daughter reading that! As it turns out, libraries say they don’t have any way to get rid of the old books or any money to
buy new, updated books. I bet you can find some real gems hidden in the shelves, and with a little humor, turn a good story
for TV or print. Search the Boston Globe or the Boston Herald for the article in 1999.

Life After Death Row
KRIV-TV, Houston - Carolyn Canville
They were the luckiest men alive. Convicted criminals, sentenced to die. Until the US Supreme Court struck down the death
penalty, in 1972. And hundreds of condemned men got the break of a lifetime. Sentences commuted, many wound up
paroled and, yes, free. KRIV wanted to know what happened in Texas. Where are these men today?
They spent 3 years hounding the Texas prison system for answers. Finally, for the first time, they put together a list. They
found inmates who got out and wound up committing more crimes. They discovered that many death row parolees-- who are
supposed to be on parole for the rest of their lives-- were not being watched by anyone. Some actually "got lost." One
death row parolee wound up back on death row. And this time, his luck ran out.

Missing Evidence
WMAQ-TV, Chicago - Dave Savini, Michelle Rubenstein
WMAQ's investigation uncovered an enormous scandal. For more than a decade, thousands of pieces of evidence had
disappeared from its evidence vaults. They obtained secret internal reports detailing how millions of dollars in drugs and
hundreds of weapons, were missing from the evidence room. Also missing, jewelry, computers, tv sets, rape kits with DNA
evidence and more. They obtained a secret internal audit, but launched their own investigation. Using serial numvers from
missing guns, court recrods and police reports, they determined the guns not only were missing from the evidence room, but
made their way back to the streets and into the hands of criminal. But they took it further. The police denied any criminal
cases had been affected. But WMAQ used court records to show drug dealers who had their cases thrown out due to the
missing evidence.

Page: 6

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

Near Miss Communications
WABC-TV, New York - Jim Hoffer
WABC's investgation started with a near miss between two 757s at JFK. The FAA would reveal little. But WABC's probe found
that foreign pilots inability to understand English was teh cause, and they found documents showing numerous operational
problems for the same reason.

New Work at Home Twists
WRAL-TV, Raleigh WRAL-TV camre across a new spin on the work at home schemes. They get people to fork over $189 for special software by
saying they can use this to work at home doing the billing for doctors' offices.THey also promise to help set up accounts with
doctors. The company in this case is American Data Systems, which of course the doctors they list don't know. Similar
schemes popping up all over the country. Talking with BBB's in telemarketing boilerroom hotbeds like Southern California,
Phoenix and Texas are a good place to start. Also check in the help wanted sections of local newspapers.

No Air Bags
WFXT-TV, Boston - Deborah Sherman
Mechanics or used car dealers have found a new way to save some money that could someday cost you…your life. After
you’re in an accident, some mechanics are cutting corners by putting in fake or used airbags into your car. That saves them a
thousand dollars. But people are getting seriously hurt or killed because their air bag didn’t go off in an accident. Also,
there’s no law that makes it illegal for someone to repair a car with a bogus airbag. (If it looks like you have an airbag, don’t
be too sure.) Arnold Diaz with 20/20 did a version of this story this year and so did WFXT in Boston.

No Room for Justice
WXYZ-TV, Detroit - Shellee Smith, Jim Schaeffer
In Wayne County, Michigan, prisoners walk free from the local jails nearly every day. They are not escape artists, they are
simply benefitting from overcrowding. WXYZ wanted to see just how many pristoners had been released in 199, and which
types of criminals were walking free. Through state FOIA laws, WXYZ obtained data on thousands of prisoners who'd been let
go. They discovered the county broke its own rules by releasing violent criminals and proved that many prisoners were only
serving a fraction of their time.

Nursing Home Horrors
KPIX-TV, , San Francisco - Christie O'Connor, Jon Taylor
KPIX went undercover into eight nursing homes and got neglect and abuse on tape. Then they tracked the nursing home
industry's contributions to politicians who vote against protective patient laws. We confronted California's governor about his
recent veto of a reform bill and noted that he received industry contributions. Then they confront our state attorney general
who's election platform was elderly care. While he is lambasting the previous attorney general for not stopping nursing home
abuse they confront him with the numbers which show he hasn't taken action either and has accepted the most money of all
from the nursing home industry.
Results: The governor reversed his veto and pumped 300 Million into reform. Tips: Start with DHS' list of neglectful nursing
homes. Target the worst. Find residents and their families who can be your ticket in to wander the halls of nursing homes. Put
in your open records requests in early to get politicians' contributions from elderly PACs. Get a copy of the Government
accounting office's 1998 report on nursing home abuse. It shows extensive neglect and abuse is rampant ( 1/3 of nursing
homes "cause the life-threatening injury or deaths of patients.")
Pitfalls: We wanted to go in as an employee but didn't fearing a patient might have an emergency in our presence and we
could be held responsible for a health problem.

Pet Sitter
KARE-TV, Minneapolis - John Croman, Chris Peterson
A local police officer suspects his pet sitter is not really letting his dog out for excercise everyday. We rig his house with
hidden camera's and the cop is outraged by what he sees on the tape. Let's
just say he's not getting his money's worth! To try this in your town, pehaps check with the BBB on pet sitters.

Pets & Vets
KPIX-TV, , San Francisco - Christie O'Connor, Jon Taylor
KPIX found a vet who stole animals, lied to owners that he'd put them to sleep and then, when he was about to get
caught..did put the animals to sleep to cover his tracks. Just one of many egregious stories about vets that are easily
obtained through you State Veterinarian Medical board. You will probably find the board slaps hands of vets while hundreds of
animals die in their care each year. Highlight a few shocking cases and confront the vets. Part two: we take a perfectly
healthy dog and a cat into four vets and get very different diagnoses. One diagnoses a case of tapeworms our cat doesn't
have. Another: possible heartworms.
Tips: (Vet story): Ask for not only "disciplinary actions" but citations against vets. Citations are even more interesting. They

Page: 7

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

are issued for "minor" violations which are shockingly serious but are crimes the vet
board doesn't think it can prove in court..so it knocks them down to a level the vet will quietly sign off on.
Pitfalls: (Vet story):The vet board (California's) wouldn't release names. So you have to track down the vets through lawsuits
and attorneys. But part of the story is the protective secrecy the vet board
facilitates.
Tips: (Misdiagnosis story): Choose vets who have criminal records or complaints but who are still practicing. Choose a dog
and a cat from the humane society which can take the animals back each night and keep them happy while your taking the
animals on an oddesy of prodding and pulling. The animals can't last forever so have your story well planned out and blocked
before you begin toting them around ( worked really well for us in three days.) Tell the humane society their payoff is we will
try to get the animals adopted by pitching it at the end of the story.
Pitfalls: Vets don't like to challenge vets. But you'll need a "control" vet to serve as your expert in declaring a dog and a cat
healthy in the first place. Also to challenge the findings of vets who misdiagnose. So
you need an internal medicine specialist. Ours was strong on declaring the clean bill of health but got nervous contradicting
findings of other vets.

Photo Quality
WCCO-TV, Minneapolis - Julie Kramer
WCCO decided to see if the price you pay will really get you better pictures when you get those photos developed. WCCO
used five of the same rolls of film, the same camera, the same conditions. Then took them to five different labs to get them
developed. The prices ranged from six to 22 dollars. Then they had experts look at the finished work without knowing who did
the developing. The best was Walgreens! The worst, a high end lab that charged the most. In addition to this, they also
purposely over exposed and under exposed some shots to see if they were fixed. Important when doing this to point out the
importance of photos in people's memories and lives.

Police Complaints
KPRC-TV, Houston - Tony Kovaleski, Matt Goldberg
KPRC looked at how local police station handled complaints against police. Using hidden cameras, and an former cop who
now monitors police departments, KPRC tested 32 police agencies in the Houston area. 6 of the 32 got high grades. The
station was careful not to step over the line and file a false report, but simply wanted to see if they'd follow proper procedure
and do the right thing.

Prison Phone Rates
KIRO-TV, Seattle - Chris Halsne
Most states get multi-million dollar kickbacks from phone companies for allowing exclusive contracts inside prison walls. Find
out where the money goes. In Washington, some of it goes to pay for ESPN and basketball tournament trophies for guards
and inmates. This isn't a story about prisoner's rights. The prisoners rarely pay the phone bills. Their relatives on the outside
are burdened with outrageous fees and costs. Taxpayers might also be getting taken to the cleaners because the Department
of Corrections often doesn't use the phone profits to reduce the costs of incarceration.

Prisoners in Their Own Homes
WFLA-TV, Tampa - Mark Douglas
WFLA's investgation uncovered the failure of Florida's justice system to safely screen, monitor, and control criminals under
house arrest. They profiled specific criminals as examples of the problem and caught them violating house arreste
restrictions.Good compurer assisted story showing failures in Florida's system of monitoring criminals under house arrest.
They also downloaded data to their website and mapped locations of felons for viewers.

Public Records
WCPO-TV, Cincinatti - Laure Quinlivan
See what happens when regular citizens request public records. Recruit a citizen volunteer to go around to various
municipalities in your area to see how easy or hard it is for a regular Joe to obtain public records. You will likely find that
many of the people who are executiving the public records law (receptionists, police chiefs, etc...) have no idea of what the
law requires.

Questionable Credentials
WPLG-TV, Miami - Jilda Unruh, Helen Moore-Harbeson
WPLG's investigation discovered found top educators with the Miami Dade public school district who got their PhDs and
Masters degrees from questionable institutions. They discovered that the Superintendent of the nation's 4th largest district
and five top administrators earned degrees from programs and institutions described by experts as diploma mills or shortcuts.
Two of these educators even put Dr. in front of their name, in spite of the fact the state of Florida refused to certify them as
having a doctorate.

Page: 8

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

Renegade Rigs
WHDH-TV, Boston - Hank Phillippi Ryan
This wasn't just another "dangerous semi's on the road" story. WHDH found truck drivers and trucking companies breaking
the law, putting people's lives in jeopardy and getting away with it. The story exposed weak laws and how the trucking
companies skirt the system. They discovered that police gave out tickets to more than 4,000 trucking companies, but not one
of those tickets were paid. The companies owed more than 2 million dollars in unpaid citations. They also used the web sites
www.crash.org and www.trucksafety.org to help track down a victim.

Rental Ripoffs
KCOP-TV, Los Angeles - Christine Penza
Rental Services claim that for a fee, they will give would be renters a daily, updated list of available apartments that meet the
renter's specifications. The services even claim to have exclusive listings. KCOP went undercover to see if it's true. They went
undercover to two local rental services, paid the fees, and went apartment hunting. None met the specifications, and the lists
they gave repeatedly had the same apartments they'd already been to. In fact, some had been rented 3 months earlier.

Research Trials
WHDH-TV, Boston - Hank Phillippi Ryan
WHDH did a great story that can be done elsewhere about people who participate in the studies or trials for money. (Do you
have headaches? We’ll pay you $1000 to participate in our 3 week study on migraines.) Turns out there is no agency
overseeing those studies using people as human guinea pigs and even though you can make a quick easy buck, in some cases
people have been seriously hurt or died. There are websites that show which studies are taking place in your area and a
group in DC that is critical of the lack of oversight for these trials.

Rich Tax Dodgers
KIRO-TV, Seattle - Chris Halsne
They are filthy rich, but refuse to pay their fair share of taxes. KIRO-TV requested a computerized list of people who owed
Washington state back-taxes. By using some old-fashioned 'insider' sources, we quickly zeroed in on cheaters that had been
thumbing their noses at the system for years. Some people owed millions of dollars, but still drove the finest cars and lived
like royalty. As an added bonus, we caught the Department of Revenue trying to manipulate our story, so it wouldn't look as
bad on TV. If the state won't help you get the data, try your local courthouse for tax warrants or liens

Risky Cabbies
WMAQ-TV, Chicago - Dave Savini, Michelle Rubenstein
WMAQ's 3 month investigation uncovered potentially dangerous cab drivers. Half of the drivers investigated had criminal
arrest records. Most had been arrested for assaults and batteris. Some had been caught with guns, buying drugs and sexual
offenses. And then there were all the traffic tickets and accidents.

Security GuardsAntique Buyers Show
KARE-TV, Minneapolis - John Croman, Chris Peterson
Security Guard Background Check: This was inspired by a story KPNX presented at show-n-tell last year, about a security
guard background check story done in Maricopa County. The difference between Phoenix and Minneapolis, however, is that
Arizona actually licenses security guards. In Minnesota, the guards are not licensed. The companies are licensed, and those
companies are required to submit a roster of employee names to the state's Private Detective Board once every two years.
The Detective Board does not do background checks on those security guards. That's left up to the employers. STRATEGY:
We decided to create a database using those employee rosters on file at the state. However, the Detective Board at first
refused to give up those rosters. After our attorneys got involved they finally agreed to let us photocopy the rosters. We
used that to create a database in Microsoft Pro ACCESS. We already had imported a database of criminal convictions from
the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension. We cross-checked those two databases in order to come up with a list of security
guards with criminal backgrounds. HANG-UP: The biggest roadblock to this story is that the rosters don't contain full names
or dates of birth. So we got 2500 crossmatches of security guards with the same first and last names of convicted felons, but
then we had to narrow down which ones were which by pulling court records and mug shots. TWIST: Although a long list of
misdemeanors disqualify you from being a security guard in Minnesota, the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension doesn't collect
information on misdemeanor offenses. The only misdemeanors on file are those which started as felony arrests but were
later plea bargained down to misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors. ADVICE: I would not attempt this story again in a
state that doesn't license security guards, because without dates of birth it's too time-consuming to do the background
check (even with ACCESS).

Soccer Bingo- Gambling Gone Backwards
KIRO-TV, Seattle - Chris Halsne
Many youth sports associations run their own bingo parlors to raise funds for activities. This is suppose to REDUCE the cost
for kids to participate in soccer, baseball, or football. KIRO-TV obtained a list of bingo parlors (and other gaming

Page: 9

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

establishments), which were in financial trouble. We discovered that, in some cases, the sports associations were having to
prop up the bingo parlors. The money was flowing the wrong direction. Several organizations were raising entry fees for kids,
to cover losses at the gambling establishments. If you have bingo in your state, this may be happening.

Sonar Whale Killers?
KGO-TV, San Francisco - Dan Noyes
A secret Navy program to detect enemy submarines may be killing whales and other marine life. Good pictures of mass
strandings, during and after tests o f the low frequency active sonar. Good piece for any station on any coast. Vocal activists.
More Navy tests and controversy on the way

Stadium Investigation
WCPO-TV, Cincinnati - Laure Quinlivan
WCPO committed the resources over several years to be watchdog on a billion dollar stadium project in Cincinnati for the
Bengals and the Reds. Their investigation has revelaed broken promises, manipulation of numbers in official reports, political
cronysim in contract awards and other questionable and possibly illegal activity.

Student Activity Funds
KMOL-TV, San Antonio - Brian Collister
This is the money raised by students and held by the school district. It's only supposed to be used for activities that benefit
students. But KMOL found it was being used by principals for meals,
mini blinds, and other things they are not allowed to use it for. Also, missing money and records, no controls, etc. Result: The
school board pres. asked the superintendent to do a full investigation.
First, look at the internal audit department at the district to see if they regularly audit these funds. You may also find they do
spot audits when questions are raised at certain schools. If not, you'll have to ask the district for the list of expenditures.
Make sure you have the district's guidelines for use of the money.

Suicide Records
TXN, Austin - Paul Adrian
TXN in Texas just produced a story that is getting a lot of response - and it's an Open Records issue to boot!
TXN was contacted by a mother who's son was found dead by gunshot. The sheriff's office investigated and it was quickly
ruled a suicide, which she doesn't believe. She hired a Private Investigator for a second opinion. But he couldn't provide that
opinion because the sheriff refused to give him or the mother or the media access to the investigative files. Turns out, there's
a new exemption to the Texas Open Records Act. It gives police agencies the discretion whether or not to release files when
an investigation did not result in a conviction. The idea behind the exemption is to protect the reputation of people
investigated by police departments, who were ultimately found innocent. Both legislative sponsors of the law say the
exemption was never intended to be used to deny families access to suicide records, which would never result in a conviction.
They plan to change the law, to clarify it, in the upcoming legislative session. This story seems to have struck a nerve. We
have heard from numerous people across the state who are in the same boat... wanting to know more about an investigation
into a suicide, but denied access by law enforcement. TXN guesses that with privacy advocates pushing for legislation across
the country other states may have similar legislation. Check out the print version of the story at www.txn.com in the Texas
Investigators section

Talent Web Site
KARE-TV, Minneapolis - John Croman, Chris Peterson
The Talent Web Site: This is a travelling talent search agency with a new high-tech twist. Known as SMASH
ENTERTAINMENT, with a web site at www.cybernetcasting.com they go from city to city signing up kids to get their faces put
on the web site. They charge from $1000 - $2000 for various services, from photo's to video clips. The PROBLEM is that
most local casting directors do not look to the internet to find child actors. Casting is a very hands-on business, and the
likelihood of being discovered on the web is very limited.

Taxed to the Max
WSB-TV, Atlanta - Jim Strickland
WSB took a simple idea and turned it into good television. They went to area convenience stores to see if the stores were still
charging a state sales tax on groceries which had been repealed. They took it further than a quick hit, methodically checking
large numbers of stores across the state to show it wasn't an isolated case, and found numerous stories still charging the tax.
They even got the Attorney General to make some buys. He was particularly upset because as a legislator, he authored the
law repealing the tax. After their story aired one disgruntled shopper filed a class action suit against several retailers. Are
there sales taxes being incorrectly charged in your area? It may seem like a small amount, but add it up. And since tax
districts are the recipients of the overflow, they may not be to eager to check up on it.

Page: 10

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

Taxi Test
WBTV-TV, Charlotte - Jeff Keene
This story has been done in many markets but if you are considering doing this story in yours, this approach might be a little
different. It's a fast paced Saturday night in Charlottes nightclub strip. It's very late and as the bars close, hundreds of
intoxicated people hit the streets for their journey home. Society has driven home the point that they should not be behind
the wheel. Many of them have taken that message to heart and the Taxi companies are there to help. But mostly we found
they were there to help themselves to the pocketbooks of what they thought were drunk passengers. They broke the rules,
were very rude and overcharged in a big way. We also did the usual test of taking a taxi from point A to point B and back
several times. We were not cheated as badly but about half of our rides ended up costing more than they should have.

Teen Pharmacists
KDFW-TV, Dallas - David Christopher
KDFW's undercover investigation found that Eckerd Coprotation allowed a 17 year old hired as a Pharmacy Technician to fill
prescriptions without proper training or supervision. Their search of court records found many lawsuits from cases related to
people who were harmed because there prescriptions were improperly filled.

Teen Smokers
WRAL-TV, Raleigh - Stuart Watson
We've all seen the "teenger-buying-cigarettes" story. But WRAL took it beyond the quit-hit gotcha by accessing the data
collected by the FDA, to see which stores had been cited the most for selling cigarettes to minors. Rather than leave viewers
thinking he just nailed some clerk for selling to minors, he was able to show these stores had a patterno of doing this. Data is
kept on the internet, so you can not only access it, but let viewers do it too--after you do your story of course.
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/oc/cftobacco/about.cfm

The Drop
WAMI-TV, Miami - John Mattes
WAMI's six week investigation discovered a kickback scheme at Miami Airport where skycaps were forced to pay cash back to
their supervisors in order to keep their jobs. WAMI documented the payoffs on videotape. The skycaps banded together to
sue the bosses, and the county government forced the practice to end.

The Pretendant
KOMO-TV, Seattle - Chris Heinbaugh
KOMO-TV looked at the parking attendants who take your money when you park at lots. The only problem: they're self-park
lots. The parking lot owners call these guys pretendants...they take your cash, you park, they disappear. While few people
have much sympathy for the lot owners who charge ridicuous rates, however you should care because you'll get demands for
payment, and risk a ticket or getting towed. Talk with lot owners to find out if this problem is in your city.

The Urinator
KSAZ-TV, Phoenix - Dan Simon
A device sold on the internet allows people to beat drug tests. KSAZ went undercover to see if it works. They highlighted
problems with how drug tests are conducted. They bought a urinator off the net. (Cleantest.com) Then had their HR person
set up some pre-employment drug tests for a "fake applicant" and used one of their photogs. Ideally, you want to use a
DOT certified lab. Have another person walk in to the collection site with a hidden camera to record the dialog between the
applicant and the tester... makes for some good sound. Of course, the applicant will pass every time. The problem... the
drug testers don't observe the collection unless the employers requests otherwise. With products like the urinator, it's very
easy to beat the system.

Tipped Off
WISH-TV, Indianapolis - Sandra Chapman, Eileen Waldron
WISH's investigation focused on a small businessman in an ethical struggle, involving a kickback scheme in the hotel industry
that's happening across the country. The man owns a limosine company, but hotel bellmen demand payoffs to get customers
for his limo service. Some bellmen show him how to work with them to charge passengers more money for going to the
airport. He refuses to make the payoffs, and loses customers. WISH caught the scheme on tape.

Toll Road Runners
KRIV-TV, Houston - Carolyn Canville
KRIV wanted to know who the Top 10 Toll Runners were in the Houston area. They got the idea from an IRE conference.
After filing their Open Records Request, they got the answers-- and more. THey discovered many absconders were getting off
"scott free." The county was dropping the ball, while taxpayers picked up the tab. Why? They went in search of answers.
Now, the county is trying to solve the problem.

Page: 11

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

Trash for Cash
WTXF-TV, Philadelphia - Paul Mussoni
This Fox undercover investigation focused on the illegal and widespread practice by city sanitation workers of picking up
swag...the trash that's supposed to be collected by private haulers. They do it for bribes, and sometimes do their illegal
pickups first, then do the legal trash pickups, on overtime...paid for by the taxpayers.

Travel Brokers
WCNC-TV, Charlotte - Jacqueline McLean
The ads are in newspapers everywhere and online as well. Travel brokers advertise "to sell or buy" frequent flyer miles, but
what you may not know is that this is against every airlines' policy. people are often left stranded, paying out hundreds for
cheap tickets when the frequent flyer miles don't come through. Many don't even say they're using frequent flyer miles. Big
scheme. A lot of airlines have put special enforcement teams together to go after these brokers. Different kind of travel
story.

Utility Markers
WTNH-TV, Connecticut - Paul Adrian
WTNH, produced a story on the guys who mark underground utilities.
We've all seen the "Call Before You Dig" promos. This is a national drive to ensure public safety. But we learned that some
of the biggest utilities in Connecticut save money by hiring a third party contractor to mark the underground utility.
Unfortunately, we found that company, PROMARK, hired some poorly trained and extremely undiligent workers. We watched
two guys on five different occasions spend most of their workdays in a bar. They sat at the bar, faked their reports to make it
look like they worked all day long, and told our producers how they often simply guessed when they marked the ground. One
of the two we watched marked utilities at the airport. Our backgrounding efforts turned up that the company had been sued
19 times in the past two years for mismarking utilites, endangering lives and costing utilities hundreds of thousands of dollars
in damages. One really interesting fact was that the company was mostly sued by the utilities themselves... yet the utilities
continued to use the contractor's service.

Waste Management Recycling Scam
WEWS-TV, Cleveland - Tom Merriman
WEWS's investigation dicovered that Waste Management was fraudulently collecting millions of dollars in recycling fees from
cities throughout the region. Dissatisfied with the depressed market for recycled goods, Waste Management continued to
charge taxpayers a premium for recycling services, but in fact was simply dumping the recyclable materials in a landfill.

What A Waste
News 12 Long Island - Bob Butler
News 12's investigation found that the Town of Islip's reputation as a leader in waste management is not all it should be. The
reporter found that the Town regulary dumped it's recyclable plastic trash into the Town landfill.

Where the Money Goes
WKYT-TV, Lexington - Valeria Cummings, Angie Ricono
Each year, the county school system recieves millions of dollars to cover teh cost of giving each child a good education. Nut
WKYT's investigation found not all the money is used on children. Using spreadsheets, databases, and school reaords, they
found the school officials wasting money on snacks, food, and trips.

Page: 12

Compiled by Chris Heinbaugh, KOMO-TV, Seattle

