NICAR 2000
Lexington, Kentucky
September 16, 2000

Mapping on the Beat
Doug Haddix
Projects editor
The Columbus Dispatch
dhaddix@dispatch.com

Develop a mapping state of mind
Think about all of the data that you use or could use on your beat. Much of that
data already has a geographic component (street address, county, ZIP code, state, police
precinct, census tract, etc.). Usually, all you need is one geographic item to make a map.

Connect with other GIS users
See if the institutions you cover have a GIS mapping department. Talk with the
mapping guru, who likely will be happy to show off the gee-whiz applications of GIS.
You might be surprised by how an agency or government is using mapping software. For
instance, the city of Columbus ultimately may use GPS devices on its snow plows to
track which neighborhoods have been plowed and which ones are still snow-covered.
See what local universities, planning agencies, GIS users' groups and others are
doing with GIS in your community; often, good map shape files already exist.
Check on whether other departments at your news operation already use mapping
software (e.g. marketing, circulation, advertising). We formed a mapping users' group
that has benefited us all (for details, see the September 2000 issue of Uplink).
Peruse Internet sites that list geographic data that's available (often for free) by
state, community or agency. Some examples:
• The Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies, University of Arkansas:
http://www.cast.uark.edu/local/hunt/
• U.S. Census Bureau Gateway to GIS:
http://www.census.gov/ftp/pub/geo/www/gis_gateway.html
• ESRI (Environmental Systems Research Institute), the developer of ArcView
software: www.esri.com
• National Geographic MapMachine:
http://plasma.nationalgeographic.com/mapmachine/ax/arcdata_fs.html
• Free GIS software and data: http://freegis.org/
• GIS tools: http://www.gistools.com/
• Geography Network: http://www.geographynetwork.com/

Produce compelling stories
Would it be helpful to pour your data into a map to see it geographically? Might
geographic patterns emerge that would be interesting or revealing to your readers?
• Where are the rapes happening on campus?
• Where are the arson fires in your city?
• How does your county or city compare with the rest of your state on
something (minority residents, federal grants, cancer rates, etc.)?
• Which parts of your city or county have the most or least of something?
• Where are the schools with low test scores or high teacher absences?
If you discover geographic patterns or trends, you may have a strong angle for a
story. For instance, mapping software showed us that the least-experienced teachers in
Columbus's 88 elementary schools were clustered in the inner-city buildings. That gave
our reporters strong evidence to take to school district officials and forced them to
explain why that was the case -- and what they would do to change it.
Mapping software can save lots of time in figuring out where to do your
reporting. It's a great way to find sources, often by name, depending on your data set.
Mapping software can help you write with authority instead of anecdotally. For
instance: Residents of the Worthington Estates neighborhood had the highest response
rate in Franklin County to the 2000 census. Then go out and talk with people in that
neighborhood to see why they're so civic minded.

Get data that cannot be obtained any other way
With a spatial join, you can merge files based on geography without having a
common data field to link. This is the real magic of mapping software.
One example from NICAR mapping boot camp: Pinpoint the major releases of a
dangerous substance (e.g. lead) in your state. Then, use the mapping software to draw a
circle around each site with a specified radius (e.g. one-half mile). Then add a geographic
layer of census tracts with an underlying data table. Mapping software then allows you to
merge the shapes (the points that represent the addresses of the lead-release sites and the
polygon shapes of census tracts). Then, you can mine the data in all kinds of ways. For
instance, how many children under the age of 5 lived within a half-mile of the seven sites
that had major lead releases in Ohio in 1997? How many residents 65 and older?

