Danish Institute for
Computer Assisted
Reporting

Freedom House
Foundation

Transparency
International

South Eastern
European
Network for
CAR

The right to access public documents and electronic data
Journalists should have access to public data and public databases
Chapter One: General Overview:
An open society cannot be preserved without public scrutiny on public funding and public
expenditures. Transparency prevents public money waste, corruption and, finally, lack of
confidence in democratic system. Public can be easily informed about public issues by
journalists. They can be provided with necessary training and skills development in order to
ensure the right information of public, in connection with public affairs. The discussion on
public sector information should be seen in the context of the emerging Informational
Society. The new Information and Communication Technologies are quickly changing the
ways public sector bodies operate, which makes a timely debate on public sector information
all the more important. Electronic government services can generally be
distinguished,according to the three main functions they serve.
Table 1 - A typology of Electronic Government services
Information services
Communication
services
Information on work,
Discussion dedicated to
Everyday life
housing, education, health,
questions of everyday
culture, transport,
life;
environment, etc.
Jobs or housing boards
Public service directory
e-mail contact with
Telepublic servants
administration Guide to administrative
procedures

Transaction
services
e.g. ticket
reservation, course
registration
electronic
submission of
forms

Public registers and databases
Laws, political programmes, Discussion dedicated to referenda
Political
consultation documents
political issues
elections
participation
Background information in
e-mail contact with
opinion polls
decision making processes
politicians
petitions
Source: Institute of Technology Assessment, Austrian Academy of Sciences and Centre for
Social, Background Paper to "the Information Society, Bringing Administration Closer to the
Citizens Conference", November 1998 (organised by the Centre for Social Innovation on
behalf of the Information Society Forum/Work Group 5/Public Administration).
Chapter Two: Democracy’s challenges in facing the e-society:
Basically, the aim of this proposal is to secure democracy in the society of the future.
Computers enable the authorities to exercise expert power to an increasingly greater extent,
while the citizens and the media have very limited possibilities to act as watchdogs. We must
do whatever we can to eliminate this imbalance. One of the key issues is to secure the
public’s right to be informed, cf. the Human Rights Convention.
Issues addresed in the short term:
1.
How to determine a larger number of institutions, organizations, etc. make their
mailing lists available on the Internet. This access needs to be expanded to more
transparent rules, knowledge of file/case lists, search systems and the right to make
queries across data.
2.
How to define general norms and minimal set of information to be provided in
electronic format by public authorities, in all member countries and candidate
states in the EU.
3.
How to harmonize the existing legislation and legal framework in the EU,
regarding FOIA, Private Information Act and general content regulation, regarding
public data and databases.
4.
Acquire knowledge of more registers and indexes without personal information
and other confidential data. Make the rules of payment work. Make it possible to
receive electronic data in a standard format.
In the long term:
1.
Rules concerning mailing lists, file/case lists and search systems should be simple
and transparent in the public sector.
2.
The right to insight in harmless registers and the right for everyone to have
material delivered in an electronic standard format. In practice this means through
the Internet or as an attachment to an email (comma separated, Excel files, etc.).

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

The rules of payment should work and not be kept at a high level.
Cross searches and queries as well as report generators should be available.
Journalist’s insight should also include: introductory law making, activities of the
court and other public enterprises.
Insight in the systems and the rules, which have been worked into the computer
systems, and which in more and more cases manages the administrative casework.
The rules of insight must be made with respect to the citizens’ obvious and natural
concerns of privacy and confidentiality. It is important to find a balance between
openness and confidence and journalists would like to take part in that discussion.

Chapter Three: How Internet data should be made available to journalists
Data on the Internet - Internet access over all - should be available to journalists along the
lines, laid down by journalist Flemming Svith, Denmark, as follows:
1. The easiest way to data access is to make it available in spreadsheet. Either as a spread
sheet file (Microsoft Excel is the most common program) which the journalist can
open via his browser and visit on the web-site or by making data accessible directly
via a web query in Microsoft’s spread sheet, Excel. This means that by clicking twice
in Excel the journalist can collect data from the Internet into a spreadsheet. The data
supplier should make this facility available.
2. Data should also be made available in a program neutral version as a comma separated
file.
3. Data should only be raw data, i.e. not including subtotals or totals.
4. There should be only one piece of information per cell.
5. Data should include clear definitions and unambiguous codes for identifying data.
6. All data should include explicit source references.

These minimal requests mean that EU member states should follow a certain standard of rules
concerning the content and its format, regarding data and databases of public organizations,
available through the Internet. Also, public insitutions should follow a simple list of basic
requirements, such as the following:
1. Access to mailing lists and journal lists.
2. Access to agendas, minutes and other documents in connection with committee
meetings.
3. Access to search systems and subject indexes.
4. No access to full text documents – unless the authority in question agrees to grant
access.
5. Standardized systems.
These requirements come as a supplimentary list to the basic minimal content list provided by
FOIA in each country. However, a general recommendation for FOIA application should be
provided by the EU towards member countries. Minimal content lists are more and more
necessary, due to global journalism environment brought by the new technologies.
It would be desirable that a much larger number of authorities in the EU supply data
according to a general set of content guiding rules, available as a general European Norm.

Section I
B. We declare our Common Vision of the Information Society:

1. The Information Society that we seek to build is one which is inclusive, where all persons,
without distinction of any kind, are empowered freely to create, receive, share and utilize
information and knowledge, in any media and regardless of frontiers.
2. The Information Society should be people-centered, with citizens and communities at its
core, and be at the service of humankind. It should be an environment where information
and knowledge are disseminated and utilized by all sectors of the population, for their
economic, social, cultural and political development.
3. The Information Society is a new and higher form of social organization, where highlydeveloped ICT networks, equitable and ubiquitous access to information, appropriate
content in accessible formats and effective communication must enable all the people to
achieve their full potential, promote sustainable economic and social development,
improve quality of life and alleviate poverty and hunger.
4. The essential requirements for the development of an equitable Information Society
include:
-

The respect for all internationally recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Notably the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including the right to hold
opinions without interference and seek to, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers in accordance with article 19 of the UN
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to unhindered access by individuals to
communication media and information sources,

-

The commitment to democracy and good governance as well as the existence, in
accordance with the legal system of each country, of independent, pluralistic and free
mass and other communication media in their various forms, as an important means of
fostering public information, societal development and social cohesion.

-

The adherence to international undertakings with respect to peace and security,
sustainable development, equality, solidarity, tolerance, human dignity, economic
progress, and the protection of the environment and building of new values, trust and
norms with respect to the use of ICTs.

-

The building of an environment that inspires confidence and trust in using ICTs, and
ensures security of networks and information, in particular the protection of privacy.

-

Ensuring the adequate development of human capacity in order to be able to fully
exploit the benefits that ICTs and building public awareness on the capabilities of
ICTs to improve the lives of people by circumventing traditional obstacles like
distance and time.

-

The nurturing of creativity and support for the flourishing of free flow of a
multiplicity of ideas from a diversity of sources, recognizing cultural identity in all its
variety, linguistic diversity, and multilingualism as well as the creating favorable
conditions for the production, processing, dissemination and protection of local
content.

1) Information and communication infrastructure
17. Universal, ubiquitous and affordable access to ICTs must be an objective of all
stakeholders involved in building the Information Society.
21. The right to communicate and the right for citizens to access information are fundamental to
the Information Society.
22. Access to knowledge: Individuals and organisations should benefit from access to
information, knowledge and ideas. The sharing and strengthening of global knowledge for
development can be enhanced by ensuring equitable access to information for educational,
scientific, economic, social, political and cultural activities.
23. Access to public domain information: A vibrant and rich public domain is an essential
element for the growth of the Information Society. Information in the public domain must be
easily accessible.
39. Good governance: The Information Society must support participative democracy,
transparency, and accountability, at all times upholding the principle of legality. Information
is the basis of a well-functioning and transparent decision-making process for both global
society and local communities. ICTs can be an important and very effective tool not only for
good governance but also for more accessible government.
•

Section II

•

Observers’ contributions to the Declaration of Principles

•

A. Preamble
•

[2] The media are central to any conception of an Information Society. For the political and
cultural potential of the Information Society to be realized, citizens require access to full
information for democratic participation at all levels, including unbiased information and a
plurality of opinions, as well as access to a wide range of content, including material reflecting
national and regional cultures and content relevant to local communities
-

The right to participate in the communication and information process in conformity with
article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and without any obstacle to freedom
of expression, and press freedom, as well as the right to access, creates and disseminates
information, without any kind of censorship, should be considered basic human right.

C. Key Principles

[12 B] In a democratic society, information and communications are the foundation for
transparency, debate and decision-making and for informed choice of an active citizenry.
[14] The Information Society is one where every citizen has the opportunity not only to
access information but also to produce it and exercise their creativity.
[17] Universal access to information and communication technologies, including radio and
television, shall be an objective of all the stakeholders involved in building the information
society, in accordance with the legal framework in force in each country.
[22 A] Access to information is a fundamental human right. The media—both new and
traditional—have a major role to play in bringing about an Information Society in which all
citizens are included and can participate.
For this purpose, the media need to be accessible and affordable for all citizens. Free-to-air
broadcasting, and especially broadcasting with universal coverage, is an important means of
achieving this objective; universal coverage needs to be improved, particularly in developing
countries. The new opportunities offered by the information age should also be at the service
of the whole range of communities.
To fulfill their role, the media must have unhindered access to events of interest to the public,
including the right to make recordings and to establish contribution links without any
interference by the public authorities.
[23] Global knowledge commons and the public domain of information constitute
resources that are cornerstones of a global public interest. They should be protected,
expanded and promoted, in particular, via open-source and free software.

7) ICT-Applications

[46] Life-long learning.
[47] Enhanced possibilities for more community-level participation in governance issues.
[47] The vision for the Information Society is for open, equitable and unrestricted access to
reliable (or evidence based) information for health, a global public good, by making full use
of ICT in health system development.
[47 A] Volunteers can participate in the development and spread of ICTs application, and
contribute to raising awareness among decision-makers as well as the population in general
on the opportunities that ICT brings to development.
8) Cultural and linguistic diversity, local content and media development
[49] Work on a global convention on cultural diversity.
[51] In this regard, mass media, independent and pluralistic – in their various forms – are
recognized as important means of fostering public information, societal development and
social cohesion.
Limit, through legislation, excessive media concentration that undermines pluralism and free
expression and sees information only as a commodity.
Commit [all participants, especially national delegations] to a tripartite effort to support
media both of developing countries and media serving vulnerable sectors in every country.
Such efforts require professional training, respect for professional independence, security
and protection of journalists, support to local content and community media, durability of
materials and software, easier access to now technologies.
National and global media concentration is contrary to diversity of information.
To ensure diversity and pluralism in the Information society, monopolies and excessive
concentration in the media, including those in new communication and information
technologies should be subject to general anti-monopoly laws. Such general laws should be
enacted where they do not already exist and strengthened where necessary.
The existence of independent and free communication media, including community media.
All forms of media and new ICTs should stimulate cultural diversity and multilingualism.
[51] ICTs can strengthen traditional media such as broadcasting and print, which will
continue to have an important role in disseminating content in the Information Society.
Digital broadcasting, with its interactive enhancements, will be an essential tool for making
the services of the information society widely available, thus contributing to bridging the
digital divide. Transition to digital therefore needs to be actively promoted.

Draft action plan
Based on discussions in the Working Group of Sub-Committee 2

Section I
2) Access to information and knowledge

12. Individuals and organizations should benefit from enhanced access
to knowledge and information.
13. Access to public domain information: Information in the public
domain should be of high quality, easily accessible for all, including
the disabled.
21. ICTs in education: The use of ICTs could contribute to more
efficiency and better quality in education services. They should also
contribute to reaching broad target groups:
-

Information regarding the potential of new technologies in education should be disseminated
through exchange of information on best practices, awareness campaigns, pilot projects,
demonstrations and public discussions.

-

ICTs should be incorporated in school curricula.

-

ICTs should be used to train trainers and to ensure better delivery of education at all levels,
including outside the educational structure, at the workplace and in the home.

-

Teacher’s skills and curriculum resources need increased support so that teachers can act as
a gateway to the Information Society.

-

There should be a large-scale integration of ICTs in primary education to generate a dynamic
process towards e-literacy.

-

The capacity of developing and least developed countries to apply ICTs effectively in
education must be enhanced through regional and international cooperation.

B. Objectives
45. Examples of possible concrete and comprehensive actions could
include:

a) Benchmarks: The following could serve as benchmarks for actions to be taken:
-

all villages to be connected by 2010, with a community access point by 2015;

-

all universities to be connected by 2005, all secondary schools by 2010 and all
primary schools by 2015;

-

all hospitals to be connected by 2005 and health centres by 2010;

-

90 per cent of the world’s population to be within wireless coverage by 2010 and 100
per cent by 2015;

-

all central governments departments to have a website and email address by 2005 and
all local governments departments by 2010.
f) Training content workers: Equipping and training content workers in the LDCs, such as
archivists, librarians, scientists, teachers and journalists in making use of the expertise and
operational capacity of the relevant international professional organizations.
g) Curriculum revision: Revising the curricula of the primary and secondary schools in all
countries, within three years, in order to meet the challenges of the Information Society.
Recommend that Member states should adopt national regulations making it compulsory for
scientists whose research is funded by public agencies or by private foundations to publish in
Open Access journals. Interesting!!!
Access to public domain information. Need to encourage:
-

Provision for increased access to ICTs and integration into programmes that assist with
poverty alleviation and the empowerment of women and men.

-

Web pages of all public bodies should be fully accessible from any kind of browser, including
free software browser and should follow accessibility guidelines.

-

Awareness among civil society at large for the need to support an independent, open-access
public domain.

[14]

Open-source/free software shall be adopted by all public authorities and bodies:

-

Awareness of open-source/free software should be created, especially in the developing
countries.

-

Capacity in open-source/free software development should be built through the development
of incubator funding, a knowledge warehouse of expertise in developing countries,
development of regional and national open-source/free software portals, and by ensuring that
technical experts in developing countries have full opportunity to participate in the
development of open-source/free software.

-

A “Programmers Without Frontiers” initiative, focused on open-source/free software as
applied to development needs, should be launched and coordinated, under the auspices of the
UN.

-

A collaborative network of open-source/free software technology tools for civil society must
be promoted.

-

To ensure that the media are able to fulfill their role in the information society, laws should be
put in place in every country by 2010 to grant journalists unhindered access to events of
interest to the public, including the right to make recordings and establish contribution links
without any interference by the public authorities

Journalism in Global
E-democracy

Journalists need access to
public data and public
databases

Information
services

Communication
services

Transaction
services

Everyday life

Information on work,
housing, education,
health, culture,
transport,
environment, etc.

Discussion dedicated
to questions of
everyday life;
Jobs or housing
boards

e.g. ticket
reservation, course
registration

Teleadministration

Public service
directory
Guide to
administrative
procedures
Public registers and
databases

e-mail contact with
public servants

electronic
submission of forms

Political
participation

Laws, political
programs,
consultation
documents
Background
information in
decision making
processes

Discussion dedicated
to political issues
e-mail contact with
politicians

referenda
elections
opinion polls
petitions

Issues addressed in the short term:
• 1. How to determine a larger number of

institutions, organizations, etc. make
their mailing lists available on the
Internet. This access needs to be
expanded to more transparent rules,
knowledge of file/case lists, search
systems and the right to make queries
across data.

Issues addressed in the short term:
• 2. How to define general norms and

minimal set of information to be
provided in electronic format by public
authorities, in all member countries and
candidate states in the EU.

Issues addressed in the short term:
• 3. How to harmonize the existing

legislation and legal framework in the
EU, regarding FOIA, Private Information
Act and general content regulation,
regarding public data and databases.

Issues addressed in the short term:
• 4. Acquire knowledge of more registers

and indexes without personal
information and other confidential data.
Make the rules of payment work. Make
it possible to receive electronic data in a
standard format.

In the long term:
•

•

1. Rules concerning mailing lists, file/case
lists and search systems should be simple
and transparent in the public sector.
2. The right to insight in harmless registers
and the right for everyone to have material
delivered in an electronic standard format.

In the long term:
• 3. The rules of payment should work and not

be kept at a high level.
• 4. Cross searches and queries as well as
report generators should be available.
• 5. Journalist’s insight should also include:
introductory law making, activities of the court
and other public enterprises.

In the long term:
• 6. Insight in the systems and the rules, which

have been worked into the computer systems,
and which in more and more cases manages
the administrative casework.
• 7. The rules of insight must be made with

respect to the citizens’ obvious and natural
concerns of privacy and confidentiality.

How Internet data should be
made available to journalists
• The easiest way to data access is to

make it available in spreadsheet. Either
as a spread sheet file (Microsoft Excel
is the most common program) which the
journalist can open via his browser and
visit on the web-site or by making data
accessible directly via a web query in
Microsoft’s spread sheet, Excel.

How Internet data should be
made available to journalists
•

•
•

Data should also be made available in
a program neutral version as a
comma separated file.
Data should only be raw data, i.e. not
including subtotals or totals.
There should be only one piece of
information per cell.

How Internet data should be
made available to journalists

4. Data should include clear definitions
and unambiguous codes for identifying
data.
5. All data should include explicit source
references.

List of basic requirements
•
•

•
•

•

Access to mailing lists and journal lists.
Access to agendas, minutes and other
documents in connection with committee
meetings.
Access to search systems and subject
indexes.
No access to full text documents – unless
the authority in question agrees to grant
access.
Standardized systems.

