NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children

Key Findings:
●

●

●

●

Of 180 identified fatality cases "known to the system", one-fifth died after government
workers failed to take key preventive steps or placed children in unsafe home or
institutions. These included not only child abuse deaths, but deaths of infants from
SIDS or other natural causes.
Another fifth of the children died with no apparent help from the city, but their cases
contained serious errors, according to their own fatality reviewers.
City officials had known for years of problems in the child protection system. Over the
eight years ending in 2000, they had made more than 650 specific recommendations
to prevent future deaths, but none we could find had been implemented.
The child protection system was broken at every stage in a case, ranging from the
original investigation to the care of children in city institutions.

NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children

Key CAR elements:
●

Identifying the kids

●

Analyzing documents for city accountability

●

Documenting our facts and decisions for quick confirmation and tracking the
documents in the several FOIAs

Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / March 2002 /(202) 334-6259 / cohensh@washpost.com

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/stages.gif

NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children-ID

The District's Lost Children - Identifying
the kids
Starting from scratch:
Early on, the city insisted there was only one publicly available document: The annual report
from the city's fatality review committee. These included:
A list of children whose deaths were reviewed by the city, identified by age and cause of
death only
● Vignettes of unnamed children's deaths, which we later learned often omitted crucial
details about the city's involvement in the case.
●

Piecing it together
At first, we used an Excel spreadsheet to track what we knew about each case, piecing the
details of the vignettes together with the list, and searching clips for each type of case. We
could search for exact age, causes of death and the like to match up details. It quickly became
clear we needed a better way, which led to the intranet system.
Eventually, we were able to piece together the stories of 180 kids, among them Eddie Ward
and Sylvester Brown.

What you would do if you could:
Look up all deaths of juveniles through death certificates, and
● Look up all autopsies of juveniles through the medical examiners' office.
●

Alas, in D.C., both sets of records are closed to the public. Most other records, such as the
Social Security Death Index, proved fruitless. Some other records we did use included:
Police incident and homicide reports
● Clips and death notices (very limited use)
● Eventually.... internal logs made by the city as they were reviewing cases (redacted -often poorly -- but more details)
●

Back to page 1 / Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / On to Page 3

NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children-Accountability

The District's Lost Children
Holding government accountable for its
neglect
Public recommendations:
The public reports contained a section on "recommendations" for virtually every agency in D.C.
that dealt with children. In fact, the public health outlook of child fatality review committees
almost require it. A first pass through it helped guide much of the rest of our reporting, and
helped us understand what the government already knew. Here's an example of a
recommendation from a public report:
Revise policy to ensure that prior to closing a case as "unable to locate" that all possible
collateral contacts have been made and the the record documents the results of these contacts.
Contacts should include but not be limited to the school officials, IMA, motor vehicles, landlords,
etc.(232)

We made some basic categorizations, leading to:
Repeated themes: Which ones happened year after year?
● Common recommendations
●

When the documents arrived...
We stopped working with the publicly released recommendations, instead identifying them by
case. Among the items we tried to document -- that would probably be used in any similar
attempt to summarize thousands of pages of government documents -- were:
Stages in the system where the problem occurred. This involved mapping out the way
the system was supposed to work, then assigning each recommendation or criticism
made in the documents to one of those stages wherever possible.
● Actors: Which agencies (and sometimes which individuals in the agencies) were being
criticized? (We didn't do much with this only because so many of our documents came
from one agency. The other agencies cooperated so poorly with the reviewers that they
couldn't review their work.)
● The theme or category of the problem: We eventually matched these up to the specific
days of the project
●

NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children-Accountability

●

The core problem: This was the hardest to identify.

Searching for the recommendations meant we could look for patterns.

What you would do if you could:
Conduct a more traditional content analysis, by testing documents against an already
existing list of categories
● Use more stringent coding methodology, possibly even using two independent coders to
assign many of the categories
●

That said, it would be difficult to do this in a news project because we really had no specific
problems we were seeking to document. Instead, we had questions: What happened most
frequently, when did the city know of the problems and did they continue to happen?

Back to page 1 / Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / On to Page 4

NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children-Accountability

The District's Lost Children
Documenting the cases on deadline
"In the 40?"
Among the most difficult quesitons was whether any case was a candidate for culpability by the
government. We knew we'd never prove that government actions caused a death. But we could
say that children died "after city workers failed to take key preventive steps" or "placed children
in unsafe homes and institutions."
Reporting out the cases knocked many possible cases out of the group. Ricky Anthony, for
example, died in an uninspected home of "abuse", according to the medical examiner's report.
But it turned out the abuse had happened years earlier -- it was brain damage that sent him into
foster care in the uninspected and unlicensed home.
There were two databases to track this:
●

●

A Lotus Notes database for the reporters to take notes in, which allowed some modest
analysis but was difficult to work with as data. We only created records in this database
when a child's death was potentially tied to government mistakes. Most of the raw notes,
clips, and to-do lists were kept here. It wasn't used to count anything, but was a great
way to let us all share our knowledge.
The same intranet SQL Server-based database. This was the one to generate statistics.
It was also used to print off standarized summaries of each case that the team reviewed
in its entirety to assign government culpability and then code lesser mistakes. This was a
three-day session with all three reporters and the editor to make final determinations.

The SQL Server database was used to generate the list of deaths -- it automatically calculated
the ages and set the 40 highlighted cases in bold. This meant we could continue reporting
throughout the project.
Other analysis that was used in the story included assigning themes to the cases, then seeing
which kids overlapped. It helped keep each day different from one another by avoiding
duplication.

NICAR Philly-The Washington Post-Lost children-Accountability

We also used the database to tell the government which documents we'd received and which
were still missing. This process went back and forth for a year, allowing the agency and the
fatality committee plenty of time to search for its records. In all, about 40 cases remained
undocumented. Some were open homicides of teenagers, though others were simply from
years in which the committee had few records.

What you would do if you could:
●

Find a better way to coordinate the reporting notes with the database. I spent a lot of
time making sure they were in synch. One solution, which we found later, is an ODBC
driver for Lotus Notes databases, which would have allowed me to automatically update
the SQL Server database.

Back to page 1 / Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post /

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/log_1998.jpg

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/orig_xl.jpg

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/eddie_vignette.jpg

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/names.gif

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/names.gif

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/names.gif

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/names.gif

file:///N|/INetPub/WWWRoot/nicar2002/images/names.gif

Child fatality search pages

Search for child deaths
Fill out as many boxes as you need to hone your search. Press the "Reset" button to start
over. Or, search all the recommendations (public and private)
Submit

Reset

Search conditions
Name
includes:
LaShawn?

Case number:
Yes

Maybe

Year

No

Solid, contributing case (In the
40-odd)
Mistakes, not contributing
How we're (Unrelated mistakes)
countng
In project, but without
it:
mistakes (rest of base)

Themes
<%=ThemeNames(i)%>

Not enough records to include
in project (excluded)
Not LaShawn (excluded)
Word or
phrase
anywhere
in the
case:

Includes recommendations and problems raised in the case; see below for examples

/
DOD:
/
DOB, DOD DOB:
(Enter month / year in numbers, like 12 / 1993. Leave month blank to
and age
get anything that year.)

....or between

years and

years old
(Enter 0 in both boxes for children under 1
year old)

Child fatality search pages

Manner
/cause of
death

Cause:

Manner:

(includes the word or phrase)

Document
Final Report:
status:

Summary

Supplement

Backup Docs

Internal rept

Sort options (for detailed listings only)
Sort the results by: Year

then by

Case number

(For sarah's special requests)
more
where...

Report options
Document summary (list form)
Detailed report (all details shown)
Short case list (shows names, case numbers, causes of death, dob, dod, etc. without details)
Full report of all children, by theme (sorted chronologically)
Submit

Reset

Examples for the search criteria for the row, "anywhere in this case":
For a single word, just type it: unsupported
● For a phrase, enclose it in quotation marks: "closed at intake"
● For two words that might not be next to each other, enclose the words in quotes
separated by the word AND: "unsupported" and "SIDS"
● To find a word that could have many forms, enclose it in quotes and put an asterisk
at the end to find the various endings: "support*". (Note: In this one, you can't search
for any letters together if you don't know the beginning of the word. So if you want to
all supported and unsupported cases, use this: "support*" or "unsupport*"
●

Note: This search only works on updated information once a day. Let me know if you want
me to update it right away, but there's no way to automatically update it as you go along.
The rest of the form, such as cause of death or case number, is updated every time you
make a change. Coming soon: Statistics and charts.

