NICAR Conference March 14-17, 2002
Paula Lavigne Sullivan, The (Tacoma) News Tribune
253-597-8542 paula.sullivan@mail.tribnet.com

Starting up and hanging in there:
How to bring computer-assisted reporting to your beat and the newsroom
•

Read. Read lots. Read stories in which other reporters have used
CAR and jot down their ideas. Read NICAR’s Uplink and the IRE
Journal and other publications for ideas using databases. Scroll
through the IRE story archives and select a few great stories.
Read other papers and try to spot stories that used CAR work.
Not only will this motivate you and give you ideas, it will help
you convince your editors and co-workers that reporters can do
great things with CAR skills.

•

Scavenge. Find out what software your newspaper already has. Ask
the people who maintain your computer systems if any computers
in the building have spreadsheet software like Excel, or
database software like Access or FoxPro, or mapping programs
like ArcView or MapInfo. You might find that even if your
newsroom doesn’t have these applications, your accounting or
advertising departments do. If so, ask if you can use their
computers after hours.

•

Play. Jump on the software and start playing around. Learn how
to import data, or create your own, and see what the functions
do. Go through the tutorials, follow some of the examples given
on the NICAR listserv and don’t be afraid to ask for help. Learn
by failing and trying to work your own way out. Figure out where
you need help.

•

Train. Get to a NICAR bootcamp or other NICAR training if you
can. If you don’t live near Columbia, Mo., see if there’s a
NICAR or IRE event coming up in your area. Apply for a
fellowship if you can. If not, here are some alternatives:
•
Take advantage of any training in statistical
applications (Excel, FoxPro, etc.) that your company
offers. (And, remember, it might be outside the
newsroom.)
•
Many community colleges offer courses in using
spreadsheet, database and mapping software and
statistics. If you work somewhere that offers tuition
reimbursement, take advantage of it. Even if you pay
yourself, consider it an investment in your career.

•

Sell your CAR. One of the toughest things about getting into CAR
is getting the support from editors to do the work. Remember
those great CAR stories you read? Show them to your editors and
explain how you could do the same work at your paper. Propose a
few ideas - start simple - and get them in the paper. If you
can get time off your beat, great. If not, consider putting in
some extra hours on your own. (Remember that “investment in your
career” part?) Editors have to see the value of CAR before
they’ll be willing to spend money and give you more time.

•

Find allies. If you can get at least one or two other reporters
interested in what you’re doing, you’ll have a louder voice in
the newsroom. Think of data that would interest other reporters
and pitch it to them as a way to do a great story on their
beats.

•

Meet the geeks. Get past the PIOs and talk to the people who
maintain the data for agencies on your beat. Learn their lingo
and learn what they have.

•

Request data. Even if you don’t have a specific story you’re
working on, get in the habit of asking for data on regular
basis. Learn how your state’s public disclosure/access laws
apply to the release of electronic data. Be specific in what
records you ask for. Many agencies are not familiar in giving
out databases. They either think they don’t have to, or they
don’t know how. Don’t take no for an answer without trying to
negotiate. Ask those geeks you met earlier for help if you can.

•

ASK. This is most important. If you’re the only person working
on CAR in your newsroom, it can be a lonely place. Get to know
CAR reporters at other newspapers and take advantage of the
resources of journalism association, such as IRE/NICAR. Sign up
for listservs. Although you may think yours is a “dumb
question,” there are likely others on the list with the same
question and they will appreciate the answer.

•

Don’t give up. You get the point.

