Census 101: A beginner’s guide
to getting just a little local data
Prepared for NICAR National Conference
Philadelphia, March 14-17, 2002
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427
If you’re a beginner, it’s the best and worst of times: There are gigabytes of fresh Census data. How does a
beginner with just a browser and a spreadsheet keep from drowning? One way is American FactFinder, the Census
Bureau’s data dissemination site. After a long, clumsy development period, it actually will let you drill down to a
small area, extract just a little bit of data and download or print it easily. To get ready for this summer’s release of
the good stuff from the 2000 Census, it’s a good idea to pull and look at local 1990 Census data.
Here’s a step-by-step guide to getting just one county worth of neighborhood-level data on one subject. The
example uses 1990 Census public and private school enrollment for Bucks County, Pa., but you can adapt as
needed:
1. Go the American FactFinder web site: factfinder.census.gov. Click on the box
labeled “Data Sets.”

2. On the page that opens, click in the radio button for “1990
Summary Tape File 3.”

3. You’ll see that the page reloads, and a list of links appears to the right. Choose “List
All Tables.” (It’s a good idea to have a printed list of tables and their categories saved in a
three-ring binder for reference. A link to that list is shown at right as “Technical
Documentation.”)
4. On the list of tables, scroll down to P054, highlight it
and click the “Next” box at lower right corner of the page.

5. On the page that opens, click on the drop-down arrow
for “Select a geographic type” and choose “Census tract.”

6. You’ll see the page reload. Then choose your state from the list and watch the page reload again to present a
list of counties. Choose one and watch the page reload again with a list of
census tracts.
7. Click on “All Census Tracts” and then on the
blue “Add” button. The list of tracts will appear in the
box below. Then push the blue button “Show Table.”

Be patient while the table loads, especially if you’re doing an urban county. Here’s what you’ll see:
Notice the links to
documentation on the table’s
categories and definitions, to the
data set itself and to the “Variance
Document for STF3.” Since these
numbers come from a survey,
there’s a little cloud of uncertainty
around each number. The variance
document tells you how to figure
out how big that cloud is for your
numbers so you don’t overstate
what they say.
8. Notice at upper right how the
“Print/Download” button opens
into both options when your cursor
hovers there. Choose “Download.”
9. In the window that pops up, leave the default selection “Comma
delimited” but make sure to click in the box marked “Transpose rows
and columns.” Then click “OK.” When the box pops up prompting you
to save the file, steer it to the directory you prefer and save it, then open
it with Excel. Or just click on “Open this file from its current location.”
You’ll get something like this:

10. Make sure to save the file as an Excel file –
choose “Save As” from the File menu and give it a
name that ends with *.xls. Then you can start
calculating percentages, sorting, etc.
“Census Tract 1001.01” may not mean much to you,
but your local planners can probably equip you with a
paper map that shows census tracts in relationship to
landmarks like streets and rivers. If not, you can get
one from the Census Bureau either by downloading it
as an Adobe Acrobat file
(http://ftp2.census.gov/plmap/pl_trt/ ) or buying one on
paper. (A county is 1 to 7 sheets, $25 minimum order:
http://www.census.gov/mp/www/geo/msgeo60z.html .)
If you’d like to change or make new selections, just
go back to FactFinder and choose from options at the
top right of the screen.
American FactFinder can do lots of other things as
well – it serves so many purposes that navigation can
be daunting. You might try blazing off from this trail if
you see something interesting. But these simple steps
will let you find and grab just the data you need.

