1

Consumer Product Safety Commission
Injury/Death Data
NICAR National Conference
Philadelphia, Pa.
March 2002
By Mike Sherry, IRE and NICAR Database Library, mikes@nicar.org

The Basics
Four tables (10-year’s worth of data). Provided by CPSC’s National
Injury Information Clearinghouse:
•
•
•
•

National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS).
Record count: 3,228,474
Injury/Potential Injury Incident File (IPII). Record count:
222,396
In-Depth Investigations (INDP). Record count: 46,420
Death Certificate File. Record count: 44,042

Access Database with the four tables imported: 513MB
Products are identified in CPSC’s “Product Code Comparability
Table” and the “NEISS Coding Manual.” They are available at
http://www.cpsc.gov/Neiss/jove-asp/default.htm

Pros
•
•

•

•

Cons

EASILY OBTAINABLE. I sent them two CDs on November 21, and
they sent the data back on January 4. No charge.
EASY TO IMPORT. It is "|" delimited, and it imported into
Microsoft Access with no problem. They sent the NEISS table
as four separate text files that I had to import
individually, but that was the only real hassle.
HELPFUL STAFF. The clearinghouse puts – in writing! – its
pledge to “have your request acknowledged in writing within
5 working days” and to make available “a courteous
Technical Information Specialist” from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30
p.m. EST on weekdays. I have found they stick to this
pledge.
ALL TABLES include codes for the product(s) involved and
narrative fields explaining the injury.

2

•

•

•

POOR DOCUMENTATION. Surprise, right? The record layout and
code sheet for the NEISS table was OK. But the
documentation for the other three tables was spotty. In
some instances, the record layout included fields that were
not in the table. In other instances, the table included
fields that were not reflected in the documentation. I also
had to call to get additional code sheets that allowed me
to decipher race and sex codes in some of the tables. (Be
sure to request the “Interpretive Sheet for Computer
Printouts of Reported Incidents.)
ONE EXAMPLE: The record layout for the investigations table
showed the third field as date_entered and the fifth field
as a column that indicated how CPSC was notified of the
incident. At first, I thought the table did not include the
fields. Further inspection showed they were tacked on the
very end of the table – after 12 narrative fields.
CPSC VERY WILLING to send you 10 year’s worth for free.
Larger requests will cost you. The data go back to 1980. I
originally requested all four tables back to 1980. They
said it would cost $235 and take six to eight weeks. This
is probably negotiable, if you’re willing to fight.

About the Data:
1) National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS)
The Consumer Product Safety Commission has been conducting
the survey for nearly 30 years. They collect reports from 100
hospitals nationwide that are a representative sample of the more
than 5,300 U.S. hospitals with emergency departments. The 100
hospitals are in five groups – four representing hospitals of
varying size and a fifth including children's hospitals.
Using the data collected from the 100 sample hospitals, CPSC
produces national estimates of the numbers and types of injuries
caused by hundreds of consumer products. CPSC calls these national
estimates “product summaries,” which are available in paper format
from the commission. The latest available is 2000, with 2001 due
out later this summer.

Notes:
• There are no state or city fields.
• Age field: For children under the age of 2, they use a
three digit number e.g. 23 months equals 223. Beware of
this if you're planning on doing any average or median

3

•

calculations on the age field. A "group by" on the age
field showed that the ages appearing most often are teens
and children between the ages of 2 and 5.
Products causing the most injuries: stairs/steps (1);
floors/flooring materials (2); basketball - activity,
apparel, or equipment (3); bicycles or accessories (4)

2) Injury/Potential Injury Incident File (IPII)
This file contains summaries of Hotline reports, newspaper
accounts, reports from medical examiners, and letters to CPSC.
Notes:
• Has state and city fields
• Has age field
• Other fields include hazard type and how the CPSC found out
about the incident.
• The incident table links to the investigations table via
the TKNO field.
3) In-depth Investigations (INDP)
This file contains summaries of investigations into productrelated injuries or incidents. Based on victim/witness interviews,
the reports provide details about incident sequence, human
behavior, and product involvement.
Notes:
• Has city and state fields
• Other fields include body part injured and the extent of
the injury.
4) Death Certificate File
This file contains death certificates where consumer products
are involved. The certificates are provided to CPSC through state
health departments. The Clearinghouse provides summaries of these,
with victim information removed.
•
•

Has city and state fields
Most deaths occur in: swimming pools (1) bathtubs/showers
(2) stairs or steps (3).

4

•

Has accident dates that range from 1927 to October 2001.
Here's the narrative from the record with the accident date
of 1927, for a 69-year-old guy in NYC who died in 1994:
SWALLOWED LYE WHEN 2 YEAR OLD - CHRONIC PARASPINAL ABSCESS;
COMPLICATIONS OF ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION; LYE INGESTION AUTOPSY NO

The datasets are available from:
National Injury Information Clearinghouse
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
4330 East West Highway, Room 504
Washington, DC 20207
Telephone: (301) 504-0424
Fax: (301) 504-0025
Web sites: http://www.cpsc.gov/about/clrnghse.html
http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/3002.html

