D’Vera Cohn
Washington Post
Cohnd@washpost.com

Handout for “Spinning the Census,” NICAR 2002, Philadelphia, Pa.

Same-sex couples
Question to think about: Are same-sex couples “everywhere,” as gay-rights advocates
say, in numbers and distribution too great to ignore when policy and laws are being
made? Or are same-sex couples so few in number, as gay-rights opponents argue, that
they are not that important?
And what does it mean that the 2000 Census reported far larger numbers of same-sex
couples than the 1990 Census? Gay-rights advocacy groups say that same-sex couples are
more comfortable about telling the census-takers who they are, but the Census Bureau
belatedly weighed in with a technical note
(http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/samesex.html)
saying some of the difference (it did not say how much) was because the numbers were
analyzed differently in 2000.
Immigrants
How many illegal immigrants are there? The census is supposed to count everyone, even
people in the country without legal documents.
In January, the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates limits on immigration,
reported (http://www.cis.org/articles/2001/censusillegalsme.html)
that the Census Bureau had concluded there were 8.7 million people in the U.S. illegally,
including 115,000 Middle Easterners. However, you had to read carefully to find out that
some of them were in a gray area between legal and illegal, including people awaiting
papers giving them refugee status. Much of the news coverage ignored that point.
Families
Last year, the Census Bureau itself came under criticism for a study that was
accompanied by a news release overstating its conclusions. The April 13 news release http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2001/cb01-69.html - reported the “rebound” of the
nuclear family, because a higher share of children now lived in a “traditional nuclear
family.” But the Census Bureau definition of “nuclear family” included dad, mom, the
children and no one else (grandparents, aunts or uncles, nanny, etc.). The share of
children living with both parents in all situations did not change.
Two articles that did a good job explaining the confusion were in The New York Times
(April 21, 2001, Tamar Lewin, Section A, page 16) and Boston Globe (April 13, 2001,
Cindy Rodriguez).

Segregation
Sometimes there are multiple ways of analyzing an issue, all of which have elements of
truth. The issue of whether racial integration is rising illustrates this.
Here are some of the headlines: Segregation of a New Sort Takes Shape; Census: In a
majority of cities, Asians and Latinos have become more isolated from other racial
groups (Los Angeles Times, July 5, 2001); Analysis of Census Finds Segregation Along
With Diversity (New York Times, April 3, 2001); Index charts growth in diversity
Despite 23% jump, segregation is still going on, researchers say (USA Today, March 15,
2001).
The above stories, emphasizing that the glass is half-empty, reflect in large part the views
of social scientists who emphasize the persistent black-white segregation in older cities.
Among them is sociologist John Logan of the StateUniversity of New York at Albany,
who offers local segregation data from the census on his website:
http://www.albany.edu/mumford/census/

Then there are these headlines: Racial Integration's Shifting Patterns; Enclaves Persist,
but Black-White Divide Shrinks (Washington Post, April 1, 2001); Sprawling Our Way
to Integration (Raleigh News & Observer, April 17, 2001); or Suburbia, the new melting
pot; Census contradicts stereotypes about diverse neighborhoods (Dallas Morning News,
Dec. 12, 2001).
These stories reflect the glass-is-half-full views of academics who have focused their
attention on changes in the West and South, where a growing number of Americans now
live. A report from the Brookings Institution, prepared by researchers from Harvard and
Duke Universities, illustrates this school of thought:
http://www.brookings.edu/dybdocroot/es/urban/census/glaeser.pdf

