NICAR Conference – Philadelphia, March 2002
Data on Health and Environment
MaryJo Sylwester, msylwester@publicintegrity.org

Storm Water
Why should you care?

Storm water runoff and its resulting pollution are problems in every urban area, yet the
majority of the news coverage only talks about the “symptoms,” such as flooding. The fact that
these symptoms are occurring might instead be a sign that there are bigger problems. In
addition, this topic will be a major item on city agendas this year because of a new law
requiring all “urban” communities to establish programs to reduce runoff pollution and
sediment erosion. There is a lot of concern in the environmental community that agencies aren’t
ready for these new laws….my story showed that the local agencies in Missouri had not even
succeeded with regulations that took effect a decade earlier (see attached).
Data sources:
1) Storm-water permit applications and matching enforcement data. This should exist at the
state environmental regulatory agency, in whatever department monitors water quality. It’s
part of a series of requirements started in the early 1990s to address water pollution, called the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit Program. A sub-set program
deals solely with storm-water pollution. Information about the EPA program is available at
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/
Some cities (or maybe counties) have established their own permitting/enforcement programs.
2) Information on subdivisions in your area. The local planning office(s) at the city or county
level should have files on each subdivision that would include plat maps, comments from
public officials/citizens about the proposed plat, and other correspondence. I also found the
planning office had a spreadsheet listing each subdivision approved in the previous five years,
which I matched against permit data.
3) Water quality data. The state environmental agency probably collects something (but be wary
of volunteer-collected data). Experts also told me a good indicator of stream problems because
of runoff (and the sprawl that caused it) is stream-flow data collected by the USGS. However,
they don’t collect this information everywhere. If you can find it for your community, you can
do regression analysis to see if local streams are being negatively affected by increased runoff.
Check out story by Aron Pilhofer from the IRE Resource Center, story #14442.
Who to talk to:
• County and city planning inspectors and public works engineers
• County Soil and Conservation representative (the local erosion expert)
• State environmental agency officials who work on storm water or water pollution issues,
including the local inspector
• Local US Geological Survey expert on water pollution
• Local university soils professors
Also check out: GAO Report 01-679: Better Data and Evaluation of Urban Runoff Programs
Needed to Assess Effectiveness. June 2001.
Links:
• Copy of the EPA Storm Water Phase II rule:
http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf

1

•
•
•
•
•

General information about the EPA Storm water requirements and Phase II:
http://www.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/
Center for Watershed Protection: http://www.cwp.org/
The Quality of Our Nation’s Waters (an EPA report): http://www.epa.gov/305b/
National Association of Flood and Storm-water Management Agencies:
http://www.nafsma.org/
USGS Water Quality data and other information: http://water.usgs.gov/ Stream-flow
data is at: http://water.usgs.gov/nsip/

2

