Investigative Reporters and Editors
Regional Conference - Albuquerque, N M
November 12-13, 1993

SPREADSHEETS VS. DATABASES
By Rich Gordon
The Miami Herald
(305) 985-4536
CompuServe: 72072,2741
Entering the world of computer software can be bewildering.
Everyone has a favorite database or spreadsheet program, and will
argue forever about why it's better than the competition. But
here's the dirty little secret: these programs all do the same
things. The main differences between different kinds of spreadsheets, or different klnds of database managers, lie in which
keys you push to accomplish certain things. Once you press thoee
keys, they operate very similarly. In fact, in many ways, even
spreadsheets and database programs are interchangeable. The main
differences are in ease of use: certain operations are just
easier with a spreadsheet, while others are easier with a database manager.
Here's some advice on which program to use when.

USE A SPREADSHEET WHEN:
- - You first get your hands on some numerical information,
and you're trying to make sense out of it. A spreadsheet is ideal
for figuring out how to attack the numbers.
-- You want an inexpensive program, or one you can run on an
old computer that doesn't have a lot of processing power.
-- You're getting started in computer-assisted journalism and
want to build a solid foundation for yourself. (The spreadsheet
is the basic building block of computer-assisted journalism; you
can start with database software if you like, but you will be
readier to use it if you master a spreadsheet first.)
-- You are working with dozens or hundreds of records (rows),
rather than thousands or millions.
(Most spreadsheets have a
limlt of about 8,000 rows.)
- - Each of your recoras~irowsi has no more than a few dozen
fields (columns). If you have, say, 25 columns or more, the
spreadsheet gets pretty cumbersome to use.
-- You are performing the same mathematical operation on each
number in a list.
(Even if you need to use the results as part
of a database, you will often find it easier to do these calculations in a spreadsheet, then export into a database format.)

-- You need to turn rows into columns, and columns into rows.
( I know of no database manager that will do this.)

-- You need to copy information from one table to another,
but there are no fields that match exactly in the two tables.
(For example, let's say you have a table of population figures
for every county, and another table of income figures for every
county, but in one table the "Countya field includes the word
County and the other one doesn't.)
- - You're typing information into a computer, and you aren't
exactly sure how you want to set it up -- how many fields you
want, how many characters you'll need for each, etc. It's easier
to make those kinds of changes in a spreadsheet than a database.
(Once your format is set, you can export t o a database manager
and complete the data entry there.)
-- You want to graph your findings. Most of today's spreadsheets have fairly sophisticated, easy-to-use graphing functions,
while that is not true of most database managers.
-- You want to insert into the database some numbers showing
how each record ranks under a certain criteria.
(For example,
you sort the list of counties by population, and you want to add
into the database for each city the number for its ranking.) This
is a job for the spreadsheet's Fill or data Fill function, which
most database programs do not have.
USE A DATABASE MANAGER WHEN:
-- You are working with thousands or millions of recorda.
- Each record has many fields. A database manager is ideal
for zeroing in on only a subset of the fields.
-- You have mastered a spreadsheet program and are ready to
learn some of the things a database manager can do more effectively.
-- You want to do crosstabulations, or crosstabs. For example, if you've gathered information on campaign contributions and
you want to know what cities have generated the most money for
each candidate.
-- You want to ask questions of your data without changing
the original data.
(Most database software leaves the underlying
database unchanged when you issue a query. With a spreadsheet you
will need to make a backup copy of your data first.)
-- You want to combine information from two or more tables,
AND each table contains at least one field in common. For example, two census tables that each have a field with the census
tract numbers entered in the same format. This is a job for a
relational database manager, such as FoxPro or Paradox.
- - You want to set up a menu-driven program that other staff
members will use to access a database. Programs such as FoxPro
and Paradox have powerful programming languages that make this
possible.

-

THOUGHTS ABOUT SOFTWARE

This is is a great time to buy. There are more good products
than there are buyers, so prices at the retail level are coming
down, down, down. It's easy to find bargains because manufacturers frequently offer deals to attract new customers.
How do you know what to buy?
Rule One: If you know someone who already uaee a spreadsheet or database program, and they're willing to help you
through the learning curve, buy it. There's no substitute for
having someone to turn to when you run into trouble.
Rule Two: Never pay full price.
If you shop around, you
can get great deals on great software. Look for "competitive upgrade" offers -- when a manufacturer offers a cut-rate price for
a limited time to someone who already owns a competing product.
If anyone in your company, or a friend, already uses the competing product, they can get the one you want cheap.
Go to CompUSA or another superstore. Buy an ieeue of PC Magazine or PC Computing and check out the ads from the software
distributors. (One 1s MicroWarehouae, 800-367-7080, but you
should shop around for the best prices.) With a call to an 800
number, you can have software on your desk the next morning -often for hundreds of dollars less than the list price.
A recent article in PC Magazine was headlined: "1 have seen
the future of software, and it costs $ 9 9 . '
Software companies
are discovering that they'll sell many times more programs if
they cut the price, so that's what a lot of them are doing.
Rule Three: Don't be afraid to try another program. When
you've mastered only one kind of software, the idea of moving on
to a different one will seem daunting. But you will discover
that learning one program gives you a big leg up on the next one.
And you will develop a tremendous senae of empowerment when you
move on to your second type of software. Once you see how easy
the second one is, you will want to learn more.
WHAT'S OUT THERE
SPREADSHEETS
DOS: The most popular products are Lotus 1-2-3 and Quattro
Pro. They're largely interchangeable, though Ouattro Pro has better graphing functions and may be a little slicker to uae.
WINDOWS: Ouattro Pro for Windows seems to be getting the best
reviews. Lotus 1-2-3 and Excel (best known aa a Macintosh
spreadsheet) are also out with Windows veraiona.
BARGAINS: Ouattro Pro Special Edition, a slightly modified
version of an earlier edition of Quattro Pro, which you can buy
for less than 980; Lotus 1-2-3 for Home, available for under
9100.
DATABASE MANAGERS:
DOS: Among journalists, FoxPro and Paradox are the most popular programs. Paradox is probably easier to learn and to teach
to others. FoxPro is somewhat faster and perhaps more versatile.
There are tons of others: Alpha Four, dBase, SuperBaae and Q&A,

just to name a few. If you don't need a relational database manager (one allowing you to combine data from two or more tablea),
Reflex is awonderful program that is extremely powerful and easy
to learn how to use.
WINDOWS: Some people swear by Paradox for Windows; others say
it's too different from Paradox for DOS. FoxPro for DOS users
seem to be able to migrate fairly easily into FoxPro for Windows.
Then there's Access, which is Microsoft's effort to penetrate the
Windows database market. The windows databases sacrifice some
number-crunching speed, but they're more user-friendly.
BARGAINS: Paradox Special Edition, like its Quattro Pro
counterpart, is a slightly stripped-down version of an older version of Paradox. You can buy it for lees than $70. Unless you
are a computer programmer, l t will do everything the more ex- pensive veraion of Paradox will do. Reflex and Q + E Database
Editor are also bargains, with list prices of lees than 8300 and
market prices of 8200 or leas.
INTEGRATED PACKAGES: If you're trying to get started quickly,
you could do a lot worse than one of several programs that incorporate spreadsheet, database, word processor and more. The
best known are Microsoft Works and Lotusworks. Both list for 8149
and can be bought retail for about 5100. If you're really cheap,
buy Eight-in-One, which is available for lea8 than $35. You'll
aacrifice aome bells and whistles and ease of use, but it works
quite effectively.

