Doctors on drugs
And other physician problems
How to uncover the hidden world of medical regulators
Paul D'Ambrosio, Investigations Editor, Asbury Park (NJ) Press
NICAR 2002
pmd@app.com
732-643-4261
Often called the “white wall of silence,” critics of the medical community lament that doctors
protect their own, even in extreme cases involving incompetence and gross negligence. The
Press explored that issue in its five-day series, “First, Tell No One.” (www.app.com/medboard)
The 2002 series looked at two major aspects of our physician regulatory board – substance
abuse by doctors and how the board disciplined its own. What we found is a super-secret
physician alcohol and drug treatment program run by doctors with the blessing of the board. The
program is so confidential, not even board members know the names of enrollees. This is a
common set-up in most states, but one that gives rise to the question: how well is the public
protected from impaired physicians?
From a journalistic standpoint, such stories offer the exploration of public policy questions that
affect the health and welfare of the general public. There are good arguments on both sides of
the issues. There are also many people willing to talk about their experiences with the medical
board, which provide readers with compelling, human impact stories.
Using Access, the Press turned seven years of board minutes and public discipline reports into a
database that detailed the type of offense, the severity of the sanction and a brief summary of
events. Our results were turned into the attached info graphic. Even when doctors drop out of the
state-sanctioned substance abuse program, and are publicly disciplined, most get their licenses
back within a few months. And revocation of a license is never permanent in New Jersey. Of the
83 doctors who lost their licenses in the seven years, 24 returned to practice.
A quarter of all suspensions were stayed. Even in cases of gross negligence that resulted in
serious injury or death, a third of the sanctions were in the form of a letter of reprimand.
Here are suggestions for sources and story development:
n

n

Build your own database of medical discipline actions from the board minutes. Get a copy
of your medical board’s own database of doctors. That database will give you
standardized names and addresses so all you have to do is add more fields to build your
own disciplined doctor file.
Get as much detail into your narratives as possible, but keep the “offense” and
“sanctions” fields simple and to a minimum (no more than six codes for each field,
otherwise the analysis gets hairy). We used such codes as “M” for misconduct, “Rx” for
drug abuse, and “S” for suspensions. Also, set up three fields for suspensions: Number of
months, months actually served, and months served as probation. This is a screen shot
of part of our database:

You may find that many suspensions are retroactive to when a doctor was in rehab. The
Public Citizen book “Questionable Doctors” can offer a detailed summary of individual
sanctions in your state.
n Use Lexis-Nexis’ civil court (ie: NJCIVL library) and news clips files. We downloaded all
medical malpractice suits (use the term “med mal!” to narrow in your search) for NJ over
a 10-year period. Using Monarch, the data was parsed into two databases: plaintiff and
defendant. The case number served as a common field. You can use this as a way to
find doctors who have been sued a number of times and to provide a general summary of
malpractice actions in your state. We found that while the New Jersey medical board
must review all malpractice verdicts and settlements (1,000 over seven years) it only
sanctioned three doctors stemming from those malpractice actions. Be sure to review the
court files of any case you will write about. Lexis is not 100 percent accurate when it
comes to the final outcome of cases.
n Look for partnership disputes between doctors in your local courthouse. These suits,
heard in equity or chancery court, are not listed in Lexis. But, they can offer a goldmine of
detail about substance abuse allegations. Since the disputes are about money and profit
sharing and not malpractice, you may be able to find doctors telling all about their
partner’s competence and habits in sworn statements.
n Reach out to patients who have complained to the medical board. The public’s perception
of the board is one of law enforcement: if a doctor does something wrong, he or she
should lose their medical license. But the board sees its role as corrective, not punitive. If
they can rehabilitate an incompetent doctor with more training, then their mission is done,
the logic goes. Malpractice attorneys may be able to point you to former clients who have
filed complaints with the board.
n Hook up early with your state’s medical society, generally the largest professional group
in the state, to get a balanced picture of how they see their role in keeping substance
abusing or incompetent doctors away from patients. Other sources: malpractice plaintiff
and defense lawyers, lawyers who appear before the medical board defending doctors,
physicians, consumer groups like the People’s Medical Society in Allentown, Pa., and
Public Citizen, the Federation of State Medical Boards (a trade group for all medical
oversight boards in the U.S.), patients, and, of course, doctors.

