EQUITY IN SCHOOL SPENDING
Holly Hacker
Education reporter
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
hhacker@post-dispatch.com
NICAR 2002, Philadelphia

In 1993, the courts threw out Missouri’s school funding system. The judge in the
case declared that because of huge gaps in spending, public schools ranged from
“golden” to “god-awful.” So the state created a new funding formula intended to be more
equitable. But educators and lawmakers complained that disparities still existed.
The education reporters at the St. Louis Post-Dispatch decided to tackle the
school funding issue. We knew it was going to come up for debate in the next legislative
session, and across the Mississippi River, Illinois lawmakers also grappled with the issue.
Here was a chance to test my skills as the education team’s CAR specialist. I had
used Microsoft Excel and Access and recently learned SPSS. Still, I would suffer
headaches and emit primal screams before our three-part series ran in the fall of 2000,
after about three months of work.
We wanted to know if school districts spent about the same amount on each child.
Official state figures don’t tell the whole story. Just as it costs more to live in Chicago
than in Peoria, some districts have to pay more for teachers and resources based on their
location. Plus, children with disabilities or other special needs cost more to educate. So
we wanted to compensate for those differences.
I called various school finance experts and struck gold with the National Center
for Education Statistics, part of the U.S. Department of Education. A researcher in the
school finance division pointed me to a bunch of studies and sources. I learned about
something called the geographic cost of education index, which lets you adjust for cost
differences by school district. The index is based mostly upon salaries for teachers with
comparable experience, plus other costs.
Through NCES I also found a way to adjust for differences in student costs.
Generally, children with disabilities cost 2.3 times as much to educate, while poor
children and children with limited English cost 1.2 times as much. So if a district has
1,000 students, and 200 of them are poor and another 50 are in special education, it’s like
of educating 1,105 “regular” students. That is, 750 + (200 x 1.2) + (50 x 2.3) = 1,105.
Getting the data
I pulled data from several sources.
• I downloaded the cost-of- education index from the NCES web site.
• The Illinois education department e-mailed spreadsheets with finance data and
student enrollment, including counts for special education, limited-English
and poor students in each district. (Poor students are defined as those who get
free or low-cost meals through the federal school lunch program.)

•
•

Missouri’s education department e-mailed me a monster text file with detailed
financial information for each district.
I pulled student information for Missouri districts from an Access database I
had already created.

For starters, we had to determine how to count students. Illinois gives districts
money based on student attendance. Missouri uses “eligible pupils,” which is like
attendance, but not exactly. We picked student enrollment as our measure, because even
if kids don’t come to school every day, the district still has to pay for their teachers,
textbooks, utilities, etc. Plus, poor districts tend to have lower attendance, which inflates
the amount spent per pupil.
We also had to define expenditures. We used operating expenditures, which
includes costs to run the district but not capital costs. Luckily, officials at the Missouri
and Illinois education departments provided data willingly and helped me make sense of
the numbers and financial terms.
Let the number-crunching begin
I imported my spreadsheets and tables into Microsoft Access, then joined them so
I had a single table for each state. From there, I divided each district’s operating
expenditures by its cost-of-education index to get adjusted expenditures. I adjusted
student enrollment using the weights for special education, limited-English and poor
students. Then I divided the adjusted expenditures by adjusted enrollment to get adjusted
spending per pupil.
Actual expenditures = Adjusted expenditures
Cost-of-education index

Regular pupils + (2.3*special ed pupils) + (1.3*poor pupils) + (1.3*LEP pupils) = Adjusted enrollment
Adjusted expenditures = Adjusted spending per pupil
Adjusted enrollment

So you might have two districts that spend $5,000 per student in actual dollars.
But factor in location and student need, and one district could have more “buying power”
than the other - say, $5,200 per student vs. $4,600 per student.
I turned to SPSS for further analysis and calculated the minimum, maximum and
average spending per student for each state, in both actual and adjusted dollars, weighting
for district size. One school finance expert suggested we look at the coefficient of
variation (scary statistical term alert!), which is the standard deviation of spending per
pupil divided by the average spending per pupil. It gives you the range that about twothirds of students fall within. That way, you can see if there are still sizable gaps in
spending, even when you disregard the extremes (but still look at those, because they
make for make great stories.)

2

In both states, the gap between the highest- and lowest spending districts shrank
using adjusted dollars, but not entirely. This table shows Missouri’s results.

Average
Std. Deviation
Minimum
Maximum
Coefficient of variation

Actual EPP Adjusted EPP
$
5,398
$ 4,409
$
1,075
$
665
$
3,499
$ 3,246
$ 10,503
$ 9,499
0.20
0.15

Note: EPP stands for expenditures per pupil.

In actual dollars, Missouri spent an average of $5,398 on each public school child,
with a range from $3,499 to $10,503. Two-thirds of children are in districts that spend
within 20 percent of the average – that is, from $4,324 to $6,472 per pupil.
But adjust for geographic costs and student need, Missouri spent an average of
$4,409 per pupil. The range narrows, from $3,246 to $9,499. Two-thirds of children
attend districts that spend within 15 percent of the average – that is, from $3,743 to
$5,075 per pupil.
This suggests that Missouri spending is more equitable than it first appears on
paper, yet there are still considerable variations.
Here’s the same analysis for Illinois:

Average
Std. Deviation
Minimum
Maximum
Coefficient of variation

Actual EPP
Adjusted EPP
$
6,352
$
5,003
$
1,581
$
1,165
$
3,048
$
2,780
$
15,348
$
13,961
0.25
0.23

As with Missouri, adjusted spending is less than actual spending. But Illinois has
bigger disparity in spending, and the gap doesn’t shrink much (2 percentage points) when
you adjust for geographic cost and student need.
Okay, so we know the gaps still exist. Why? For answers, I ran some regressions
in SPSS of school spending against district poverty rates, tax rates, property tax bases,
and other variables. We found that local tax rates explained about a third of the variation
in Missouri district spending. The property tax base explained about a third of the
variation in Illinois. Our stories explained that Missouri rewards communities willing to
tax themselves, while in Illinois, district spending rests more upon local property wealth.
I tried to see if differences in spending had any effect on state test scores but did
not find a strong relationship. A pattern may exist, but I think we’d have to look at more
specific categories – say, dollars spent on classroom instruction. Plus, because test scores

3

can vary from school to school, it would be better to look at spending on the individual
school (not district) level.
Another challenge was deciding how to report our findings. Because we used a
different student measure (enrollment), the actual spending we calculated did not match
what districts report. Would readers get the distinction? We simplified by grouping
districts as high, medium and low spenders based first on actual spending, then on
adjusted spending. That way you could see that a district that appears to be a big-spender
– say, a large urban district with lots of poor kids – really isn’t. The district just has to
spend a lot to bring their kids up to a basic level.
Here’s some advice if you attempt a similar project:
• Follow what I call the Rule of 3.7 - Estimate the time you think the project
will take, then multiply by 3.7. Or more.
• Be shameless in consulting with experts. Get their advice on how to design
your analysis. What you’re doing has been done before, so you can learn
about pitfalls and caveats up front.
• Get those experts to review your findings.
• Work with graphics editors. This is complicated stuff, and you should present
your findings so they make sense to readers but don’t overwhelm them.
• Once you’ve done the analysis, get into some schools. So one district spends
$5,000 per child and another spends $10,000. How does that play out in the
classroom? Good anecdotes will liven up the story, and help people care.
Resources:
National Center for Education Statistics, www.nces.ed.gov/edfin – Click on
“publications” for stuff like “A Primer for Making Cost Adjustments in Education,”
“Public School Finance Programs of the U.S. and Canada” (a good overview of each
state), “Inequalities in Public School District Revenues” and “Geographic Variations in
Public Schools’ Costs.”
William J. Fowler, program officer at the NCES education finance statistical center, at
(202) 219-1921 or William_Fowler@ed.gov
Education Commission of the States, www.ecs.org Click on “education issues” and look
under “finance.” Media contact is Kim Sharpe, (303) 299-3680 or ksharpe@ecs.org
John Augenblick, Augenblick & Myers, Inc. www.aandm.org – a consulting firm in
Denver that works with state legislatures and education agencies on school finance
issues. (303) 293-2175
Lawrence O. Picus, an associate professor in the School of Education at the University of
Southern California and director of the Center for Research in Education Finance
(CREF). (213) 740-2175 or lpicus@usc.edu
(Note – An article similar to this appeared in the July/August 2001 issue of Uplink.)

4

