Tip sheet: Digging for stories in the statehouse
Holly A. Heyser
State government editor, St. Paul Pioneer Press (hheyser@pioneerpress.com)
President, Association of Capitol Reporters and Editors (www.capitolbeat.org)
Free your mind from the intentionally limited view of state finances that you find on those “convenient”
handouts.
Don’t ask a bureaucrat to tell you about budget trends; ask the bureaucrat to give you the raw data. Plug
it into a spreadsheet. Then you decide how to crunch it: cuts as a percentage of spending areas.
Spending areas as a percentage of whole budgets. Revenues compared to forecasts. Spending
compared to appropriated amounts. Cash balances in the middle of deficits? You betcha.
Prerequisites: Curiosity; ability to conquer fear of numbers.
Helpful: Spreadsheet skills; a smart person in administration or legislature who will help you learn to read
revenue reports, forecasts and budgets.
Advice: Always run your numbers by The Authorities. If they can’t pick holes in what you’ve uncovered,
you’re in good shape.
Think small. It’s not all about acquiring big government data sets. Get data — off of web sites, on paper,
whatever — and make your own spreadsheets and databases. Track budget trends over years. If you’re
really ambitious, add the annual consumer price index and population numbers so you can adjust per
capita spending for inflation. When the next budget comes out, you’ve got the depth and context in your
first day story, and your pals will be tearing through those lame handouts wondering who gave you that
great stuff.
Prerequisites: Time or perseverance. Creating databases and spreadsheets that actually tell you
something takes time — time to enter data, time to verify it and time to play with formulas, charts and
queries until they give you what you want every time.
Helpful: A co-worker who will help you double-check the data you’ve entered by reading it to you, so you
don’t have to take your eyes off the screen.
Advice: See previous advice. Trends will be obvious but reasons for them often won’t — perhaps one
agency’s budget doubled one year because its took on extra responsibilities, not because the cabinet
secretary was sleeping with the agency head.
Don’t follow the money — sometimes it doesn’t follow the beaten path. If you’re blessed with a good
campaign finance database in your state, look for hardcore party supporters who AREN’T contributing to
their party’s guy this year. Also: did the people who supported the loser in the primary transfer loyalties —
and checks — to the winner? Or better yet, are a lot of people switching parties? What does this say
about the candidates?
Prerequisites: A good, multi-year database, preferably one that uniquely identifies each contributor. You
can live without unique identifiers, but you’ll have to do a lot of cleanup to figure whether “Williams III,
Thomas J.” and “Thomas Williams III” are the same person.
Helpful: Sources in the giving community; an interesting race to cover in the first place.
Advice: Hunt down the wayward contributors and find out why they’re behaving differently this year.
They’ll tell you tons about the candidates, and probably tip you off to the outcome of the race.

