NICAR Philadelphia March 14-17 2002
Columbus Dispatch Statehouse reporter Jon Craig’s tips:
Time: It's your biggest enemy and best friend. Editors and sources will compete
for it. What's the most important task today, next week, next month, this year?
Send yourself voicemail or email messages.
Think big, but practical: The most obvious enterprise stories are the ones we
never get around to because of time, complexity, even fear. Identify your state's
major issues: health care, schools, gambling, tobacco money, investments, death
penalty. Does your coverage mesh with the public's hot buttons: judicial
corruption, wasteful spending, energy costs, terrorism. Do your editors’ listen to
suggestions and trust your instincts?
Impact: On cutting-edge stories, it's you against them. Be organized. Gather as
many documents as possible. Make many Freedom of Information requests.
Paper records are valuable long after the initial article. Cast several fishing lines
at once and see if you get any bites. Make sure to follow through so agencies
won’t assume delay will keep you away.
Trust your gut: Even if an official tries to narrow your FOI request, talk you out
of a story, give you another story, calls another reporter ''the expert'' -- forge
ahead.
Get out of the office: Meet sources for coffee, stroll through the Statehouse,
interview "real people" at their homes. Clear your head; get away from the
phone.
At great newspapers, staffers share ideas: Treat every tip seriously. Be
honest with sources. If you can't jump on a story, pass the tip to another reporter.
You’ll be rewarded.
Investigative reporter's block: Don't postpone important interviews because of
fear. Envision the final product ahead of time. What key sources need to be
confronted early?
On your own time: Chase time-consuming conspiracies after work. Troll the
Internet at night or before work. In-person interviews can be done en route to the
office. Court transcripts or printouts of complex material, payrolls and data can be
skimmed in front of the TV. Make spreadsheets of finance information. Sorting
records and data helps focus.
Resources: Keep old state employee directories or annual reports. When a
consultant, lobbyist or campaign contributor turns up, check to see if he/she
worked in government. Keep old calendar books to reconstruct calls and
chronologies.

Old stories, if good, never die: Make state and federal document requests
involving former investigations, prison riots, death penalty cases, etc. For
instance, public record requests related to the fatal 1970 shootings at Kent State
University unearthed autopsy photographs as well as Ohio Highway Patrol, Ohio
National Guard and FBI records that had never been released.

