Measuring equity in schools
Doug Haddix, projects editor
The Columbus Dispatch
dhaddix@dispatch.com
March 16, 2002

Any time you tackle the topic of equity in education, be prepared to fight for data. The stakes are
high – basically, are some kids getting the shaft? So educators and officials likely will work hard to block
access to key information. Or, once you get the data, they will try to spin your findings through a haze of
educationese.
Don’t be intimidated. Prepare a list of key areas you want to measure. Figure out who has the
data. Build in time for negotiations to get the data and time for the analysis.
The Dispatch published a four-day series called “Dividing Lines” in June 2000. It’s online at
http://www.dispatch.com/news/special/schools/cpsmain.html. Our mission was to see whether the return
to neighborhood elementary schools in Columbus four years earlier had fueled inequities among the
65,000 students. The school board had passed an equity policy to placate people who wanted to maintain
racially and economically balanced schools through cross-town busing. With the end of busing for
integration, we set out to measure whether the district was keeping its promise.
Look for data in expected places as well as unexpected places. Here’s what we gathered and
analyzed:

Student and teacher master files
These proved the toughest to get but the most valuable. The Columbus School District, like most
districts, maintains extensive computer records on its 65,000 students and 11,000 employees. In
Columbus, the district keeps 19 separate tables, which can be linked only by an employee Social Security
number or a student ID number. After seven weeks of delays, the district provided all of the data with
randomly generated IDs so that privacy concerns would not be compromised. For benchmarks, we
analyzed the last full year of busing for integration and the most current school year with neighborhood
schools. The master files helped us answer a lot of questions, including:
• How had the racial composition of the 88 elementary schools changed in four years since the end
of busing for integration?
• Had there been significant changes in the racial composition or experience levels of the teaching
staff?
• How had spending levels changed by elementary school? Were schools with higher percentages
of poor students getting additional resources?
• Had student absences and transfers changed significantly at the schools?
Just as importantly, the master files allowed us to link our findings to other sources of data at the
school-building level. The detailed demographics about the students and teachers at each of the 88
schools could be connected to a lot of other information.

Ohio proficiency test results
Ohio requires five tests (math, reading, science, citizenship and writing) at several grade levels,
including 4th grade. The Ohio Department of Education posts detailed scores by school on its Web site in
Excel format for easy downloading. Schools and educators now can receive cash bonuses for big
improvements in test scores. With the return to neighborhood schools, the elementaries on the outskirts
of Columbus became more white and more affluent; test scores rose significantly. Schools in the core
city, on the other hand, became highly concentrated in terms of poverty and minority enrollment; test
scores plummeted. Bottom line: The more affluent schools received bonuses and other incentives while
the poorest schools received nothing. The resource gap widened.

Student school assignment records
With the end of busing for integration, Columbus had to reassign its students to neighborhood
schools. An electronic database included a breakdown of the attendance zones for every school: the
number of students, their race, gender and assigned school. Our analysis found odd boundaries that
seemed designed to produce schools with disproportionately white or minority makeup. We also
discovered nearly all-white or all-minority schools that were seriously overcrowded while ample space
could be found nearby at schools with the opposite racial composition. One overcrowded primarily
minority school, for instance, had no art room; instead, all of the supplies and learning materials were
kept in a cart and wheeled from classroom to classroom. Other less crowded schools (mainly white) had
separate art rooms well-stocked with supplies. Despite the district’s denial, the attendance zones for each
school seemed to be drawn deliberately for racial reasons in many cases.

Uniform school accounting system
The district tracks spending by building through detailed expenditure codes. With this database,
we analyzed spending by building and looked for racial or economic disparities. This data also included
receipts from parent-teacher groups and business partnerships; we found dramatic differences by school
in the money raised for special programs, playground equipment, field trips and library books. The district
did not monitor these resources, so some schools had tens of thousands of dollars in additional resources
each year while others received virtually nothing. No effort had been made to balance those types of
resources or to use district funds to level the playing field.

Free and reduced-price lunch data
A separate paper file tracked the percentages of students eligible for this program, a key indicator
of poverty. We keyboarded the information into Excel for analysis.

Independent audit
Phi Delta Kappa, an independent company that audits school districts, had recently finished a
thorough audit at the district’s request. Poring through the extensive report gave us many leads and
helped direct us to types of resources to track down, such as library books.

Map key results
We found it helpful to map our key findings to look for geographic trends among the 88
elementary schools. That enabled us to point out, for instance, that the highest-paid teachers were at
schools in the outer edges of the Columbus School District – areas that are more affluent and whiter than
schools in the core city. Using ArcView mapping software, we were able to see trends in our data much
more easily.

