A plan for tracking the local economy
By John Byczkowski
The Cincinnati Enquirer
NICAR @ Philadelphia 2002
Your editor asks, “How’s the local economy?” What your editor probably means is “Is
the local economy expanding, standing still or contracting? Is business in a mood to
expand? Are consumers in a mood to spend?”
Forget about finding “leading indicators.” For most of the country, these kinds of data
don’t exist. You’ll be ahead of the game if you can just describe where the local economy
has been recently.
You’ll find that there’s actually a fair amount of data out there about local economic
activity. The challenge is whittling it down to a manageable number of key indicators that
you can obtain reliably, and then track regularly.
Key indicators: These eight indicators should be obtainable on a monthly basis for just
about anywhere in the country. If you follow these on a monthly basis you’ll have a good
handle on the state of your local economy:
•

•
•
•

Employment:
q Total non-agricultural wage and salary employment
q Manufacturing employment
q New unemployment claims
Construction:
q New home starts (number of starts, rather than dollar value)
q Nonresidential construction (dollar value of building permits)
Spending
q Retail sales
Production
q Average weekly hours, manufacturing
q Industrial electricity sales

Getting data
1. Employment data: The pace of job growth is probably the best indicator of economic
health, not to mention consumer confidence. Consumers don’t spend if they don’t feel
secure in their jobs. Start at http://www.bls.gov/data/home.htm. This is the gateway to the
huge stores of data at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. You’ll be
able to get data – in some cases down to the county level – stretching back as far as the
1940s. Focus on this section: “State and Area Employment, Hours, and Earnings.” You’ll
be able to find numbers on total employment, manufacturing employment and average
workweek, and a lot more. That will help you get the historical databases set up, but new
data – as it’s issued – will come from your state’s labor market information division. Ask
for the division’s schedule of release dates, and ask what other data they collect. Talk to
an expert before you use data older than 1990.

Page 2
2. New unemployment claims: One of the few “leading” indicators you’ll get on a local
level. Check with your state’s employment services division and ask about
unemployment compensation data. Many states can provide this data weekly. It’s
unlikely that the data will be totaled for your MSA, so you may have to add it up
yourself. The data typically report how many people file claims at particular offices, but
keep in mind also that many states are going to telephone systems, so try to find data on
the people who file claims by phone in your area.
3. New home starts: Strong activity means jobs for builders and reflects consumers’
willingness to make long-term financial commitments. Check with your local home
builders association. The state’s labor market information division may also provide this.
4. Commercial (nonresidential) construction: Activity here means jobs for
construction workers and reflects the willingness of business to invest and expand. The
F.W. Dodge division of the McGraw-Hill Construction Information Group is the main
source of data on construction activity. The division issues press releases monthly with
construction totals for nonresidential construction. That includes manufacturing,
commercial, education and medical buildings. One caveat: The totals in the press releases
are preliminary and you don’t get the final number until the next year. The revisions can
be as much as 50 percent. It’s a pain, but it’s the best that’s available. Contact F.W.
Dodge PR at (212) 904-2439, or Bob Murray, VP economic affairs, 781-860-6623.
5. Retail sales: Reflects consumers’ willingness to spend. The U.S. Commerce
Department used to provide these figures, but stopped doing that around 1996. If you
have a county sales tax, you might be able to get those collections from your state’s
taxation department.
6. Industrial electricity sales. This reflects the level of manufacturing activity in your
area. Ask your local electrical utility if they’d provide this for you. My local utility folks
used to provide me with the figure in kilowatt hours, but today they provide an index so
they don’t have to disclose Kwh. They can also break this down by SIC code.

What do you do with the data?
1. Chart it. You’ll understand it better if you visualize it.
2. Run comparisons. Keep in mind almost all the data you get will not be seasonally
adjusted. That means you can’t really compare February’s numbers to January’s; you
have to compare them to February a year ago.
q

q
q
q

Calculate changes both as percentage change and nominal change. Data will be
clearer to the reader you say the economy created 10,000 new jobs, rather than
saying the number of jobs grew 2 percent.
Calculate year-to-year change.
Run a 12-month moving average and chart it against the main data line. This will
smooth out seasonal changes and allow you to see trends.
Calculate a year-to-date total and change from a year earlier. This is helpful with
indicators that are cumulative, such as construction or unemployment claims.

Page 3
3. Be mindful of revisions in the data. Labor data is revised every March for the
previous two years. As mentioned above, the construction data can be substantially
revised.

Analysis of the data
Are you kidding? Do you think you’re some kind of economist? Analysis is tough for a
lot of reasons. If you’re collecting data for March, you’ll have some in April but you
won’t have all of it till the end of May. Also, it’s sometimes tough to know exactly what
these indicators are indicating. All this makes it difficult, for instance, to build a local
economic index. Think your readers will be interested in June to see your March index?
The data is a conversation starter. The best you can do is eyeball it, get a sense of
where things are going and who’s most affected, and begin your reporting.

Who do you talk to?
Forget economists, unless you have a real ace in your area. If you avidly collect data
about your local economy, it’s guaranteed you’re going to know more than any of the
local economists. Try talking to:
q

q

q
q
q
q
q
q
q

CEOs and CFOs: Are you expanding your company? Hiring? What’s your
capital budget? Is that higher or lower than a year ago? What are your customers
saying?
Commercial loan officers: Who’s borrowing? Who’s not? What are they
borrowing for? (About four times a year the Federal Reserve conducts a “Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.” Find it on the Fed’s
web site and read it for ideas.)
Accountants: Ask if they can put you in touch with any of their clients who
might fit your story?
The people who run your local unemployment offices
Economic development people: Are businesses looking for expansion
possibilities?
Purchasing managers: How are you managing cash?
Temporary services companies: Where’s the biggest demand for workers right
now? Is it hard finding people? What kind of skills are in short supply?
Human resources people: Are you hiring? Are you having trouble finding
people?
So-called “real people”: Suck it up and talk to people walking around in malls.
How’s your job? Is your employer hiring or laying off? Do you think you’ll have
a job in a year? Have you cut back on your spending? Are your neighbors losing
their jobs?

Other data
1. The unemployment rate: I don’t include it in the primary list of indicators to follow
because I think it’s more important to know the rate at which the number of jobs is
growing (or not growing). But it’s still worth knowing, and it’s probably the one thing

Page 4
your editor will ask for. Keep in mind your local rate may not be seasonally adjusted,
which means it’s not comparable to the national rate. A national unadjusted rate is
available at http://stats.bls.gov.
2. Profits: When businesses have healthy profits, they hire, they expand, they invest in
new businesses that provide future growth. When their profits aren’t healthy, they cut
their work forces, they close factories, and they cut back on investment, throwing their
futures into doubt. Are the companies in your area, overall, making money? At least once
a year, take a look at how everybody’s doing, and what’s driving their profits.
3. Browse Census Quickfacts (http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/) for ideas.
4. The Economic Census: Every five years the Census Bureau does an economic census,
and it gives a great picture of business in your area. Trouble is the last one was 1997. The
next one will be done in December 2002, and the data will start being released in 2004.
Stick this one in your pocket.
5. Read the Beige Book. It’s at the Fed web site, http://www.federalreserve.gov, under
“Monetary Policy.” You’ll get story ideas about how business is in your region.
6. Bureau of Economic Analysis: http://www.bea.doc.gov. There’s a “State and Local
Area Data” section, and check for more data under “Publications.”
7. Commercial Real Estate: Somebody in your area is tracking commercial and
industrial properties, watching vacancy rates and rents. Most surveys of this type are
done quarterly.
8. WARN notices of big layoffs: Your state should be able to provide these to you, by
county. Are big layoffs increasing in your area?
9. Manpower survey: A quarterly survey of company hiring plans. Contact Manpower
in Milwaukee 414-961-1000 or 414-961-1048.
10. Economic Cycle Research Center: 212-557-7788. Anirvan Banerji, Director of
Research (ext. 11) Julienne Kim, Publications Manager (ext. 10), or
http://www.businesscycle.com. This used to be part of Columbia University, and these folks
pioneered leading indicators. They’re good patient people who can explain a lot.

John Byczkowski
The Cincinnati Enquirer
312 Elm St.
Cincinnati OH 45202
513-768-8377
johnb@enquirer.com

