Education: Measuring Tests, Examining Equity
Chris Roberts
The State newspaper, Columbia, S.C.
mcroberts@thestate.com
Nicar at Philadelphia-- March 16, 2002

A few tips for measuring school tests results and report cards:
Get the data early.
The longer the lead time, of course, the more time you have to prepare. You'll make fewer mistakes, and you might
catch mistakes made by the source of the data.

Question authority.
Many bureaucrats are so busy compiling data that they don't take time to figure out the forests for the trees. So do
your own analysis, and question the analysis that educators do for you. They might have made mistakes -- or put their own
slant on things by providing the only favorable results. And while you're at it, question their operational definitions, such as
reminding readers that a state's graduation exam is set to measure a ninth-grade education.

Check your work
When you can, get third parties (such as statisticians or education professors or smart CAR folks) to double-check
your findings. Ask them to suggest analyses that you didn't think of. And be transparent with the education bureaucrats, too.
You don't have to agree with what they think of your findings, but sometimes they spot holes in your analysis and save you
from embarrassment.

Look for outliers.
Those deviations are usually errors or news. Run regressions (the usual suspect is poverty and test scores) to find
places that are doing better or worse than expected.

Track cohorts, not necessarily grades.
It's not necessarily fair to compare this year's fourth graders against last year's fourth graders. Whenever possible,
compare this year's fifth graders against last year's fourth graders. If you can fight the battle and have the computer space and
expertise, get student-level data for comparisons.

Stockpile the data.
Most new education data is an update of last year’s data. Having years of old data is the only way to spot trends.

Find a way to get the numbers onto your Web site.
Parents, real-estate agents, and other interested parties will thank you.

Explain the information better than the educators.
Readers will appreciate your attempt to turn edu-speak and statistical gibberish into plain English.

A few good Web sites
Education Writers Association -- www.ewa.org
Southern Regional Education Board -- www.sreb.org
The federal government’s statistical site -- nces.ed.gov
International archive of education statistics -- www.icpsr.umich.edu/IAED/studies.html
A pretty good list of education statistics -- docs.lib.duke.edu/federal/guides/ed_stats.html
Journalist Toolbox education links -- www.geocities.com/mike_reilley_2000/newswriting/education.html
Standards for states -- dir.yahoo.com/Education/K_12/Curriculum_Standards/By_Region/U_S_States/
Public Agenda -- www.publicagenda.org/specials/learning/learning.htm

