Tracking campaign donors through City Hall
For NICAR’s conference in Philadelphia
March 16, 2002
Bob Warner
Philadelphia Daily News
215-854-5885
warnerb@phillynews.com
If you’re a reporter covering City Hall or state government, maintaining databases on political contributors
is essential. In most places, you can’t really understand what’s happening in local government or politics
without knowing who is financing the campaigns. The Shays-Meehan bill in Washington might push even
more political money into state and local coffers, so you’ve got to develop a strategy to track it. Here are a
few suggestions:
1. In City Hall or your county seat, spend some time in whatever office is responsible for
maintaining campaign finance data. Try to get to know the people who file away all the reports –
it’s a thankless job, and the people who do it well are probably just as shocked as you at the
amounts of money now influencing the political process. Prepare a list of all the public officials
you’re interested in and take a fast look at their most recent reports. Make sure they’re up to date,
and figure out which ones are already using computers to prepare their paper filings.
2. If your paper is wealthy enough, you can hire someone to input data into your own databases. If
not, you’ve got two choices: start typing yourself, or call the pols, asking them to share the donor
data that they’ve already fed into their own computers. At first blush, this may go against your
grain. Nobody wants to ask favors from the people they cover. But that’s the wrong way to look at
it. This is no personal favor. Your public officials are asking city contractors and other people to
give them hundreds or thousands of dollars. All you’re asking them to do is facilitate public
disclosure of their fund-raising. Surely they have no objection to that, do they? If they do, ask
them to explain it. Very few will be willing to say for the record that they want to obscure the
names of their contributors. In Pennsylvania, the major candidates for governor, mayor and other
major offices are now pretty well-trained to provide the news media, voluntarily, with diskettes or
e-mail attachments identifying their contributors and campaign expenses.
3. Find a way to get lists of contributors into your newspaper. Every time we do it, we get story tips
from people who suddenly understand why they got beat on that last contract awarded by City
Hall. Don’t be shy about calling people to find out why they donate. Sometimes they’ll be
remarkably candid.
4. Join the listserv run by the Campaign Finance Information Center, at www.campaignfinance.org.
Aron Pilhofer is developing some software to deal with some of the knottier problems we face
trying to link donors with government contracts, such as the fuzzy matches between the business
names listed in campaign filings and the business names used in contracts. He says he’ll be
looking for beta-testers within several months.

5. Be creative about campaign finance stories and charts. Write about the biggest donations from
people outside the city or state, who won’t be able to vote for the candidate they’re sending money
to. Write about the people who are giving to three or four candidates in the same campaign. Pay
attention to contributions from out-of-state PACs – frequently they’ll be raising money under rules
that are different from those that prevail in your own state, for instance, taking money from
corporations. When you write about various campaign issues, include a box with relevant
campaign finance data – lists of union contributions to go with a story on organized labor, for
instance, or lists of real estate and developer contributions to go with a story on suburban sprawl.

