COVER STORY

here are almost 9 million uniformed police officers and civilian
police employees on the public
payroll in this country according
to the FBI. Their performance, good and
bad, has an enormous impact on their
communities.
In recent years, some of the hardest hitting investigative news stories have dealt
with the sometimes secretive world of law
enforcement. This certainly isn’t new territory for investigative reporters, but these
days it seems we’re doing it better.
Journalists all over the country are finding new and innovative ways to expose the
shortcomings of their local law enforcement agencies – or the systems in which
agencies work. Using paper trails, databases and a lot of old-fashioned pavement
pounding, these reporters are bypassing
the notorious blue wall of silence and cutting through political smokescreens. In
doing so, they expose hidden dangers not
only to the public, but also to the officers
themselves.
In this issue, we’ve highlighted just a
few to show a range of possibilities. The
journalists behind these stories explain
the conception, techniques and impact of
their work.
Joe Donahue of The (Newark) Star-Ledger explains how a traffic stop by state
troopers on the New Jersey Turnpike
turned into an 18-month investigation of
the state police and racial profiling. The
investigation resulted in over 40 front-

18

page exclusives, the dismissal of the state
police superintendent, state and federal
investigations and a challenge to an ambitious governor’s political career.
Eric Mansfield of Akron’s WKYC-TV
describes how a tip he received in an elevator evolved into a one-week project
that exposed a sometimes life-threatening problem in police deployment. With
the help of a spreadsheet, Mansfield was
able to identify the misallocation of police
resources and manpower as well as the
neighborhoods and officers whose wellbeing it threatened.
Clint Riley details how the CamdenCherry Hill Courier-Post exposed Camden’s
high-priced police department’s failure to
protect citizens of one of America’s most
dangerous and cash-strapped cities. The
three-part series resulted in the appointment of the county prosecutor as monitor
over the department and the redeployment of officers to better protect the entire
city.
And Geoff Dougherty offers an excellent
tipsheet on analyzing police staffing.

THE IRE JOURNAL

COVER STORY

RACIAL PROFILING
BY JOE DONOHUE AND
KATHY BARRETT CARTER

I

n April 23, 1998, two New Jersey state troopers
pulled over a van carrying four young men
along the New Jersey Turnpike. When the van
began rolling slowly backward toward them,
the troopers fired 11 shots at the non-white
passengers, injuring three of them seriously.
With that incident, The Star-Ledger began
examining in detail the conduct of the state
police, an organization long held above scrutiny,
whose records concerning internal discipline
and arrest practices have always been closely
guarded.
Over an 18-month period, the Ledger published more than 40 major exclusive stories,

Continued on page 224

COSTLY COPS

RETIRING FORCE

BY CLINT RILEY

C

amden police Detective Pierre Robinson
wasn’t just any cop. Newly elected Mayor
Milton Milan handpicked the 13-year department
veteran to serve on his personal two-man security
detail.
Robinson and the mayor were together at all
hours. They were rarely seen apart.
Imagine the newsroom buzz in February
1998 when news leaked that federal authorities
suspected Robinson gave a banned IntraTec-9
assault pistol to an alleged East Camden drug
trafficker charged with running one of the city’s
most notorious drug markets.
A story linking the mayor’s bodyguard to
the gun hit the front page within days of federal
agents finding the weapon.

Continued on page 204

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2000

BY ERIC MANSFIELD

I

always tell people that if you want a big story
out of the cop shop, the best place to get the
scoop is the elevator.
That’s the way my two-part series “Cop Out”
was spawned.
I was riding the elevator at the Akron Police
Department when a patrol officer said, “I guess
you’re here about the big fight.”
I had no idea what he was talking about, but
often times, when cops see a reporter on the
elevator, they immediately assume you’re there
because of a certain story. If you play along,
you can get a scoop because the cop will have
anonymity inside the elevator.
The officer told me that a few patrol officers
were roughed up in a fight because there wasn’t

Continued on page 264

19

Photo: John O’Boyle Star-Ledger

COVER STORY

Governor Christie Whitman listens as Carson Dunbar, the new superintendent of the State Police, answers questions at a statehouse press
conference in Trenton.

many of them based on
records the state had
never before surren(CONT.)
dered to a news organization and which they
BY JOE DONOHUE AND KATHY BARRETT CARTER gave up only after a
prolonged legal battle.
On April 20, the
New Jersey attorney general released a report on
the state police admitting that “racial profiling
is real, not imagined,” the first such admission
by any state law enforcement agency in the
nation. Racial profiling is the practice of pulling
over motorists based on nothing more than the
color of their skin.
For investigative journalists, the story seems
to teach three things:
1. The need for ferocious perseverance on
a wide front – from reporters and editors to
lawyers.
Ledger reporters spent several months
following dead-end leads and tips about state

RACIAL PROFILING

22

police conduct, working fruitless stretches of
three to four weeks without a day off. The
Ledger’s lawyers battled for eight months to
get the critical state police records that helped
blow the lid off the story.
2. The importance of dedicating a team of
reporters to one story.
Not long after the shootings, editor Jim
Willse declared the story the newspaper’s
top priority. From the outset, two reporters
worked the state police story full-time under
Trenton Bureau Chief David Tucker. As leads
developed the team grew. For one prolonged
span, the Ledger had eight reporters working
the story full-time.
3. The idea that routine requests for the
most basic information can lead to remarkable
revelations.
In this case, the state’s refusal to provide
information about traffic stops, arrests, civilian
complaints and internal discipline became a
beacon for reporters. Each “no” meant that

THE IRE JOURNAL

COVER STORY

CONTINUED ON PAGE 24 ×

Photo: Vic Yepello Star-Ledger

the paper was asking the right questions and
hunting in the right places
The first break in the story came two weeks
after the shooting. In an interview with Trenton
reporter Kathy Barrett Carter, Public Defender
Frank Farrell revealed that, at one point, the public
defender’s office had kept a file on the alleged
profiling tendencies of trooper John Hogan, one of
the officers involved in the shooting
It would be six months before the next major
break. Just days after the shooting, the Ledger
asked the state police and the attorney general’s
office for information on turnpike traffic stops
as well as arrests broken down by race, age,
gender and offense. We also requested the
name of the arresting officer.
The state never directly refused to provide
the documents. Instead, it sought to wear down
the paper’s will with obfuscation, delays and
excuses that consumed several months.

For weeks the “matter
was under review.” For
several more weeks, the
data was being extracted
from the computer. Then
for another few weeks,
it was on the attorney
general’s desk, but he was
reviewing it to make sure
that undercover operations would not be jeopardized. And on it went,
with information always
just around the corner.
After months of delay, the attorney general’s
office finally turned over two months of data in
a form so obscure that it was unusable.
“That’s when we went nuclear,” said Tom
Curran, AME/Investigations, the editor who
had been handling the legal end of the story.
Confronted with 21 pages of useless data, the
newspaper’s lawyer made a final request to the
state to turn over the documents, saying the
paper was ready to go to court if denied.
Meanwhile on the journalistic front, statehouse
reporters met with an unusual array of excuses
when they asked the state police and the attorney
general for basic information about citizen
complaints. The paper wanted to know how many
citizen complaints the force had received over
a five-year period, and the discipline handed
out if any.

RESOURCES
tracked by the police department.
The story won the 1999 Pulitzer Prize for
Public Service.

“Downgrading the Offense”
The Philadelphia Inquirer, 1998
IRE No. 15007
In 1997, the Philadelphia Police Department released the underlying crime-by-crime
database used to construct the totals sent
to the FBI. Reporters at The Philadelphia
Inquirer noticed several weird trends when
they analyzed the data. Car thefts dropped
in the beginning of the year, only to boom
at the end. Attempted burglaries had all but
vanished and the aggravated assault rates
were remarkably low compared to murders.
Their curiosity piqued by these trends,
Inquirer reporters decided to expand their
analysis of the crime data beyond the traditional “most dangerous areas” stories. As
they continued to analyze the data, they also
began using computer mapping and interviewing former and current police officers and
commanders.The newspaper slowly began to
uncover the Philadelphia Police Department’s
long-time culture of downgrading crimes to
lessen their workload and improve the image
of the city.
As a result of the two-part series, the
department withdrew its FBI count figures
for 1996, 1997 and the first half of 1998, the
city controller’s office began auditing crime
statistics and the mayor’s office is no longer
celebrating a drop in crime. Unofficial figures
show a 9 percent rise in crime, which Mayor
Rendell attributed to the new honesty in
reporting, not a crime surge.

“Behind the Badge”
WTHR-TV, Indianapolis, 1998
IRE No. 15264

State police officers rake the area of 62.8 Southbound of the New Jersey Turnpike in Washington
Township for evidence from the incident that occurred on the New Jersey Turnpike where
three people were shot.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2000

In response to ongoing disciplinary problems at the Indianapolis Police Department,
reporters at WTHR-TV decided to take a
systematic look at how violations of rules
and regulations were handled by the department. They reviewed the disciplinary records
Continued on page 254

23

Photo: Michael Sypniewski Star-Ledger

COVER STORY

Assemblyman LeRoy J. Jones Jr.; Rev. Reginald Jackson, a minister at the St. Matthews A.M.E. Church in Orange, N.J., and part of the Black Ministers
Council, speak to the media asking Gov. Whitman to fire State Police Superintendent Col. Carl Williams.

Stories by other papers, most notably The
Philadelphia Inquirer in 1996, have shown
that the manner in which citizen complaints are
handled can help illuminate how aggressively
police are policing themselves.
The state police responses were bizarre.
At first, the agency refused to divulge the
information at all. Then it said it did not know
how many citizen complaints it had received
and refused to count them. Then it changed
its response a third time to say the complaints
were commingled in a
massive logbook with
internal or administrative
complaints and could not
be separated. Finally,
when the Ledger offered
to send its reporters
to headquarters to look
through the book, the
state police refused to
discuss the matter further.

24

In the absence of even a scintilla of information about state police arrest patterns or
its internal discipline, the paper decided that
state police stonewalling had become a story
in and of itself.
Carter wrote a story about how other states
handle complaints, comparing the level of
state police secrecy to that of other states. She
was assisted by Kenya Mann, who contacted
every state police department in America
over a six-week period. The story, which
appeared on Nov. 11, 1998, revealed that New
Jersey’s state police agency was among the
most secretive and antiquated in handling
citizen grievances. Within days, legislation
was introduced to modernize procedures and
publish for the first time a yearly report on
state police conduct.
The resulting outrage and embarrassment
over the story widened a growing rift between
the state police and the attorney general’s
office and paved the way for the first release
of arrest data.

THE IRE JOURNAL

COVER STORY

• The attorney general’s announcement that he was
now investigating the state police, the first such
probe in the 78-year history of the force.
• The disclosure that a federal probe into possible
civil rights abuses by state police was also under
way.
• State Police Superintendent Carl Williams’ admission that he linked drug trafficking to certain
minority groups. He was fired by the governor
that afternoon.
• The suggestion that one of the troopers in the
Turnpike shooting was an open, avowed racist and
that state police commanders knew this.
• The discovery that desk clerks in New Jersey
hotels were working as informants for a secret
state police drug squad, alerting the police when
Hispanics, paying in cash, checked into hotels
near the Turnpike.
• The revelation that the state police’s most vaunted
award, The Trooper of the Year Award, had
become an incentive for racial profiling.

The Ledger followed up the arrest story by
filing a civil action in Superior Court, Essex
County on Feb. 12. Superior Court Judge Alvin
Weiss ordered the state to turn over 12 months
of records on Feb. 17, 1999, the largest release
of internal arrest data in state police history.
On March 19, 1999, the parties signed a
consent decree under which the state agreed to
turn over the information no later than April
7, 1999.
The arrest statistics, along with revelations
by state and federal investigators and state
police troopers themselves, provided a torrent
of news stories about the state’s most secretive
agency.
In a two-part report issued last spring, the
state admitted troopers do target minorities on
the Turnpike and called for a massive overhaul
of the force. A database tracking the way in
which state troopers do their jobs, a shakeup
of internal affairs and an end of the Trooper
of the Year Award were among the changes
initiated.
In May, the state agreed to enter into a
consent decree with the federal government

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2000

RESOURCES

Photo: Frank Digiacomo Star-Ledger

Finally, on Feb. 9, 1999, Attorney General
Peter Verniero began to give in, releasing the
first batch of arrest statistics. It was just 200
arrests, but it represented a major breakthrough.
The paper ran a page one story reporting that
three out of four motorists arrested by state
troopers on the turnpike during the first two
months of 1997 were minorities.
The release of the data set off a stunning
chain reaction of page one stories over the next
month. Those stories included:

New Jersey State Police Superintendent
Col. Carl Williams responds to questions
regarding the black ministers asking him to
resign because of alleged racial problems,
during a press conference at State Police
Headquarters in West Trenton.

to eradicate racial profiling from its highways
and to eliminate racism within the ranks of
the state troopers.
Finally in June, the president called for a
nationwide crackdown on racial profiling.
By September, John Hogan and James
Kenna, the two troopers who opened fire on
the van and wounded the unarmed men, were
indicted for attempted murder and aggravated
assault. Several months earlier they were both
charged with falsifying patrol logs to cover up
the fact they were stopping a large numbers
of minority drivers. They are still awaiting
trial.
New Jersey’s long denial of racial profiling
threatened Gov. Christine Todd Whitman’s
nomination of Attorney General Peter Verniero
to the state Supreme Court and was a factor in
Whitman’s withdrawal from the U.S. Senate
race.
The biggest crisis of her tenure continued
in early October, when former police superintendent Carl Williams sued the governor for
reverse discrimination.
For revealing confidential case files, Farrell,
the public defender, was suspended for five
days and is now suing the state.
Kathy Barrett Carter has worked at the StarLedger for 18 years, covering the Supreme Court
and legal affairs issues. Joe Donohue, an eightyear Star-Ledger veteran, covers the state budget,
auto insurance, campaign finance issues and
politics.

of all 1,005 IPD officers, and found several
disturbing patterns of behavior.
Twenty-seven officers had 10 or more
disciplinary actions on their records; 95 had
committed offenses that could constitute
ghost employment; and 52 had broken
the laws they were paid to enforce. They
also found that blacks were disciplined
at higher rates than whites. All of this
was accomplished by using the IPD’s own
documents and interviews with officers,
police brass and union leaders and victims
of the officers’ misdeeds.

“Responsive or Not?”
The Columbus Dispatch, 1999
IRE No. 15690
For months the Columbus Police Chief
claimed he would need 477 more officers
to adequately staff his division based on a
formula that multiplied the number of calls
for service by the average length of time
to handle a call. The chief’s credibility was
questioned, however, after reporters at The
Columbus Dispatch found that police had
no idea how many more police officers they
would need because they had no idea how
long their response times were. The division’s
data on the response times was either missing
or misleading.
The Dispatch decided to examine the situation by looking at a year’s worth of 911 call
data to determine if police response time
reflected the priority levels police gave the
calls. They found that priority levels didn’t
reflect response times, meaning that calls
given top priority weren’t always responded
to in the least amount of time.
The Dispatch found that it could analyze
only half of the 911 calls this way because
officers often didn’t log their arrival time,
blaming difficulty in using equipment even
though it only involved pushing a button in
the cruiser. Union representatives blamed
this on the location and reliability of the
equipment, but the newspaper found that
the fire department, which uses the same
equipment, didn’t have any problems.
Continued on page 274

25

