Using census data
for non-census stories
Prepared for NICAR National Conference
Philadelphia, March 14-17, 2002

Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427

If you’re looking for local school stories, it’s easy to be put off by this table:
P36.

SEX BY SCHOOL ENROLLMENT BY LEVEL OF SCHOOL BY TYPE OF SCHOOL
FOR THE POPULATION 3 YEARS AND OVER [47]
Universe: Population 3 years and over
Total:
Male:
Enrolled in nursery school, preschool:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in kindergarten:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in grade 1 to grade 4:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in grade 5 to grade 8:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in grade 9 to grade 12:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in college, undergraduate years:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in graduate or professional school:
Public school
Private school
Not enrolled in school
Female:
(Repeat)

This data will be published this summer for areas as big as states and as small as block groups (a few hundred
homes) 1 in Census 2000 SF3 data files. It’s a good example of how census data can yield lots of non-census stories –
stories that aren’t just about basic demographic trends like changes in population and racial totals. The exercise below
focuses on just this table, but you can adapt the approach to any of them.
Doing your homework
There are 812 tables in SF3 (http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/SF3-pop.html and
http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/SF3-housing.html). There are many other ways to add up the data,
but these have the most or most powerful backers. So look at tables for subjects that you care about and think: “People
asked to see this data this way. What are they looking for?”
Invert your usual process. Instead of looking at the data for stories, bring your knowledge of a subject – like your
community’s schools – to this data. See if this data can back up – or knock down – hunches and ideas. Look at its

variations across your area. See if this data, linked to local data on tax rates or test scores or charter schools or
attendance zones or home prices, produces new insight. You should also look at what’s not there, the way you’d
analyze a story draft for holes.
It’s fair to ask, “Why do I need Census enrollment data when I get it each year from the school district?”
-- Reason 1: No school superintendent has all the data. Nationwide, 1 student in 8 attends private schools. And then
there’s home-schooling. Even states with strong rules don’t always require registration with the local district.
-- Reason 2: School systems collect data the way they need it – by school. That doesn’t help if you want to see it by
neighborhood. Or within 1.5 miles of a school building.
-- Reason 3: Annual data may be too much. Census data from 1990 and 2000 lets you see broad patterns, and in
ways that are comparable around the state and nation.
It’s easy to see basic story possibilities in the table above, like public-private and male-female breakdowns in local
schools. But think geographically as well to use the rich local detail only the census offers. If you map these ratios for
each neighborhood, you will see variations that could produce stories.
One way to get ready for the new data is to get local data from the comparable table in the 1990 Census, P54 in
STF3:
P54.

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND TYPE OF SCHOOL [7]
Universe: Population 3 years and over
Enrolled in preprimary school:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in elementary or high school:
Public school
Private school
Enrolled in college:
Public school
Private school
Not enrolled in school

(You can probably get local P54 data from planners, school officials or the state data center. You can also download
it. Browse to factfinder.census.gov, click on “Data sets” and follow the instructions.)
The 1990 table is less detailed, but you can collapse 2000 categories to match.
When 2000 data arrives
-- Who’s not there: Think which kids are not in this table, the two “not enrolled” categories. Most are working or
retired, but if you subtract an area’s population age 18 and over and ages 3 to 5 from the sum of the two “not enrolled”
categories, you get kids ages 5 to 18 who aren’t in any school. How many? Are they home-schooled 2? Nationwide,
about 1.7 percent of kids 5 to 17 were home-schooled in 1999 (http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2001/HomeSchool/) but that rate
varies widely. Dropouts? (http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2002114) Where are they -- clustered or
scattered? If you want to focus on dropouts, check table P38. Set up mostly to track potential military recruits, it
nonetheless tells you how many people ages 16 to 19 are dropouts and their employment status.
-- Dropouts. Since the male-female ratio is pretty close in primary school years, you can get an idea of relative
dropout rates that point to various stories by looking at the male-female ratio in each age group. In some places and
ages, more boys will be dropouts – or sent to military or boarding schools, prison, etc. In other areas, especially with
lots of recent immigrants, you may find girls dropping out relatively more often.
-- Private school popularity: What’s the ratio of public vs. private in grades 1-4 compared to grades 5-8 and
grades 9-12? One index of a public school system in trouble is people leaving as their kids get older. In particular,
calculate the public-private ratio for each neighborhood and map it, even if it’s just using crayons on paper. See any
surprises? How well do you know your private schools? At http://nces.ed.gov/globallocator, check “private schools,”
punch in a local ZIP and a 20-mile radius. See how many you know on the list that pops up. Use the links to find
enrollment data.
-- Starting earlier. Over the last 10 years, nursery schools have swelled as parents seek a structure and curriculum
that day care can’t offer, and that 4-year-olds who are used to day-care can handle. Compare 1990 and 2000 totals and
public school-private school market share splits in each year. You might find overall increases even though birth rates
in most areas dropped from 1990 to 1995, cutting the number of 4- and 5-year-olds from 1995 to 2000.
-- Middle-age students: Look how many are enrolled in graduate or professional programs. You might be surprised
-- distance education, weekend and night programs are boosting middle-age enrollments. (If you want to delve more
into the age breakdown of local students, see tables PCT23 and PCT24
(http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/SF3-pop.html#seea3). One breaks down male and female students

separately into eight age groups starting with 3 to 4 and ending with 35 and older. The other breaks down just male and
female college and graduate students separately into four age groups starting with 15 to 17 and ending with 35 and
older.
-- College town: You may know the enrollment of the local college, but where are the students? This table will tell
you. You probably know the obvious undergrad neighborhoods near campus, but look at the change since 1990, both
in density and extent. Grad students, who tend to be less raucous and more settled, will probably show a different
pattern.
-- Commuter colleges: Your town has colleges you probably don’t think much about – community colleges,
technical and trade schools, etc. Look to see where the most college students live away from known college
neighborhoods. They’re probably working-class and immigrant neighborhoods with lots of hopes and dreams and not
much money. Where are those students enrolled?
-- Magnet and charter schools: They’re growing in popularity and steadily scrambling the neighborhood school
picture. It’s quite possible to find suburban neighborhoods where kids go to five different elementary schools. What
does this do to neighborhood life? The Common Core Data on public schools from the National Center for Education
Statistics (http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/pubschuniv.html or http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/pubagency.html), free for downloading,
offers one-stop shopping if you cover more than one district. It carries a wealth of data on each public school,
including whether they are charter or magnet schools and grade-by-grade breakdowns by race/ethnicity and totals for
faculty and students eligible for free or reduced-price lunches.
-- Race and enrollment: How different is the racial profile of your district from the public school enrollment? Or a
school’s attendance zone from its actual student body? NCES has summed Census 2000 race/ethnicity data for 8
million census blocks to get totals for 14,400 districts nationwide. The data is tallied for the total population and the
population 18 and over, so you can subtract to get kids up to 17. Start at http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/sdds/c2000d.asp to
get a quick profile or to download data to open in a spreadsheet. Across the country, the 1990s saw school segregation
grow in most places. (See http://www.law.harvard.edu/civilrights/publications/resegregation01/pressseg.html.)
-- Striving: Take the private school enrollment percentage for every neighborhood you cover from this table. Take
the poverty rate percentage from P87 or P90. Put them in Excel and make a scatter-plot graph, so that each pair is
plotted as a dot. You’ll see a pretty logical pattern – higher private school enrollment corresponds with lover poverty
rates. But you’ll see some dots standing out from the cluster – where a relatively poor neighborhood has a relatively
large private school enrollment. What’s going on there?
Finally, two cautions:
-- 1. This data comes from the census long form, which about 1 household in 6 fills out. If the school enrollment
question isn’t answered despite the best efforts of census takers, the Census Bureau will use rules it has tested to fill in
the data based on known characteristics of the household and its neighborhood. To see what percentage of any area
you’re studying has this imputed data for this question, see table P110.
-- 2. Because this data comes from a survey, each number has a little cloud of uncertainty around it, just like an
opinion poll. We usually call these “error margins.” The smaller the geographical area you’re studying, the bigger the
cloud is relative to the totals. Make sure you’re not overstating what the data says by understanding that error margin.
Use the SF3 documentation to compute the applicable margin, or get help from a local statistics professor.
1

It’s not a good idea to analyze data for block groups – the data’s too thin. They’re mostly to let you build custom areas. Usually
census tracts – areas averaging 1,500 homes – are the smallest standard areas worth analyzing.
2
It’s not clear how parents schooling their kids would answer. The actual wording of Census question No. 8: “At any time since
February 1, 2000, has this person attended regular school or college? Include only nursery school or preschool, kindergarten,
elementary school, and schooling which leads to a high school diploma or a college degree.” Answer options: “? No, has not
attended since February 1. ? Yes, public school, public college. ? Yes, private school, private college.”

