Mining Census For Non-Census Stories
Ramona Smith, Philadelphia Daily News
smithra@phillynews.com
NICAR National Conference - Philadelphia 2002

Some of the most readable census-based stories of the past year appear hardly
to be about the census at all They’re about other things -Forest fire dangers
Unequal treatment of transit riders
A housing project where children outnumber the adults
Yet each of these stories was built by mining the census. At the center of each
story was a nugget of census information. With that, journalists went off to track down the
rest of the story.
The results: Good reads on diverse topics, from allocation of government
resources to living in a family with nine or ten kids.
Census can be key to stories about:
Proximity (to wildfires, noise from airport)
Inequality (transit services)
Government resources, per capita spending (police
deployment)
Ethnic identity (inter-racial, Latino, Asian)
Children, families, senior lonely hearts
Here are some examples.
Proximity........In Colorado’s “Red Zone”
Denver Post reporter David Olinger already knew that hundreds of thousands of
people were living in the dangerous wildfire “red zone” marked out on the state forester’s
map. Two wildfires had hit more than 100 Colorado homes within one week two years ago.
CAR editor Jeff Roberts suggested putting 2000 population figures up against the
fire zones to find vulnerable areas..
They started with block group data from the census but they needed much more.
After meticulous data gathering (forest zone map, info on what counties lacked “wildfire
defensibility” construction standards and more), they crunched the numbers in ArcView
and found:
Close to a million people were now living in the “red zone” of vulnerability to
wildfire damage.
The population in the hazard area had swelled by one-third in 10 years.
Experts estimated only one-tenth of the homes in the woods were designed to hold off fires
-- and most counties require no such steps for homes built today.
The “red zone” story went far beyond these numbers to look at people living in the
area and at firefighters frustrated in attempting to protect it. It also examined why some

areas lack protective requirements, such as a firebreak or fire-resistant construction
materials.
Story no longer on Web. Contact:: David Olinger at DOlinger@denverpost.com or
Jeff Roberts at Jroberts@denverpost.com
Proximity: Airport Noise
Suddenly, residents of the area around Piedmont Triad International Airport in N.C.
care about the noise. That’s because 24 FedEx overnight flights are planned by 2005, and
63 nightly later on.
Reporters for (Greensboro) News & Record checked census numbers and found
population had doubled in a decade within a mile of airport’s worst noise zone.
Paul Garber and Paul Muschick found local officials had allowed several
residential developments to go up, though they knew the airport could expand.
More than 3,500 homes and apartments sprouted within a mile of noisiest area.
Story online at:
Http://www.news-record.com/news/indepth/fedex/fedex06rk.htm
Contact: Paul Garber: PGarber@News-Record.com
Inequality: Bus Routes
Orange County Register discovered a “transportation gap” between transit
available in white and minority areas.
Bus routes mainly serving minorities had a $1.28-per-rider subsidy & standing
room only; slow trip. Shuttle service carrying nearly all whites had $7.61 subsidy. Padded
seats, fast trip.
O.C. Register also has looked at other disparities, including lack of soccer fields in
Hispanic areas.
On IRE Web pages, download Ronald Campbell’s tipsheet on “Using the 2000
Census for Non-Census Stories.” Tipsheet #1372 Includes O.C. Register stories.
Resources: How Many Police?
San Bernardino County grew rapidly in the decade before 2000 but police
deployment in cities there generally didn’t keep pace.
Louis Rom, then of the Press-Enterprise in Riverside, CA, reported reduced
staffing and budgets per capita in several police departments (adjusted for inflation).
Experts disagreed about whether this put communities at greater risk.
Violent crime rose 8.7 percent during the decade, though, according to FBI reports...
Story on web
http://www.inlandempireonline.com/de/metro/safety/072201b.shtml
Contact: Louis Rom, now at the Times in Lafayette, LA:
LRom@smgpo.gannett.com
Ethnic Identity
Stories about ethnic groups tallied by the census are everywhere. Many of these
“census stories” have been less about numbers and more about the substance of diversity
among Latinos or Asians -- from national origins to cuisine.
Other stories explore the potential power, or limits of power, for growing groups.
Latinos in Riverside and San Bernardino counties may have hit a glass ceiling, the
Press-Enterprise reports. They’ve yet to be county supervisors, or on most city councils.
Reporters Sharyn Obsatz, Claire Vitucci, explored why. Contact: sobsatz@pe.com

Tiny groups that previously didn’t want to be lumped with other “Asians” are joining
Asian alliances in some communities in hopes of gaining clout. Separate reports by Betsy
Hammond of the Oregonian and Marc Davis of the Virginian-Pilot
URL for Oregonian story:
http://www.oregonlive.com/morenews/oregonian/index.ssf?/xml/story.ssf/html_stan
dard.xsl?/base/news/101403692874260.xml
.
Contacts: Oregonian - betsyhammond@news.oregonian.com)
Virginian-Pilot - MDavis@pilotonline.com
What’s it like to be an interracial child, or a couple with interracial children, in the
South? Violet Law combined interviews with a sense of history in a story for the Arkansas
Democrat-Gazette in Little Rock.
Contact:
violet_law@adg.ardemgaz.com
Kids, Families & Lonely Hearts
Oregon has been having a boomlet in large families. Staff writer Su-Jin Yim of the
Oregonian spent time with a family of 12 and found it in working order. The census nugget:
a 48% increase in families of 7 or more in the state in the past 10 years.
Contact: betsyhammond@news.oregonian.com
In Norfolk, Marc Davis located Virginia’s only census tract with more kids than
adults. Yes, it was a public housing neighborhood - with 759 children and 708 grownups.
He had some fun with this, and also looked seriously at the aspirations of parents in
Tidewater Gardens.
Story online at http://www.pilotonline.com/news/nw0121kid.html
Contact: MDavis@pilotonline.com
And down near Atlantic City, the Press set out to explore the romantic prospects for
women 65 and over, who outnumber men of that age by 6-to-4. Whether the women had
tried searching for love anywhere but a dance floor was unclear, but this definitely wasn’t
working. “There are no men,” one would-be dance partner said. “You just can’t find them.”
Thanks to members of census-l@ire.org for providing these examples.

