Cranking out data maps
Prepared for NICAR National Conference
Philadelphia, March 14-17, 2002
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427
Most newsroom data mapping is still designed to put a single great image onto newsprint, but more and more
newsrooms are juggling multiple audiences across multiple platforms. There are zoned editions and weekly
sections, Web sites and TV partners and bureaus. Our software can produce maps best suited for each one. The real
challenge lies in shifting from handicraft toward something more like manufacturing.
Some tips:
-- Work backward. Do you want to get 72 dot-per-inch RGB GIFs to the Web site within two hours? Three
county-level black and white CMYK maps into the newspaper within 12 hours? How much common base work
can these ride? How much can be pre-built in standard shells?
-- Focus on the whole process, not just the part that ends with data analysis. Who needs what data in what
format? Will they get it by e-mail or by Zip disk? What will the color ramps on maps be? Will color maps be five
or seven shades? With or without borders on the little polygons? What navigational layers will maps need, and will
they interfere with data layers? Who will add the navigational layers? Will the maps be projected? By whom and
when?
-- Draw a detailed map – of your graphic development process. It’s probably not pretty. It evolved to get 1column locator maps into print on deadline, not to get 25 ZIP Code maps with seven colors to the Web site inside
of three days. It’s not enough to figure out how to generate those 25 images and throw them over the wall. You
need to help the artist streamline production clear through the typesetter, or Web posting. Think automation
wherever possible. A simple macro can work wonders.
-- Take a serious look at your toolkit. If you’re not using a data mapping program (the formal name is
geographical information system) like ArcView, MapInfo or Maptitude, figure out how to get started. Seeing is
believing, and many editors get it as soon as they see a demo. Maybe you have to partner with a local academic
who uses GIS. Whether or not your newsroom uses GIS, take a look at AP MapShop, jointly developed by the
Associated Press and ESRI, a leading GIS vendor. (Contact your AP bureau chief.) It offers great potential to
streamline production of simple maps, to let you do more maps and to let your graphic artist(s) do maps they
wouldn’t even attempt now, such as ones with shaded terrain or aerial imagery. Also worth considering: software
to bridge the PC-to-Mac conversion, like MaPublisher LT, http://www.avenza.com/products.mapublt.html .
Other tools to consider:
-- Think interactivity. The ultimate in manufacturing maps is letting users do their own, so that you create a
single file that allows hundreds or thousands of possible displays. If you use ArcView (www.esri.com/arcview),
download ArcExplorer. It’s free. Install it on as many newsroom PCs as you can. Then put an ArcView file in a
network directory. ArcExplorer has limits (no printing capability), but it gives users a simple way to interrogate
spatial data for patterns. Finally, the major GIS programs for PCs (ArcView, MapInfo, Maptitude) have Web
publishing tools. Think through the features and costs. There are cheaper alternatives, such as ImageMapper AV,
an ArcView add-in that spits out HTML images and pages: http://www.alta4.com/eng/products_e/im/index_e.htm .
-- Think long-term. Write up a two- or three-year outline. Figure out some good milestones and peg them to big
news events – like annual school test scores or election night. Share the plan around the newsroom. When the time
comes to plan next year’s newsroom budget, you’ll have something to help justify the expense of the next step and
a degree of buy-in, too.

