The Evidence On Aging

National Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
March 14, 2002
Prepared by:
Ziva Branstetter, The Tulsa World (Ziva.Branstetter@tulsaworld.com)
Robert Gebeloff, The Star-Ledger (rgebeloff@starledger.com)
Dave Parks, The Birmingham News (dparks@bhamnews.com)
Tom Zambito, The (NY) Daily News (tzambito@nydailynews.com)

As America grows old, news organizations are devoting more enterprise time to
the aging beat. In this handout, we’re not trying to summarize every story that’s been
done or list every possible resource. Instead, we thought it would be helpful to provide
examples of projects we’ve worked on, along with some insights into our reporting
methods and CAR techniques.
Sometimes as reporters we tend to avoid stories or projects that have been done
already in other places. On this beat, however, the opposite is true. Many of these
stories pointed to public policy issues that needed to be addressed – and were
addressed only because our newspapers stepped up to the plate and pressed the issue.
We hope you’ll find ideas here that will help you do the same in your community.

The Story: Nursing home deaths in Oklahoma. More than 1,000 nursing home
residents died during the past 10 years from bed sores, malnutrition, dehydration,
accidents and other causes of death that are often preventable.
Synopsis: Records showed more than 1,000 deaths from causes that could have been
prevented. Additionally, only a handful of the deaths received an autopsy and the
doctor did not view most bodies after death. Though the state had a lengthy policy on
what to do when a prison inmate dies, nursing home deaths get little review unless
someone files a complaint. In a follow-up, we analyzed where the deaths occurred and
who owned the homes.
CAR Parts: Computerized death certificates contained the causes of death among
nursing home residents during a 10-year period. The data was obtained from the
Oklahoma state health department’s vital records division. Death certificates are public
records in many states. Check to see if your state is one of them
---Z.B.
The Story: Home health care in crisis – New Jersey is licensing more than 100
criminals to work unsupervised in the homes of the state’s most vulnerable residents,
The Bergen Record discovered.
Synopsis: Politics, economics and a healthy dose of lax government oversight
converged in this story, which showed how New Jersey’s licensing system for home
health aides failed to prevent more that 100 recently convicted criminals from gaining
certification. The project also looked at the underground health aide industry, how
home health companies fought regulation, and the demographics driving these trends.

CAR Parts: The story was based, in large part, on a join between two databases,
licensed aides and criminals. Making the marriage work, however, was a major task
involving three people and months of digging. While the actual joining of tables is CAR
101, in this case, state officials provided large, unwieldly and largely incompatible
databases. In short, anyone attempting a story like this should seek, at all costs, data
with strong join fields – such as date of birth – and should be prepared to verify results
by pulling paper records. It’s a lot of work, but the reward is information that would not
exist otherwise.
---R.G.
The Story: Alabama's Nursing Homes: A series of stories examining the quality and
cost of the state's nursing homes.
Synopsis: Nursing homes are swamped in problems as they struggle to prepare for a
gray wave of baby-boomers. This theme covers a multitude of stories that can be found
in every state and locale. In our series, we showed that many Alabama nursing homes
were high in cost and low in quality. We examined staffing problems at nursing homes,
bankruptcies, lawsuits, worker shortages, late inspections, fraud, Alzheimer's care, cost
considerations and consumer issues.
CAR Parts: Basic data is available at www.medicare.gov. You can download databases
of detailed information on every nursing home in the nation, or you can use the search
engine provided at the site. Even more detailed inspection reports are available at the
agency in your state that conducts nursing home inspections. Usually it's the state
health department. If you want your state data crunched already, check reports from
the University of California, San Francisco. The most recent report can be found at
http:nccnhr.newc.com/uploads/oscar1.pdf.
--- D.P.

The Story: Milking the Helpless: Attorneys are siphoning off millions from the elderly
they have sworn to protect.
Synopsis: This two-part series revealed how politically-connected New York City
attorneys working as court-appointed guardians have made millions from the assets of
elderly wards. A legislative overhaul did little to reform past abuses in the state’s
guardianship system. Instead, it created a money trough for well-connected attorneys.
Since 1993, city attorneys have billed more than $63 million in fees from the assets of
elderly individuals the courts deemed could no longer handle their own affairs. The life
savings of the elderly have been whittled away by lawyers billing $300 an hour or more
to perform routine functions like making a telephone call, sending a fax or visiting them

in a nursing home. The series, which ran in May 2001, spurred administrators to seek
sweeping reforms of how paying appointments are doled out in New York.
CAR Parts:
We purchased on disk the New York State Office of Court Administration list of fiduciary
appointments dating back 10 years. This lists every paid court appointment that a state
judge has awarded and links the fee to a case. From the list of appointments we were
able to target which attorneys received the most appointments and their fees. We also
were able to identify which judges awarded the fees and, through reporting and clip
searches, identified connections between the players. We ranked attorneys by the size
of their fees and the number of appointments they received.
--- T.Z
The Story: Bed rail deaths. Bed rails and other restraints used in nursing homes and
other facilities trap and kill many elderly people each year.
Synopsis: Federal rules require doctors to approve use of bed rails, vests and other
types of restraints and that restraint use be reviewed periodically to ensure they are
necessary. But frequently, understaffed nursing homes are cited for using restraints
without a doctor’s order. We checked to see which nursing homes in Oklahoma
exceeded the state average for the percent of all residents using restraints and
obtained information on deaths from restraints.
CAR Parts: State death certificates and the www.medicare.gov web site. (Go to
nursing home compare on the web site, which will tell you how many residents are in
restraints.)
----Z.B.

The Story: Moving in with the kids: For many senior immigrants, independent living
has no appeal
Synopsis: Nearly two in five Asian seniors in New Jersey live in their children's homes the highest ratio of any state. It's a striking contrast to the way white, non-Hispanic
seniors live - only 4 percent are in homes headed by their children, according to Census
data. The rate for black seniors is 8 percent. For Hispanic seniors (who can be of any
race) it is 16 percent. The data suggest that recent immigrants are bringing their
customs with them, and even some later generations are clinging to their traditions.
CAR Parts: This story was generated as part of a package we produced when the full
short-form Census data was released. The analysis was based on Table 30: Relationship
by Household Type for the 65+ population. This census table provides a total number
of seniors, a household vs. group quarters break down, and then breakdowns of the
number of seniors who are living in a family, heading a household, living alone, etc.
Parent of the household is one of the choices. Table 30 gives you total figures, and then

Table 30B gives the same for blacks, 30D for Asians, 30H for Hispanics, and 30I, for
non-Hispanic whites. The data can be found at American Factfinder. Go to
http://factfinder.census.gov, then data sets, then 2000 SF1 100-percent data, then
detailed tables.
--- R.G.
The Story: Fat Cats Feeding on Nursing Homes: Medicaid payments help foot hefty
salaries.
Synopsis: Private nursing home owners in New York City have amassed personal
fortunes, with some pulling in millions each year from government programs for the
poor and elderly. The owners of 100 private nursing homes reaped nearly $24 million in
salaries from their businesses in 1998 alone, according to state Health Department
records. Some of the owners put their relatives on nursing home payrolls, giving them
six-figure salaries in facilities that often contain only a couple hundred beds. Owners of
five nursing homes in the city drew more than $1 million each in salary in 1998.
Virtually all the owners' profits are funded by taxpayers through Medicaid, the
government program for the poor.
CAR Parts: Using Medicaid cost reports obtained from the New York State Department
of Health we analyzed owner salaries for nursing homes in the five boroughs of New
York City. Then we ranked the top 10 salaries for owners and the homes that raked in
the largest profits. Medicaid cost reports, issued annually by the New York State
Department of Health.
--- T.Z
The Story: Corruption in the state nursing home inspection program.
Synopsis: The deputy director of Oklahoma’s state health department and a nursing
home owner were convicted of federal bribery charges following an investigation by the
FBI. The investigation showed a pattern of favoritism for certain nursing home owners
and harsh treatment for owners that the department wanted to drive out of business.
There were also numerous patronage employees such as relatives and former state
lawmakers on the department’s payroll. This type of corruption could be going on in
any state, given the power and influence of the nursing home lobby.
CAR Parts: Check payroll records for your state agency that inspects nursing homes.
Are there a lot of patronage employees? Check with lower-level employees at nursing
homes and family members. Do they beef up staff, clean up etc. just before
inspections? If so, they probably know about them in advance. Also check
contributions to lawmakers by nursing home lobbyists. Do they often occur around the
time that legislation favoring the industry is passed? Request the cell phone and office
phone records for the top people in your state’s nursing home inspection program. Do
they often call nursing home owners? Do the calls coincide with inspections?
--- Z.B.

The Story: Federal officials often forgive nursing home fines recommended by the
states
Synopsis: In Oklahoma (and probably in most other states), the state inspects nursing
homes on behalf of the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services. If it finds
deficiencies that warrant a financial penalty, the state makes a recommendation to
CMS. But in Oklahoma, federal officials often overruled those recommendations. When
a fine was levied, it was often not collected for months or even years and rarely was
ever paid in full.
CAR Parts: Data on fines levied and collected by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare
Services (formerly HCFA). They wouldn’t supply the data electronically but did send a
printed version, which was easy to enter into Excel. Ask for several years worth of data
on fines or other penalties by facility in your state, then compare it to what was
recommended by state regulators.
--- Z.B.

The Story: Violent patients loose in nuring homes; residents are at risk of brutal,deadly
attacks.
Synopsis: Over the past several years, residents of New York City nursing homes have
been beaten, sexually assaulted and killed by some unlikely assailants: their fellow
residents. The Daily News scoured state Health Department inspections, criminal
records and lawsuits against nursing homes to document a little-acknowledged threat in
city nursing homes.
Resident-on-resident violence has been getting worse for years, fueled by dramatic
shifts in nursing home populations that have created a volatile mix of residents. Nursing
homes are now home to younger patients recovering from brain injuries and other
traumatic events as well as older dementia patients prone to erratic behavior. In New
York, nearly 45 percent of nursing home residents now need psychotropic medication to
control their behavior, up from 29 percent in 1993.
CAR Parts: State and federal inspection reports for nursing homes; Analysis of federal
nursing home data by researchers at the University of California at San Francisco.
Criminal and civil records in state courthouses.
--- T.Z.

