DANGER! NUMBERS IN THE NEWSROOM
"We do not expect reporters to be mathematical geniuses. But we do expect them to
sidestep their mind-numbing fear of mathematics long enough to ask, 'Does this
make sense?' 'What would I conclude from these numbers?'"
— A.K. Dewdney, in 200% of Nothing: From Percentage Pumping to Irrational
Ratios, an Eye-Opening Tour through the Twists and Turns of Math Abuse and
Innumeracy

"Try to prove something to a reader by throwing three sets of figures at him, and he
drops you and turns on the tube. Give him three quotes in a row by Authoritative
and Informed Sources, and the same thing happens. He may even grow restive if
you give him a long string of examples drawn from the direct experiences of primary
actors in the story. ... But give him one of each of these elements mixed together and
you've got him. He's convinced...."
and
"We need numbers in almost all our stories, and in some a number may be so
important or startling that omitting or generalizing it would weaken the whole
piece. I only argue that we be choosy in selecting figures and careful in their
treatment.
"In placing numbers in a story, the good writer tries not to stack too many in one
paragraph; this builds a wall of abstraction difficult to breach. It becomes impossible
to breach when two or more such paragraphs are butted together, a construction
that may lead to more unread prose than any other writing fault. Don't do this.
Don't ever do this."
— William E. Blundell, in The Art and Craft of Feature Writing (The Wall Street
Journal Guide).

"In popular writing on scientific matters the abused statistic is almost crowding out
the picture of the white-jacketed hero laboring overtime without time-and-a-half in
an ill-lit laboratory. Like the 'little dash of powder, little pot of paint,' statistics are
making many an important fact 'look like what she ain't.' "
– Darrell Huff, in How To Lie With Statistics, 1954.

1

FIGURING A RATE, A RATIO OR A PERCENT
Rates and ratios are obvious ways to make numbers more meaningful for your
readers. The most common kind of rate is a percent. Rates, ratios and percents are
all ways of expressing fractions.. A percent is a decimal representation of a fraction,
with the decimal point moved two places to the right.
Step 1: Know your base. Think of the words "out of." It's the total of all groups you
know.
Step 2: Divide the category you care about by the base. Remember that a fraction
sign (/) means "divided by" (÷).
Step 3: Move the decimal point two places to the right to get the rate per hundred,
or percent.
Step 4. Round the answer to one decimal place, or better yet look for an easier
fraction your readers will understand. (See the translation sheet from
percents to fractions in this package.)
Formula:
(Category / Base or Total) = Decimal.
Decimal x 100 = Percent.
Example:
If 58 people say they will vote in an upcoming election and 92 say they won't, here's
how to figure the percent of people who will vote:
Step 1: Base = number of people asked = 92 + 58 = 150
Step 2: Rate = 58 out of 150 = 58/150 = .386666...
Percent = .38666... x 100 = 38.666666....
Round = 38.7 percent, or more than a third.

FIGURING A PERCENT DIFFERENCE OR PERCENT CHANGE
A percent difference is the same thing as a percent, but it uses an earlier period as a
base.
Step 1: Subtract the first period's value from the second's. The answer and it might
be bigger than the first's.
Step 2. Divide that by the first period's value.
Step 3. Move the decimal point to the right, round and simplify.
Formula
(New - Old) ÷ Old = Decimal.
Decimal x 100 = Percent difference.

2

Example
If the agriculture budget for 1993 is $2,223,000 and the agriculture budget for 1992
was $2,100,000, then here's how to figure out the percent change:
Step 1: 2,223 - 2,100 = 123
Step 2. 123 / 2,100 = .05857...
Step 3. .05857 x 100 = 5.857 ≈ 6 percent.

FINDING AVERAGES
The three common kinds of averages are means, medians and modes. Most news
stories use the "mean" as the "average." A median is often called a "typical" value.
A mode is the most common value and is usually only used in surveys.
To figure a simple average or mean, add all of the values and divide by a count of
how many there are. To figure a median, list the values in ascending or descending
order. Count how many there are, then pick the value that lies in the middle. (If
you have an even number of items, compute the average of the two middle values).
Choose a mode by counting the number at each value and choose the largest.
Generally, use medians for dollar values, means for most other "continuous" values
and modes for responses to a limited number of survey responses.
Formulas
For an average: (Sum of values) ÷ (No. of values)
There's really no easy formula for medians or modes — you'll have to get your
sources to give them to you if they're not obvious.
Examples
Here's a list of home values:
$60,000
$65,000
$70,000
$80,000

$85,000
$130,000
$250,000
$250,000

Average = $1,185,000 / 8 = $148,125
Median = $82,250 (avg of the 2 middle values)
Mode = $250,000

FIGURING PROPERTY TAXES
You need up to three pieces of information to figure the amount of taxes paid by
homeowners: The value of the home, the amount of it that will be taxed, and the tax
rate.
The value of the home: Many readers know about what their homes are worth. Many
fewer know the level that's included in official assessments. Whenever you can
express tax rates as a percentage (or some other fraction) of the value, you should.
3

The amount taxed: This is called the "assessment" or something like it. Some
jurisdictions exclude part of the value of the home. Others have a ratio of the
assessed value to the market value. Still others don't bother to assess at all.
Understand how your assessment process works.
The tax rate: Homeowners are taxed on the assessed value, not the market value. So
you multiply the rate times the assessment to get the tax amount.
Example Formula
New York hasn't updated its assessments since 1938. So it's very difficult to figure
out what the assessed value of a home is. But the state gives you a way to estimate
for a jurisdiction on average:
Step 1: Find out the equalization rate for the jurisdiction. This is the ratio of the
assessed values to market prices in that area, on average.
Step 2: Find out the tax rate. This is something like 105 percent. It's the tax on that
equalized value.
Step 3: Multiply the equalization rate by the tax rate to get the tax rate based on
market prices.
Step 4: Multiply that answer by the value of the home.
So to estimate an average tax for a town:
Equalization rate x Tax Rate x Median home price = A typical tax burden.
Example calculation
A town's equalization rate is .02. Its tax rate is 103 percent. The median home value
is $210,000. Here's what a typical taxpayer will pay:
.02 x 103 = 2.06 percent of the value
.0206 x $210,000 = $4,326.

4

NEWSROOM NUMBERS TIPS
RATES AND PERCENTS
•

Remember to take away two decimal places (or multiply by 100) when figuring
percents.
Wrong: ½ = 0.5 percent

•

Right: ½ = 0.5 = 50 percent

Try to find an easy way for your readers to picture a rate. Simple fractions give
the image of a pie and are easy to digest.
Correct: Agriculture consumed 35 percent of the budget
Better: About a third of all state dollars went to agriculture or One of every
three tax dollars in the state went to agriculture

•

For very small rates, use a base larger than 100 or percent. This is most common
in medical stories, like the number of infant deaths per 100,000 instead of per
100.

•

Keep your bases similar; compare similar numbers (adapted from Philip Meyer's
New Precision Journalism).
Correct but meaningless: "Eleven percent of blacks voted for Bush, but 10 percent
of Clinton's vote came from blacks." This mixes bases: the number of
black voters then the number of Clinton voters.
Better: "Eleven percent of blacks voted for Bush and 60 percent voted for
Clinton." The sentence keeps the base as the number of black voters.
Or: "Two percent of Bush's votes and 10 percent of Clinton's votes came
from blacks." It has two bases (the number of votes for each candidate)
but keeps the comparison similar.

•

With percent changes greater than 100, revert to ratios. This is expressed as
"times as many" or "times as much," not "times more". Here are three ways to
compare 400 arrests for drunk driving this year compared with 100 last year:
Wrong: "Four times more" is not only confusing but wrong. It's three times more
or four times as many. (Do the math: it's a 300 percent change.)
Correct: "Three times more people...." This is correct but confusing. Better: "Four
times as many people..."

5

•

When you subtract numbers expressed as percentages, the result is a percentage
point difference not a percent change. It's easy for you — or your sources — to
make changing rates seem huge or insignificant, depending on how they're
expressed. Some call this "percentage pumping."
Wrong: Joblessness has grown by more than 3 percent since the 1960s, from 4
percent to 7.2 percent.
Both of these are right; choose your weapon carefully: Joblessness has grown by
four fifths since the heyday of the 1960s, when it stood at 4 percent.
Today, the rate is 7.2 percent. AND Joblessness has grown by just 3
percentage points since the 1960s.

•

Compound, don't multiply, when you have to project changes. Remember to
compound, not divide, when you have to figure an annual rate.
Wrong: If a budget grows 3 percent a year, it will grow 30 percent in 10 years (3
x 10)
Right: The budget will grow about 35 percent, or ((1.03 10) - 1) x 100

ROUNDING
•

Round by adding 1 when the next digit is 5 or higher.
Wrong: $2,578,903 ≈ $2.5 million

Right: $2,578,903 ≈ $2.6 million

•

When deciding how much to round, consider your point. Can you get away with
"about," "nearly," or "more than" instead of having to put more numerals in your
story? They scare readers.

•

Decimal points are for meaning, not emphasis. Use only the level of precision you
need.

•

Watch for false precision, especially in surveys. This is called "significant digits."
Interest groups like to survey 20 people and express the results in percent. That
means every response accounts for five percentage points. As a rule of thumb,
use the actual number (say, one of 20) when the survey had fewer than 100
responses.

AVERAGES
•

Use medians, not simple averages (means), when dealing with dollar values like
income, house values or salaries. That's because extremely high values of a few
will pull up the simple average for all.

•

Medians are often called "typical" values; means are often called "average"
values.

6

•

You often need to explain what a median is if you use the word in your story. A
median is the level at which half the values are below it and half are above it.

•

Don't confuse a mode with "most." It's the most frequent category (usually in a
survey), not necessarily a majority. Think of it as a vote.
Wrong: Clinton got most of the votes. Right: Clinton got the most votes.

•

Means are usually used for physical characteristics and other averages that don't
vary that much, like weight and grade point averages.

INDEXING, DEFLATING AND ADJUSTING
•

Check with your editor about how to handle indexes, such as the Consumer Price
Index, consumer confidence, housing affordability or similar comparative
statistics. Some want the index levels; others want just the percent changes.

•

When reporting on dollar values over a long time, correct them for inflation.
Right: "Teachers' salaries have more than doubled since the 1970s, when
educators began complaining the best teachers were leaving the field."
Okay, but read on:
Better: "After inflation, teachers' salaries have risen just 5 percent since they
began complaining they could no longer afford to stay in the profession in
the 1970s."

•

Some numbers require other kinds of adjustments. Consider adjusting budget
numbers by population, inflation, income or all three.

•

Weekly, monthly and quarterly figures may need seasonal adjustment. You
won't be able to do that. So ask for it or make your comparisons to the same
period in previous years or to projections.

WRITING WITH NUMBERS
•

Readers want people, not numbers. When you can't report on people —
politicians, regular people, people in business or effects on people — at least keep
your story short.

•

A well-selected number, or set of numbers, can add depth and breadth to many
spot news stories. Look for opportunities to put an event in perspective by
gathering statistics on the growth, decline or scope of a seemingly isolated event.

•

The most effective writing comes from selection, not compression, of facts. It's
also true with numbers. Choose only the numbers that have meaning to your
readers.

7

•

Consider charting numbers instead of writing them. Removing them from the
text not only improves your story; it often makes a bigger impression on readers.

•

Pepper your story with just the right number in just the right place rather than
cramming them all together. Use an anecdote, quote or observation to separate
paragraphs with lots of numbers.

•

Recast as many numbers as possible in simple terms that remove their
abstraction. Ratios, rates, pictorial images and rounding can help simplify
numbers.

•

In a set of related numbers, decide what you want to say and construct a passage
to do it as simply as possible. Remember that numbers in dates are just as
difficult for readers as other numbers:
Correct: "Spending on redundancy research by the Office of Unessential Affairs
rose from $847 million in fiscal 1993 to $1.26 billion this year, a 49
percent increase." (Four numbers with 12 digits.)
Better: "Over the past fiscal year, the Office of Unessential Affairs increased
spending on redundancy research by almost half, to $1.3 billion." (One
number with 2 digits.)
(From The Art & Craft of Feature Writing)

•

Images of numbers can help if those numbers are huge and incomprehensible.
But although the just-right comparison can work well, the less-then-perfect
comparison often falls flat and adds yet more confusion to an already difficult
story. If you choose to try it anyway:
Make sure the image fits the story.
Make sure your readers can picture the references.
Avoid cliché images, like dollar bills placed end to end.
Don't insert even more numbers with the image.
Don't ask readers to repeat an image.
Not so good: "Enough water to submerge Yankee Stadium 1,000 times."
Better. "Enough water to submerge Hillsborough County a foot deep."

•

The bigger the number, the more difficult it is to visualize. Who really knows the
difference between $900 million and $1 billion? For big numbers, cut them down
to size for your readers by expressing them as a ratio or rate, but choose your
base carefully.

•

For small numbers, put them in perspective for your readers by emphasizing
change — or the lack of it.

8

FURTHER READING
William Blundell, The Art & Craft of Feature Writing, Based on The Wall Street
Journal guide.
Cohn, Victor, News & Numbers.
A. K. Dewdney, 200 Percent of Nothing: An Eye-Opening Tour Through the Twists &
Turns of Math Abuse & Innumeracy. Wiley. 1993
Darryl Huff, How To Lie with Statistics, 1953.
Philip Meyer, The New Precision Journalism, Indiana University Press, 1991.
Wilhoit & Weaver, The Newsroom Guide to Polls & Surveys

9

