Sports: Making CAR part of the team
A Whole New Game
The Columbus Dispatch
Published: March 2001
Presenter:
Suzanne Hoholik
Reporter
614-461-5131

Getting started: Doing the research
•
•

•
•

There was no focus to the project, just a charge to look at this large, powerful association.
We went to the Ohio High School Athletic Association web site www.ohsaa.org and read over two
years of minutes from their meetings. From these minutes, we found that the association makes money
and receives free balls from ball manufacturers around the country. In addition to the association
profiting, state coaches’ associations, which recommend a ball, also receive some lump sun they say
they use for scholarships. We contacted each company, asked about each contract and built a
spreadsheet of ball contracts, amount of balls, number of years and company.
Next, we searched Lexis-Nexis for stories from the past five years with OHSAA in them. These
articles led me to people who sued the association, a good starting point for reporting. Most of these
articles had to do with denying student appeals.
We then set up a Nexis search so every time Ohio High School Athletic Association appeared in a
newspaper story, it would be e-mailed to me. I still have this in place today.

Digging in
•
•
•

•

We then went to Guidestar – www.guidestar.org – for two years worth of IRS tax forms or 990s. The
OHSAA is a tax-exempt organization and is required to file these. I found out how much money the
association takes in, how much the top employees are paid and where they spend the money.
At this point, I started meeting with association people. I asked for 10 years worth of 990s, which they
were willing to hand over. They gave me a stack of information all of which I read, including the
handbook.
I went back to the Internet to the national group – the National Federation of State High School
Associations www.nfhs.org – to start comparing Ohio to other states. From here I found the names of
associations in other states, went back to Guidestar found their 990 and built a spreadsheet. This had
about 20 categories on each state including earnings, expenses and the top five salaries. I compared
Ohio to Texas, New York, California, Florida, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Indiana and Illinois.
I started going to their monthly meetings and generally hanging around their offices, meeting with
people.

Tournaments
•

From the 990s, we learned that the association made most of its money from tournaments. They
provided us with revenue, expenses, attendance and profit/loss information that we built into a
spreadsheet of actual numbers. This was information The Dispatch had not published before; we went
into an uncharted area.

Dumb Luck
•
•

The turning point in this project came from nosing around the association, attending meetings when an
employee with inside information on a controversial audit that showed the association had been doing
some things that would threaten the tax-exempt status.
I had to consider what this employee’s motives, but after going through the information, verifying that
it was accurate, I didn’t care about his motives.

Working with Sports
•

Working with sports is totally different than anything I had ever experienced. They report differently,
and are very concerned with maintain good relationships with sources.

Useful Links
www.guidestar.org
www.irs.gov
www.nfhs.org
http://www.dispatch.com/news/special/ohsaa/index.html

