Tips for an effective data factory
Robert Benincasa
Database Editor
Gannett News Service, Washington, D.C.
Rbenincasa@gns.gannett.com

NICAR 2002, Philadelphia

If you’re asked to take a complex data set, such as a Census release or a large
relational database from a government agency, and distill it down to simpler files
for a user base such as your newsroom, you can apply “Data Factory” concepts
to your work.
From the Gannett News Service-USA TODAY Census data factory, where a group
of editors created simplified data files and served them on the web to Gannett’s
99 daily newspapers, here are a few suggestions:
•

Before you the content of your data files, survey your users to find out what
elements they’re looking for and how they will use them.

•

Use the survey to learn about your user base’s data handling resources—software,
hardware and skill levels. Include graphic artists in your assessment, and test any
PC-Mac compatibility issues ahead of time. Encourage users to fill out the survey
and tell them that if they don’t, they will have less room to complain later when the
system doesn’t meet their needs.

•

If you’re selecting data elements from a large collection, such as one of the larger
Census releases, pass your selection list around to several colleagues to find out
which fields would be useful. Don’t rush this step. If you leave out something your
users want, you’ll only have to go back later and dig it out of the data.

•

Plan to release your data to users in a format that is compatible with their software
and skill level. Lean toward the more popular and generic formats such as Excel 97
and dBase IV.

•

As soon as you have detailed information about your data files—even before you
have any of the data—release it to your users. If there’s time, make changes they
request.

•

Be aware of the file-size limitations of your distribution system. For 10 MB files, for
example, e-mail may be unsuitable and CD-ROMs might be overkill. Determine
ahead of time if you’ll have to compress your output files, and let users know about it
in advance. If you’re posting compressed file to a web or ftp site, be aware that
some firewalls might reject user downloads of your self-extracting *.exe files.

•

Do as much testing as you can before you’re actually in production and facing
deadlines.

