COVER STORY
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 21

too much information in the wrong hands.”
Still, Dolan was able to find state radiation
safety experts and former NRC officials “who
were willing to help us figure out which missing
sources actually could be used to harm people,
and which were so weak they would be of no
use to terrorists.”
Dolan says he has learned from probing the
terrorist story that “the lesson is not to assume
that local law enforcement is completely in the
dark about a national investigation” and local
officials and lawyers can have top-notch contacts
in federal law enforcement.
“Don’t assume that if it’s a good story, the
national media will get it first,” Dolan says. “They
do a great job of covering the breaking news, but
that doesn’t mean someone watching carefully
from the wings can’t cherry pick good stories
that the big guys, in their rush to get the breaking
stuff, overlook.”
Also grabbing for the local impact was Minneapolis Star Tribune reporter Bob Von Sternberg,
who was flying from Minneapolis to Grand Forks,
N.D., on a reporting assignment nearly two weeks
after the Sept. 11 attacks. He says he was “frankly
startled” when he was whisked through security,
“without even the most cursory examination of
my luggage, laptop or cell phone.”
He says that security at the small regional
airport in Grand Forks was “rigorous and complete,” much more so than at the larger Twin
Cities airport.
When he returned to the newsroom and related
his experiences, editors sent him and another
reporter, Deborah Caulfield Ryback to check
on airport security, having them pass through
checkpoints a dozen times. They carried cell
phones, computers and cameras, along with a steel
pica pole, metal spoon handle and toiletry scissors.
In addition, they had items that could contain
dangerous substances, such as film canisters, and
toiletry containers.
“Our marching orders were that in no cases
were we to carry anything illegal or any items
that had been specifically banned by the airlines
or FAA. We were to act like legitimate travelers
and held valid boarding passes from Northwest
Airlines,” von Sternberg says.
“Editors took pains to be sure the language of
the story was as neutral as possible and descriptive
as possible, rather than accusatory,” von Sternberg
says of the story published Sept. 28.
Anita Bruzzese, managing editor of The IRE Journal,
is a syndicated columnist and author on workplace
issues.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2002

Press needs to challenge new
concentration of power

U

tter the word “unilateralism,” and eyes
roll. It’s a big word, a policy wonk word,
a word guaranteed to stultify readers.
It’s a word that freedom of information
advocates had better become familiar with,
quickly, because our federal government – and
soon enough, our state and local governments –
are embracing the newly rediscovered efficiencies
of unilateral governance.
Unchecked by fear of another superpower
and, at least for now, unchecked by our traditionally outspoken press and civil society, the
Bush administration marches on. Debate about
the purposes or methods of the war against
terrorism has been cowed into virtual silence
in the mainstream. The result, according to
London’s Guardian, is a sweeping “ruthlessness”
manifesting itself in a startling concentration of
power in the executive branch.
Let’s take the past month alone, and count the
moves that the administration has made without
consulting anyone other than the inner circle:
• A presidential order to allow trials by military
tribunals for noncitizens accused of terrorism.
• A suspension of the right of detainees to have
private conversations with attorneys, if the
attorney general deems they might pose a threat
to the public.
• A Justice Department plan to interview 5,000
young men who have entered the United States
from specified nations since 2000. I don’t have
to tell you that no one will know who, when,
where and for what reason these young men
were “voluntarily” questioned, do I?
• The Pentagon has told defense contractors not
to talk publicly about military business and
prohibited Defense Department acquisition
officials from speaking with the press. ``Even
innocuous industrial information can reveal
much ... to the trained intelligence collector,’’ a
Pentagon memo to contractors said.
• The White House, angry over insignificant leaks
to the media, first shrunk the pool of lawmakers
privy to classified briefings, but backed down
after Congress cried foul.
• Government Web sites have been cleansed
of sensitive military information on the where-

FOI REPORT

abouts of aircraft carriers, Army chemical
weapons stockpiles and
CHARLES DAVIS
nuclear power plants.
Government maps of
the nation’s gas and oil pipelines have been
removed. So have data on the types of chemicals
used in American communities – unilaterally,
with no legal standards being applied, no
debate, no principle at play other than unbridled
power.
• Finally, let’s not forget the more than 1,400
people currently being detained by the Justice
Department, many since Sept. 11. The Justice
Department already has denied access to any
information about those individuals under
FOIA. One media institution – The Nation –
joined a request by more than 40 FOI, privacy
and civil liberties groups for the information.
No one – not even Congress – has been able to
find out how many are still detained and what,
if any, charges have been filed.
• President Bush also signed an executive order
eviscerating the Presidential Records Act, an
overwhelmingly bipartisan post-Watergate
creation opening up the records of past administrations.

Warped balance

What emerges from the laundry list is an
unprecedented expansion of the exercise of
executive branch authority with diminished
opportunity for independent oversight, and little
or no provision for accountability. The key seems
to be speed, mixed with a bit of gravitas: new
policies are unilaterally adopted almost daily,
giving those of us in the position of debating
them little or no chance to attract the scrutiny of
Congress before the next outrage is perpetrated.
By doing so, and by labeling each unilateral
move a blow for motherhood and apple pie
and any critic of it a traitor, this presidency is
warping the institutional checks and balances
that took the nation decades to create. Because
it seems easier, because it is more efficient,
this administration is turning its cumulative
CONTINUED ON PAGE 25 ×

Charles Davis is executive director of the Freedom of Information Center, an assistant professor at the
Missouri School of Journalism and a member of IRE’s First Amendment Committee.

23

COVER STORY
“If only the government has information, then
only the government knows about problems.
If the public doesn’t know what the problems
are, it’s not going to fund solutions,” Daugherty
says.

“Interestingly, they passed it by voice vote, so
we can’t even hold them accountable for the way
they voted,” says Barbara Petersen, executive
director of the Florida First Amendment Foundation, a Tallahassee-based nonprofit organization
that advances the public’s constitutional right to
No clear directive
open government.
For almost 14 years, Paul Orum, director
Petersen says the measure is ripe for chalof the Working Group on Community Right-tolenge.
Know, has used public records to try to make
“The rule change in access to their records
chemical plants safer for citizens and to make
was in direct violation of our constitution,”
communities aware of their risks.
Petersen says. She says such changes can only be
“We have pushed for many
made by general law.
years for improved site security For more information:
She adds that while we all
and hazard reduction at chemical OMB Watch:
recognize the need to protect
plants,” Orum says. “There has
information such as port security
www.ombwatch.org/info
been a great deal of complacency
plans, exemptions already exist
that has accompanied traditional /2001/access.html
for those types of records.
secrecy in the industry. Environ- Reporters Committee
“But how does closing legisment groups and public interest for Freedom of the Press:
lative meetings protect us? How
groups have relied on the right www.rcfp.org
does closing meetings about
to know to push government and
the amount of pharmaceuticals
industry to make changes as far Florida First Amendment
available protect us? We have
Foundation:
as hazards.”
to stop and think about the true
Bass also argues that much www.floridafaf.org
effect of some of the proposals
of the information has been
and when we do, we realize
Investigative Reporters
removed randomly without a
we should err on the side of
clear directive. When he’s asked and Editors FOI site:
openness,” Petersen says.
agencies for the reasons behind www.ire.org/foi/
Daughtery notes that while
their actions, he’s gotten vague
“we’ve all looked to Florida as
responses.
the example of the sunshine state…I certainly
An e-mail response to Bass from the Departhope that states that have not followed Florida’s
ment of Transportation’s information services
lead in opening records will not now follow in
department says: “Due to the attacks on September
closing records.”
11th, BTS and all other government agencies
OMB’s Bass argues that much of these actions
have had to re-evaluate the content available
have been done randomly without a clear plan.
through our Web pages.”
“We need to have a reasoned debate about
Bass says he was particularly concerned about
this,” Bass says. “We shouldn’t be acting precipithe phrase “all other government agencies” in
tously to take things down.
the message.
“If there is a reasonable argument with
Florida, a state that has served as a public
reasonable benchmarks, I think we want to hear
access model for the rest of the country, saw storm
that and act accordingly. But until then, I think
clouds closing in on its long-standing tradition of
in an open society public right to know has to
sunshine in a special session that ended Nov. 1.
prevail.”
Several bills came before legislators that would
According to Davis, journalists need to be
have closed access – in the name of security – to
“much, much, much, much more vocal in commany records that have been open. Among the
municating with their elected representatives and
proposed legislation was a bill that would have
being citizens. We’ve always been very reticent
permitted law enforcement agencies to conceal
about these things and we’re getting killed.
arrests of individuals for seven days and delay
We need to think pretty hard as a profession
access to public records if they could reveal
about whether we’re going to sit back and let
terrorist activity.
it happen.”
What did pass in the Senate, however, was
Jennifer LaFleur is the computer-assisted reporting
a change in the body’s rules that would allow
editor for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch and serves on
it to meet secretly and to keep records of those
IRE’s First Amendment Committee.
meetings secret.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2002

FOI Report
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 23

back on the experience on which that balance
was based.
Why is all of this important? Perhaps we
should ask one of the 1,400 detainees who have
been arrested and jailed as “material witnesses”
in the Sept. 11 investigation. It seems not one of
these witnesses has yet provided any evidence
material enough to secure an indictment against
anyone for any involvement in the Sept. 11
attacks.
Yet the government has done whatever it can
to avoid releasing them, and to avoid releasing
any details about them. Why? Because knowing
their fate engenders sympathy, and sympathy
might engender criticism.
Thanks to lawyers and human rights activists, (the fact that we speak of human rights
activists working on domestic law enforcement
issues alone is truly newsworthy, no?) we
know the story of Ahmad Abou El-Kheir.
El-Kheir is a 28-year-old Egyptian national
arrested days after the WTC attack. He was
suspected of knowing two of the hijackers. He
was transported to New York and jailed as a
material witness.
Almost one month later a federal judge
ordered his release. He was then transferred
to a Bronx court on a three-year old warrant
involving a minor disorderly conduct conviction. Once that matter was resolved, he was
transferred to the custody of the INS to face
a charge that he had violated his visa on an
earlier visit to the United States. When he
agreed to depart the country, the INS continued
to detain him for deportation, but refused to
actually deport him. He remains in INS custody
to this day.

No excuses

According to those closest to the situation, it
appears the vast majority of the detainees have
no access to representation by counsel, or access
to the federal courts to seek habeas corpus
release. The media has gathered information
on a small number of detainees, and media
coverage of their plight has helped some people
to win their release.
Yet overall, media response beyond the
initial “they won’t tell us who these people are”
stories has been virtually non-existent. Huge
stories lie behind the administration’s unilateral
shift. Why aren’t we telling them? The lack of
access to information is no excuse.

25

