Scooplets
finding links and stories for thescoop.org

Panel Presentation
Weblogs: a new way to think about the collection and preservation of
information, documents and records. What are weblogs? They are places to
post and publish information, share ideas and collect feedback. At their
best, they can serve as a meeting place for reporters working on a
common project. If you ever have trouble keeping your notes straight,
finding that resource you recorded on a Post-It or documenting your
work, weblogs can help.
Some examples: Gary Price's Resource Shelf, Paul Nakada's Segway News,
and even my own site. This page was composed and published using weblog
software.
How can journalists use them?
l You can log data activity (entry, cleanup, processing, queries)
l You can aggegate information gathered from many sources (or
reporters)
l You can share information with others inside the newsroom

Weblogs can be multi-user, interactive and done over the Internet, an
intranet or corporate VPN. They can be published from a personal web
server or a large box sitting in the IT department. I publish one using
my desktop PC.
What are the benefits? Permanency, for one. You will always have a
record of what you posted, and many allow for individual links for each
entry, so you don't have to go looking for it - just bookmark it once.
Organization, for another. Some weblogging apps now employ categories,
which allow you to publish information in their own topic areas. This
allows readers to see exactly what they want to. Most weblogs can be
updated in a matter of minutes from nearly any location. And you can
deliver the content of a weblog in different ways - via a web browser or
XML are two common formats.
Can I see it? Sure, log into Blogger.com using the username "nicardemo"
and the password "test" and then edit the blog. You can add a post and
then hit "Post & Publish" to send it to its final destination. Nothing
to it! To visit some other blogging apps, try Radio UserLand (a
standalone personal Web server and blogging tool) or Movable Type or
GreyMatter, both Perl scripts that run on a Web server. Total newbie?
Try Blogger first, then proceed to other applications. You'll find a
large community of weblog users at Blogger.com or Weblogs.com.

Home
thescoop.org

© Copyright 2002, Derek Willis.
Last update: 3/16/2002; 4:48:32 PM.

