REPORTING (COMPUTER ASSISTED) ON YOUR BEAT

Jere Downs, Staff Writer, Transportation, Phila. Inquirer
Jdowns@phillynews.com (610) 313-8128
NICAR 02

1. "Ask (in person, if possible) and you shall receive."
Most government and business officials I cover use Excel or other spreadsheet software to manage budgets, annual reports, etc.
But they're not likely to think this could be useful to you. If you can, arrange to meet them in their office so you see how they
manage the data from their desk.
Example, I recently wrote a story on declining ridership at Philadelphia's transit provider. Over the phone, the official gave me
select routes and the numbers of declining passengers. I asked for an appointment in his office where we sat down together at
his computer and looked at the reports he reviews of ridership, revenue, etc. Many were on Excel. After that, he e-mailed me
entire spreadsheets that I could analyse.
2. Keep the numbers out of the story (Instead, put them in a chart or a map).
I quote no more than one or two numbers or statistics in a paragraph. Anymore than that can kill a reader's train of thought. I try to
imagine how to portray data in which a reader can absorb the information at a glance. For the story about declining bus ridership,
we mapped key routes that were dropping all over the Philadelphia region. Printing a spreadsheet of routes and their decline was
dismissed as too hard for the reader to (first) imagine which routes they were and (second) too much information.
3. Manage your own graphics
As the reporter who has managed the data, you are in the best position to create your own art. When I analyse data, I always
break it out into little charts or spreadsheets that are printable in the paper. It helps me understand it as I go. The result is that I
often find it could be useful for readers as well. A bonus: our paper's artists in the graphics department appreciate that most of the
work is already done by this reporter when they get the assignment.
4. Talking about data and obtaining data is not as hard as it used to be......
In the last several years, most people I talk to in the course of the transportation beat are at least familiar with what Excel (and
sometimes Access!) is all about. It has become nearly routine to ask what additional data may be available from a source. Seldom
now do I encounter a dumbfounded silence on the phone when I ask a question like "Do you have anything on disk?"
5. Spend some time on the Internet scrolling for data on your beat
When the beat is slow, (like, never, but sometimes), I try to check out government sources on the Internet to see what data is
available on my beat. Government sites are constantly being updated. The other day, I found the U.S. Dept. of Transportation
had vastly improved a searchable database on individual trucking companies. I can plug a truck firm's name into the site and find
out a firm's safety record, their insurance standing, and driver safety, all in one fell swoop. I save shortcuts to key Internet sites on
my desktop. That reminds me to visit there when I have a free moment.
6. Don't box yourself in with a deadline
Give yourself plenty of time to wrestle your data before you broadcast your story to an editor or the newsroom. Negotiating can
take weeks. Often, the story you imagined isn't there _ OR the story turns out to be different. Nurse these stories.
7. Copy. Copy. Copy. Save. Save. Save. Did I say "Save?"
Always copy the data you receive in its original form. Save your versions as you update and fiddle with it. Keep notes to yourself
so you don't forget what you did to it, because you will. Forget.
8. Ask for help.
At other papers, in other newsrooms, chances are a reporter has already journeyed the data road you hope to travel. Post your
doings on the NICAR listserv. Ask questions. Show your analysis and formulas to another reporter. Fresh eyes have found errors
and asked good questions long after I went blind staring at my own numbers.
9. (Most important)
If it doesn't work, it's still an investment in your beat/career
In a business centered on the rewards of daily journalism, don't kick yourself if you bollix up a spreadsheet, spend hours on a
database, or dither away a half dozen phone conversations in failed negotiations for data.
Your reward is knowing how to do it better next time.
10. Sign up for listservs on your beat, find and visit Internet sites/publications related to what you cover.
There are lots of geeks in the world you are not reporters who love what you do. Think of those people as your lieutenants in the
battle to shine light on a topic. Retired industry executives, university professors, buffs, club members, enthusiasts. There's an
entire universe out there of people who love to do what you do _ but don't necessarily get paid for it. Find them. Use them.
Sometimes, they will have digested a government agency report, or website that you didn't have time for. They will have
crunched the data so you don't have to. Example: a commuters' rights organization for public transportation in the Philly area
have become great assets to the transportation beat. Staffed with geeks who monitor route schedules, budgets and news in the
transit industry, they are great (free) consultants who love to talk about this stuff. Often times, they will access reports and
documents from industry officials I did not know existed.

