Getting data from the Web for Excel
Updated by Debbie Wolfe
Technology Training Editor
St. Petersburg Times

Nov. 30, 2001
dpwolfe@aol.com
www.techtrainfordeadline.com

Text Files:
1. Check the URL and make sure that you are dealing with a text file (.txt).
Example: www.census.gov/population/estimates/nation/intfile1-1.txt
2. Go to the File menu and select Save As. Save the file to your hard drive.
3. Minimize the browser window. Open Excel.
4. From the File menu, choose Open. Make sure the "Files of Type" box says Text Files. If it
doesn’t, click the down arrow and select Text Files. Select your saved file. Click Open.
5. The Import Wizard will launch. The Wizard will walk you through the import in three steps.
6. Determine if the file is "Delimited" or "Fixed Width." If there are commas or semi-colons or spaces
separating the columns, you probably have a delimited file. If your columns appear to be lined up,
the data may be fixed width. Click Next.
7. If you selected "Delimited," select the appropriate delimiter (comma, semicolon, space, etc.) Click
Next.
8. If you selected "Fixed Width," insert the column lines where appropriate. Click Next.
9. In Step 3 of the Import Wizard, the column data format will default to General. You may want to
change numbers like Zip Codes, addresses, and social security numbers to Text by selecting
each column. Click Finish.
10. Very Important! You’re file is still a text (.txt) file, you must save it as a spreadsheet (.xls). Select
File from the menu, click on Save As. Name the file and from the "Save as Type" drop-down
select Microsoft Excel (.xls).
HTML Files:
1. Check the URL and make sure that you are dealing with an “html” file (.htm/.html).
Example: www.census.gov/hhes/hlthins/hlthin00/hi00ta.html
If you’re lucky:
2. Select the data that you want in the spreadsheet by highlighting that information. From the Edit
menu, select Copy.
3. Open Excel. From the Edit menu, select Paste. Data should be in the appropriate cells. Save the
file as a spreadsheet (.xls).
If you’re not so lucky:
1. Select the data that you want to use. From the Edit menu, choose Copy.
2. Open Excel. Click in a cell and from the Edit menu, click Paste. The entire row of data will appear
in one cell. You want all of that data to appear in individual cells.
3. From the Data menu, select Text to Columns.
4. The Import Wizard will launch. The Wizard will walk you through the import in three steps.
5. Determine if the file is "Delimited" or "Fixed Width." Walk through the appropriate steps. Click
Finish. Save the file as a spreadsheet (.xls).
If that doesn’t work:
1. Select the data that you want to use by highlighting the information. From the Edit menu, choose
Copy. (Note: If you want the full page, save the page as a Text (.txt) file and jump to Step 4.)
2. Open Notepad. Paste the data into Notepad.
3. Save the file as a Text (.txt) file. Close Notepad.
4. Open Excel. From the File menu select Open. Open your file. (If you can’t find it, remember to
change the "Files of Type" box to Text files.)
The Import Wizard will launch and you’re home free. Remember to save the file as a spreadsheet (.xls).

PDF Files:
And you thought HTML files were tricky …..
www.census.gov/ipc/www/wp98.html (World Population Profile from the U.S. Census Bureau)
1. To work with PDF files, you must be viewing the PDF file independent from the browser. To
guarantee that you are not using Adobe as a "plug-in" RIGHT mouse click on the file that you
want to work with. Select Save Target As and save the file to your desktop.
2. Open Adobe Acrobat. From the File menu select Open and open your file. You can now take
advantage of all the tools that are in Adobe.
3. To select portions of the document, click on the Text Select Tool (this is the button that either
says “abc” or has the capital “T” on it.) Select the text that you want to copy. (Note: To clean the
data effectively, you may need to select portions of the pdf file. See Step 4.)
4. If you want to select a portion of a table, rather than the entire table, click your CTRL key and
then select the text you want.
5. Open Notepad. Paste the selected text into Notepad. Save the file as a text (.txt) file.
6. Open Excel. Find and open the text file. The Import Wizard will launch. Your data will probably
be "delimited" and the delimiter is often a space. Follow the steps. Remember to save the file as
a spreadsheet (.xls).
*If you do not have Adobe Acrobat Reader on your computer, you can download it from: www.adobe.com
Spreadsheet/Database/Executable Files:
Just a few notes about these guys.
Sometimes you will luck out and download something that is already in a spreadsheet or database
format. If your file has an extension like .xls or .dbf you can open the file directly into a spreadsheet. At
times you may want to save the file (with a RIGHT mouse click) first and then open it from within Excel or
Access.
If your file is an executable file (.exe), you will need to download the file and then open it. This process
typically inflates the physical size of a file that has been compressed.
You can import a .dbf file into a spreadsheet. Just choose File from the menu and select Open.
Reminders:
• Be careful. Using stats can be tricky. Make sure you’re comparing apples to apples.
• Check your work. Especially if you’re sorting or using formulas. Save your work after each
change.
• Compare data. If there is more than one source for the same data, check both to see if there are
inconsistencies.
Have fun!
Common File Extensions:
.txt .csv .prn .asc =
.htm .html
=
.xls .wk*
=
.mdb
=
.dbf
=
.doc
=
.wp*
=
.pdf
=
.zip
=
.exe
=
.jpg .tif
.gif
=
.mpg .mov
=
.ppt .pps
=

text or ascii
HTML or Hypertext Markup Language (Web pages)
Excel, Lotus (spreadsheet files)
Access
typical database program, FoxPro
Word or WordPad
WordPerfect
Adobe Acrobat
ZIP (compressed file)
executable (often, a program file; sometimes a self-extracting ZIP file)
graphics (photos are most often .jpg)
video
PowerPoint presentation or slide show (if you do not have PowerPoint on
your PC and you would like to view these types of files, you can download a
FREE viewer from Microsoft caution total download time = 17 minutes @ 28.8k

office.microsoft.com/downloads/2000/Ppview97.aspx)
Special thanks to:
Jennifer Small-Evert (Lexis-Nexis, formerly of the San Antonio Express-News ) who authored the original document.

