WHAT BEAT JOURNALISTS NEED TO KNOW SERIES
WEB -- Level II: search techniques
updated May 16, 2001

Created by Debbie Wolfe dpwolfe@aol.com
Technology Training Editor (727) 892-2919
St. Petersburg Times, Florida USA
www.techtrainfordeadline.com (consulting info)
www.notrain-nogain.org (technology section)

Web Target à backgrounding a beat
10 Web sites that can help you
build a solid foundation for any beat
1

www.nicar.org

National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting

suggested path:

resource center à search 17,000+ story database
tip: Contact the author(s) for additional details regarding how
they wrote the story. Members of the Investigative Reporters
and Editors (IRE) eagerly share their expertise with other
members so it is worth it to join. See: www.ire.org for details.
note: NICAR sponsors an annual national computer conference
(schmooze opportunity) and other computer training opportunities;
many members do on-site consulting and guest speaking
2

www.clearinghouse.net

Argus Clearinghouse

suggested paths:

A. drilling method: communication à journalism and writing à
journalists à “toad” link à NYTimes navigator
note: the NYTimes navigator is updated often and is based on
their intranet (www.nytimes.com/navigator)
tip: bookmark the pages you like rather than drilling each time
B. search/browse (on left): see sample search results
C. Internet Searching Center (on left): you may want to bookmark this
collection of search links

3

209.8.151.142/vlj.html

WWW: Virtual library: Journalism

tip: bookmark what you like and leave the rest

4

gwis2.circ.gwu.edu/~gprice/listof.htm

List of Lists by Gary Price

tip #1: bookmark what you like and leave the rest
tip #2: try “Direct Search” to locate data that are part of the
so-called “hidden Web” – sources that cannot be located via
traditional search engines
note: a tilde (~) in a Web address denotes a personal page –
therefore, you should be wary of the information unless you know
the source(s)

special feature: stories are written by
journalists who have submitted their
work for contest consideration -- these
are solid examples of national-, stateand local-level stories
sample search results:
water
269
ground water
10
water and toxic
39
water and “toxic waste”
9
drinking water
36
water or toxic
451

special features: items are rated
overall 1-5 based on a detailed
checklist; methodology is explained
under a link on the Home page; this
sites is one of the classics on the Web;
check out the “Digital Librarian’s Award”
… for instance, in 1997 a site featuring
Women’s Studies and Women’s Issues
was honored
sample search results for
“search/browse” feature:
medical
74
medicine
139
“health care”
14
cancer
7
special feature: SCOUT site
maintained by John Makulowich and
updated often; this site is one of the
classics on the Web; bio and
background info for Makulowich is
available on the Home page:
209.8.151.142
special feature: SCOUT site
maintained by a professional librarian
and updated often; this site is one of the
classics on the Web; bio and
background on Price is a link on the
site; many professional news librarians
rely on Price’s collections as a source
to create their own

5

thomas.loc.gov

Thomas – Library of Congress

suggested path:

th

Legislation à Bill Summary and Status à 107 Congress à
scroll down to the search box … see sample search results
tip #1: Search to locate members of Congress who have
sponsored bills that pertain to your beat. Then, contact the
legislator and their staff to obtain background information and
additional contacts – use their Rolodex to find sources!
tip #2: Search to locate the working (or informal) title of a bill.
Then, do a search on the title in "Deja" (Now, Google groups: see
entry #9, below) to read what people (the public) are saying. In this
example, the working title is: Controlling the Assault of
Non-Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act of 2001. Remember
to try shortened variations when you search:
CAN SPAM Act of 2001 or Anti-spamming Act of 2001
6

www.ibiblio.org/slanews/internet/archives.html

U.S. news archives

suggested paths:

A. Look in the section that includes California for the link to the
San Francisco Examiner and San Francisco Chronicle – it’s
known as “SFGate.” The archives for both of these papers are
available free from 1995.
tip: if a link does not work, backspace to the root and try that…
in this case, the root is: www.SFGate.com à archives (in the
sidebar on the left)
B. Look in the section that includes Florida for the link to the
St. Petersburg Times. The newspaper's archive is available from
1987 to the present for free. On the Home page, look in the upper
right corner area for a very small link called “Search our archives.”
Click the link and select the "advanced" tab.
7

www.profnet.com/ped.html

ProfNet’s database of 4,200 experts

tip #1: search for a subject/topic word or a simple phrase
tip #2: when you get results, look for those experts located in
an earlier time zone
tip #3: if you can’t locate an “exact match” expert, contact one
that is close to what you need and ask them to refer you to
another source – use their Rolodex!
8

www.marketingsource.com/associations

national associations search

tip #1: search for one subject/topic word or a city/street name
tip #2: check out the drop-down box which allows you to browse
associations by category (for one-word searches, the results are
the same as tip #1)

sample search results using the
“multi tier” approach to searching –
start broad, read a little, refine the
search for the second and third tries:
search #1 = Boolean "and" narrows: 24
#band(Internet mail)
search #2 = Boolean "or" broadens: 158
#or(Internet spam)
search #3 = Boolean phrase:
#phrase(electronic mail)

152

search #4 = Boolean combo:
2
#band(Internet spam #phrase(electronic
mail))
For more advanced search tips:
thomas.loc.gov/home/all.about.inquery.html

special feature: if you do not have
access to professional subscription
services like Nexis or Dow Jones, this
resource is a GOLD MINE as it will help
you locate free or low-cost newspaper
archives available through the Web;
maintained by the Special Libraries
Association News Division; originally
created by Margot Williams, a news
librarian at the Washington Post, as a
project for her college-level students;
this is a classic among news librarians
and researchers

special feature: unlike placing a
traditional ProfNet request, you can
obtain results in a few seconds;
professional bios and complete contact
information are included under the
name links; although searching the
database is fast, it is a subset of the
experts you would reach with a
traditional request; to learn more about
what ProfNet is, check out the Home
page: www.profnet.com
special feature: 5,000+ associations
may be searched through a primitive
search engine
sample search results:
news
22
publishing

82

tampa

6

2

9

groups.google.com
a site to watch ... see: notes

Deja (formerly known as: DejaNews) was
acquired by Google Feb. 12, 2001

suggested path:

à Advanced Groups Search
tip #1: use the "Find messages" boxes to search for particular
subject, topic word(s) or phrase(s)
tip #2: use some of the boxes to search for messages posted by a
particular author – you will need to know the author’s name or a
part of their e-mail address: either their ID, domain or both
examples:
a. Find messages with all the words: landry sptimes
b. Find messages with all the words: slandry sptimes
c. Return only messages where the author is: sue landry
combo method – fill in both boxes as follows:
Find messages with all the words: sue landry
Find messages with the exact phrase: st petersburg times

Trap: Better known as the "getting buried" syndrome!
Unfortunately, since "@" is no longer a searchable character and
"com" is no longer allowed because Google claims it's too broad,
looking for @sptimes.com will yield messages posted from e-mail
users at that domain AND material credited to the corporate Web
site which is: www.sptimes.com. Searching for @sptimes.com
really looks for "sptimes" and yields over 6,000 results!
for more background:

special features: this was a great way
to locate real people and read what
they had to say; over 35,000 forums
(newsrgroups) allowed people to post
messages and have discussions
(conversation threads) about specific
topics; over 650-million messages date
from 1995 onwards (this includes the
old Deja archive); to learn more about
newsgroups, see:
www.poynter.org/dj/082300.htm
notes:
(1) Google does not allow the public to
post messages for free to newsgroups
as Deja once did. The ability of the
public to post free messages to any
newsgroup is directly proportional to the
value of the collection so the longer the
feature remains unavailable, the more
the current collection decreases in
value to journalists. At the time this
handout was updated, Web-based
newsgroup readers allow free message
posting only to some newsgroups and
most often require a valid e-mail
address during registration.
(2) Wildcard searches in domains are
not supported by Google. In the past,
you could locate individuals by knowing
part of their e-mail address
(*@sptimes.com) but not any more
because e-mail addresses are no
longer a searchable field!

groups.google.com/googlegroups/help.html
10

lii.org

Librarian’s Index to the Internet (LII)

tip: this site is worth frequent visits as it is updated often

special features: imagine having 100
professional librarians comb the Web to
locate and evaluate 7,800+ sources and
you have this gem of a site; evaluations
are signed too! – look under the link in
the upper right corner called “about the
LII” to locate a list of the staff and their
signature initials; this is a classic Web
site among news librarians and
researchers

3

