Tip Sheet: Tracking Corporate Lobbying
Bob Young, research director, Public Citizen’s Congress Watch
202-454-5139, byoung@citizen.org
IRE Regional Conference, Washington, D.C., January 26, 2002
Most corporations spend far more on lobbying than on campaign contributions. For
instance, the airline and pharmaceutical industries spend $4 on lobbying for every $1 on
campaign contributions. And, unlike campaign contributions, lobbying reports can make
the political agendas of corporations very clear. (See The New York Times, “A Muscular
Lobby Rolls Up Its Sleeves,” based on Public Citizen’s “The Other Drug War.”)
Tracking corporations through lobby disclosure reports – made easy.
How often are reports filed? Twice a year – August 14 (first half of the year) and
February 14 (second half of the previous year). In practice, however, they don’t all
become available to the public for weeks after that.
Where are reports filed – and are they on-line? Reports are filed with the Secretary of
the Senate and the Legislative Resource Center at the House. The Senate’s online system
can be accessed at http://sopr.senate.gov. But beware of its flaws. (See “Pitfalls” below)
How do I search the system? The best ways to search the system are by a) “registrant”
b) “client” and c) “lobbyist.” (See Attachment A)
§

Registrant is the entity that is doing the lobbying. The registrant can be a corporation
that has in-house lobbyists, or an outside lobbying firm hired by a corporation.

§

Some corporations will only show up in the system as client of an outside firm.

§

If you are interested in a lobbyist like Linda Daschle search by lobbyist name . You’d
find that Daschle worked for 22 clients in 2000, including American and Northwest
Airlines.

What do lobbying disclosure reports reveal?
§

Who is lobbying for whom. (Line 1 – “registrant” and Line 7 – “client”)

§

How much a company spent on lobbying (Line 13 – “expenses”) or how much an
outside firm earned while lobbying for specific client (Line 12 – “income”)
Note: Line 13 should reveal a company’s total spending, both on in-house and
outside lobbyists. Line 12 reveals only what an outside firm received from a client.
Remember these are estimates.

§

What issues a company lobbied on: Line 15 gives a three-letter issue area code. Line
16 reveals specific issues, often down to particular bills.

§

Line 17 shows what chambers of Congress and federal agencies were lobbied –
important for tracking the influence of revolving door lobbyists on former colleagues.

§

Line 18 reveals the names (and number) of lobbyists who worked on a certain issue.
Note the “Covered Official Position” column, which sometimes shows a lobbyist’s
former government position. Beware: “Covered position” is defined so narrowly it
doesn’t apply to most former federal employees.

How do I find revolving door lobbyists?
Check the “Covered Position” section of the lobby disclosure forms. (See Bracewell &
Patterson’s form for Enron. Marc Racicot and others list their former posts.) A better
source is Washington Representatives (www.columbiabooks.com) .
This directory contains vital information about roughly 17,000 lobbyists, foreign agents,
consultants, legal advisors and p.r. types. For instance, it shows Linda Daschle’s phone
number, clients and a brief bio (“Deputy Administration, Federal Aviation
Administration 1993-1997”). But it doesn’t show that Daschle briefly held the FAA’s
top post, nor does it mention that she is married to Tom Daschle.
Another good source for picking up more information – particularly juicy anecdotes – on
revolving door connections is Influence, a newsletter published by Legal Times.
Subscriptions are pricey (approximately $350/year) but Influence is full of insider tidbits.
It also has a searchable database (www.influenceonline.net) on lobbyists.

Pitfalls: Flaws in the lobby disclosure system you need to know about.
Incomplete reporting in the on-line system. Because of anthrax contamination and the
closure of the Hart Building, the Senate system remains incomplete for the first half of
2001. You cannot count on getting all records there.
Searching problems. You cannot search either system – House or Senate – by issue or
bill lobbied on, so you can’t search for the entities that lobbied on particular legislation.
You cannot use the on-line system to total information about a specific lobbyist,
company or industry.
Specific bills lobbied on are frequently omitted, despite clear guidance from the
congressional disclosure offices.
The Center for Responsive Politics found that 45 percent of firms filing mid-year 2000
reports did not list bill numbers and many gave only vague descriptions of specific
lobbying issues. (For example, Alexander Strategy, a lobbying firm run by two top
former aides to Rep. Tom Delay, Ed Buckham and Karl Gallant, earned $140,000 in six
months of lobbying for Enron. On what? “Energy deregulation,” is all they disclosed.)

