Tip Sheet: Industry Influence on Federal Rulemaking
Bob Young, research director, Public Citizen’s Congress Watch
202-454-5139, byoung@citizen.org
IRE Regional Conference, Washington, D.C., January 26, 2002
Who cares?
When Congress passes a law, that legislation must be translated into enforceable rules or regulations.
The rulemaking process – which is handled by regulatory agencies such as the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) – gives industry a great
opportunity to dilute, delay or even discard rules that it finds onerous. We certainly found that to be the
case in our aviation security report (www.citizen.org/documents/finalreport.PDF).
By closely examining the rulemaking process our report showed how the industry successfully fought
key security improvements that were recommended by a presidential commission.
12 Steps in the Search for Industry Influence in the Federal Rulemaking Process
•
Locating the Rule: The regulatory rulemaking process is put in motion by legislation, congressional
hearings, court orders, executive orders, emergency situations or through an agency’s own initiative.
A federal agency begins the process by issuing a Notice of Proposed Rule Making and then a
Proposed Rule in the Federal Register. Search the Federal Register by keyword to find the rule at:
http://www.access.gpo.gov/su_docs/aces/aces140.html.
•

Looking for Changes in the Rule: These initial publications set the framework for the rule and
describe the purpose, estimated costs and affect on different groups. This is an effective
“benchmark” for future changes in the proposed rule; it is usually the best gauge of an agency’s true
intent. Any differences between the proposed and final rule should obviously be examined for a
corporation’s influence on the policy.

•

Finding Evidence of Industry Opposition: Along with the proposed rule comes an opportunity for
public comments, and these become part of the rule’s docket. This is where the influence of trade
groups and corporations become part of the public record. Corporations will not only comment
on the rule’s substance, but often will ask for extensions in the comment and rulemaking process.

•

Using the “Docket Summary” for a Quick Overview: An agency’s “docket summary” will
describe the commentors, studies addressing the rule, requests for extension of time, trade impact
and Regulatory Impact Analysis. The summary offers a quick overview: for example, a proposed
Housing and Urban Development rule summary showed that the primary company affected
submitted 88 percent of the 1,700 comments.

•

Locating the Docket: Some dockets are available online and others are kept in the agency’s files.
For the Department of Transportation, go to http://dms.dot.gov. The Transportation’s Docket
Management System is the most comprehensive and easiest to navigate, but the EPA
(www.epa.gov/epahome/dockets.htm) and FDA ( www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/default.htm) also have
materials online. A few other agency sites with helpful regulatory materials include: Education
Department: www.ed.gov/legislation/FedRegister/announcements/index.html; Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov/os/publiccomments.htm;
Labor
Department:
www.dol.gov/dol/compliance/compliancerulemaking.htm; OSHA: www.osha.gov/comp-links.html; Treasury Department: www.fms.treas.gov/eft/regs/ .

•

Using the Docket Management System to Find Your Rule: Hit the “search” box. Put in the
number of the rule you’re examining (you can also search by key words). Now you’ve got the
Docket Information Summary on your screen. You can simply scroll through the comments or

search

for

specific

companies

to

see

what

they

said

about

a

proposed

rule.

•

Don’t Forget the Cost-Benefit Analysis: The cost-benefit analysis is a rich vein to tap when it
comes to industry objections. To some, a cost-benefit analysis is the only efficient means of
addressing new rules; for others it looks like cold-hearted calculations with no thought given to
societal benefits or personal suffering. That said, it is fertile ground for a corporation to influence
federal agencies and regulations.

•

Reading (and Finding) the Cost-Benefit Analysis: An example comes from the FAA’s rule
concerning security of checked baggage. The cost of the rule – about $2 billion – includes new
security staff, training programs, new equipment, infrastructure changes and costs borne by airline
carriers that could be forced to delay takeoffs or schedule less flights. The rule’s benefit is the ability
to prevent a terrorist catastrophe. For rulemaking purposes, the FAA estimated the total price tag of
domestic airline terrorism to equal $271 million – the sum of one lost Boeing 737, $12 million in
property damage, $3.5 million in legal fees and the loss of 78 lives valued at $2.7 million each. Also
included in the benefit are the costs of market disruptions that would result from terrorism. This
equation was laid out in the Regulatory Impact Analysis (found in the rule’s docket).

•

Corporations Comment on the Cost-Benefit Analysis: A corporation’s influence over the
rulemaking process comes from challenges to these calculations (saying that the price of the
estimated benefit is too high, or the government estimate of cost to industry is too low). In this case
several airlines and industry representatives objected to the FAA’s cost estimates. They
understood that a rule wouldn’t be issued if the costs exceed the benefits and argued that the rule
would be too burdensome. “If we were also required to support bag match at our hubs, we would be
required to expend a great deal more in equipment and manpower. We do not believe this is
justified,” wrote TWA in comments available in the online docket. The trade group Air Transport
Association noted “The significant operational and economic impact of applying (positive passenger
bag match) is undisputed and cannot be overemphasized, and is not a viable option at hub airports.”
[Despite these industry arguments, Inspector General Kenneth Mead described on January 23, 2002
how easily airlines were able to implement new, post 9-11 security measures, and also stressed the
need for full passenger bag matching at all airports (www.oig.dot.gov/show_txt.php?id=671 ).]

•

Looking at the Final Rule for Industry’s Successes: Changes in the proposed rule may come after
the comment period ends and changes will be evident in the final rule, which is published in the
Federal Register. The final rule allows the agency to respond to industry objections and explain why
changes were or were not made.

•

Understanding the Importance of OMB and OIRA: The OMB reviews finalized rules and
applies a cost-benefit analysis. This stage has become a popular place to kill regulations, either by
holding it at the OMB, making substantial changes to the rule or sending the rule back to the agency
for additional work. The OMB must provide a rationale for its changes, and the “return letters” can
be a source: www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/return_letter.html . Records of meeting and oral
communication with corporations and outside groups are at: www.whitehouse.gov/omb/oira/ .

•

Checking OMB for the Latest: The OMB website offers a good look at the regulation pipeline.
Regulations
under
cost-benefit
analysis
(updated
daily)
can
be
found
at:
www.whitehouse.gov/library/omb/OMBREGSP.html; to determine how the long the regulation was held at
OMB and if it was modified: www.whitehouse.gov/library/omb/OMBREGSC.html; OMB can further set
the agenda by issuing “prompt letters,” found at: www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/prompt_letter.html.

