Tips on Anti-Competitive Practices in the Rx Industry
Bob Young, research director, Public Citizen’s Congress Watch
202-454-5139, byoung@citizen.org
IRE Regional Conference, Washington, D.C., January 26, 2002

The pharmaceutical industry is built on monopoly patents. Prescription drugs that account
for 28 percent of national spending on prescriptions (approximately $35 billion) are
slated to go off-patent in the next five years. Based on past behavior drug companies will
go to extraordinary lengths to extend these patents. If they succeed it means significantly
higher costs for consumers in delayed access to generic drugs.
Tricks to look for:
Bogus patents. Companies have patented the color of pill-bottles and the shape of pills in
an effort to maintain lucrative monopolies. There is a web site dedicated to
pharmaceutical patent information that occasionally spotlights dubious patents.
www.orangebookpatents.com
Settlements between generic and brand name drug companies. Barr Laboratories, for
instance, derives most of its income not from making pills but from settlements it
receives for threatening to make drugs. (Barr – which is nicknamed “Lawyers in lab
coats” – looks for vulnerable patents, challenges them and then strikes lucrative
settlement deals.)
Patent infringement suits. If a brand name company claims that a generic company is
infringing on a patent, current law creates an automatic 30-month stay, or delay for
generics, while the issue is resolved in court.
Citizen petitions. FDA created this mechanism so individuals, consumer groups and
companies could have a process to call for tighter regulation, changes in labeling, or
exemptions from a regulation. In the real world, drug companies file citizen petitions just
before expected FDA generic approval so approval is put on hold while the citizen
petition is reviewed and answered. C. Boyden Gray recently filed a citizen petition for
Bristol-Myers Squibb in an attempt to extend the patent on its blockbuster drug
Glucophage. To see a list of citizen petitions and their docket numbers, go to
http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/CITPETS/petitionlist1.doc.
To
view
actual
documents, note the docket number and go to http://www.fda.gov/search.html.
Legislative maneuvers. On May 26, 1999, Schering-Plough gave $50,000 to the
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, chaired by Sen. Robert Torricelli (D-N.J.).
The next day Torricelli introduced a bill that would extend the patent on ScheringPlough’s best-selling drug, Claritin. Schering-Plough also let Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-UT)
use its corporate jet during his short-lived presidential campaign. Months later, Hatch
tried to sneak a patent extension for Claritin into a military construction spending bill.

Pediatric extensions. Companies get lucrative patent extensions for agreeing to test their
drugs for safety and efficacy in children. (There’s no such incentive for other population
groups, such as women or African-Americans.) Sometimes these drugs have little use in
children. Drugs that have been granted pediatric patent extensions can be found at
http://www.fda.gov/cder/pediatric/exgrant.htm. To see how much pediatric patent
extensions will cost consumers, go to http://www.fda.gov/cder/pediatric/reportcong01.pdf
This FDA report contains a methodology that allows you to calculate the cost to
consumers of a patent extension for any drug.
Patent extensions through trade agreements. The Uruguay Round Agreements Act of
1994, for example, added one year to the effective patent life of prescription drugs. For a
good overview of legislation and agreements that have extended drug patents, see
http://www.nihcm.org/prescription.pdf
Front groups. Companies like to use patient groups to push for patent extensions.
Sometimes they even create the groups. For example, Schering-Plough paid one of its
lobbyists to help create Veterans Aimed Toward Awareness, a group that promotes
awareness of Hepatitis C – a disease that can be treated with Schering-Plough’s drug
Rebetron, which costs $18,000 a year. The lobbyist then created a spin-off group,
Veterans Aimed Toward Children, that has advocated for pediatric patent extensions –
which will benefit Schering-Plough drugs such as Rebetron.
The “high” cost of R&D. All the industry’s arguments for patent protection come back
to their claims about the high cost of innovation. These claims are greatly exaggerated. A
few things to check. Does the group responsible for the claim (such as the Tufts Center
for the Study of Drug Development) get funding from the industry? Does the R&D costper-new drug include “opportunity cost”? (Opportunity cost is a theoretical expense, not
an actual cost incurred. Is the figure pre-tax? (Drug companies get to deduct R&D
expenses.) Does it account for government subsidies? (Many, if not most drugs receive
some taxpayer assistance in their development phase.) What kind of drugs is the R&D
estimate based on? (A sample of only “self-originating new molecular entities,” the most
expensive class of new drugs.) For a more detailed critique of R&D costs, see
http://www.citizen.org/pressroom/release.cfm?ID=954
A few favorite resources:
§ The Federal Trade Commission has launched a study of anti-competitive practices
in the pharmaceutical industry. The FTC has also weighed in with legal briefs in
some patent battles. To find FTC legal briefs: http://www.ftc.gov/os/index.htm The
FTC filed a particularly interesting brief in a case involving Bristol-Myers Squibb. To
find the company’s brief: http://www.ftc.gov/os/2002/01/busparbrief.pdf
§ National Institute of Health Care Management (www.nihcm.org) is funded by
Blue Cross/Blue Shield companies, but it is run by a former journalist and produces
high-quality reports on complex pharmaceutical issues, including prices.
§ nofreelunch.org was created by a physician disgusted with the industry’s influence
on doctors. Full of bullet-point facts and links to studies and articles.
§ FDA warnings for misleading ads: http://www.fda.gov/cder/warn/index.htm
§ Drug sales information: http://www.drugtopics.com/be_core/d/index.jsp

