6/1/02

Investigating high school academic fraud
In 1986, the NCAA began requiring that high school athletes complete a minimum set of core
academic classes – math, English, the sciences – in order to qualify for a college scholarship. A
decade later, the organization made core classes even more important in determining whether an
athlete can play college ball, increasing the number of required classes. It’s also important to
know that, based on the NCAA’s sliding scale for eligibility that weighs the athlete’s SAT/ACT
score against his GPA in those core courses, there is considerable benefit in not just passing those
courses, but getting high grades.
This system has placed pressure on high school teachers to issue inflated grades, and driven many
athletes, especially basketball players, to high schools and prep schools with questionable
academic practices. In some cases, schools have been created for nothing other than to deliver
NCAA eligibility to academically troubled athletes.
Some tips on how to identify these schools and report these stories:
Know all the high schools that the athlete is attending
This may seem like an obvious point, but it’s not always clear which schools the player is
attending. ESPN found that many of the best high school basketball players in New York City
over the past decade were taking some of their core classes at a small, for-profit school in Queens
called Christopher Robin Academy, which wasn’t their main high school (and didn’t even have a
team). They would attend in the summer or during the school year, on Saturdays, where they
would get high grades in some of what are supposed to be their toughest classes. To find out if
such an eligibility factory exists in your community, talk to high school and AAU coaches.
Recruiting gurus can also be helpful because part of their job is figuring out whether an athlete is
going to meet NCAA requirments, so they often know who is going to which schools.
Get the school’s list of NCAA-approved core courses
Every high school in the country that wants the NCAA to accept credits from its athletes must
register with the NCAA Initial-Eligibility Clearinghouse. The courses that the NCAA will accept
from that school are listed on its website, at: http://actrs7.act.org/ahs/ Just type in school’s name
where prompted. Then ask the school to tell you who teaches these courses, and ask the state or
local education departments whether those teachers are certified.
Get state education department files
Even private schools such as Christopher Robin Academy leave some paper trail. A simple
public-records request of all department files can deliver lists of teachers and former teachers,
state investigations, complaints, registration data, annual progress reports and a description of
curriculum. Also ask for regulations and other documents that articulate the state’s authority over
the school, especially if private.
Get the school’s literature

Check their accreditation and any other claims made in their brochure and stationary.
Talk to the accreditation groups
Accrediting bodies can help you figure out whether the school’s academic practices are suspect.
They often publish their minimum standards on their websites. If dealing with a private school,
The National Council for Private School Accreditation (http://www.ncpsa.org), an umbrella
group that accredits accrediting bodies, is a good place to start; Don Petry is the executive
director and can be very helpful.
Check U.S. Department of Education website
Includes basic information on every school in the country.
Civil and criminal checks
Make sure to check not just school but principal, teachers, trustees.
Check fire and building department records
Some of these eligibility factories are in terribly rundown facilities. And in places like New York,
officials say, the city building department happens to be the only governmental body that can shut
down a private school.
Talk to academic officials at colleges
Admissions directors may be aware of problems or suspect patterns at the school, as they review
the transcripts. Some may have decided not to accept credits from the school. Each college also
has academic counselors specifically assigned to athletes; these people also know about “red
flag” schools.
Ask main high school for policies on transfer credits
Some high schools require that students take summer-school classes at their school, but make
exceptions for athletes. Ask them for their list of high schools that they will accept credits from,
and how the grades from those high schools are recorded. Some high schools accept the summerschool grades from other schools as their own, so the NCAA and colleges are often unaware that
an athlete picked up core classes at a different school.
Tom Farrey
ESPN.com
Senior Writer
(860) 766-4893
tom.farrey@espn.com

