Data for Better Business Coverage
IRE Annual Conference, San Francisco
1:30 p.m., May 30, 2002
Building a Database of Private Companies
By Jim Hopkins
USA TODAY
jhopkins@usatoday.com
415-901-5357
What are you talking about?
Virtually all U.S. companies are tiny, privately-owned businesses that collectively
employ about half of all workers. Yet, they’re a huge challenge for reporters because,
unlike corporate big-wigs such as Microsoft, they don’t leave much of a public document
trail. That makes it hard to uncover news and trends about a big part of the economy
across the nation -- and in your community. The solution? Create a database of privatecompany sources that you can query by e-mail.
What’s in this database?
Companies, with as much identifying information as you want. At the very least, you’ll
need contact names for the owner or a key employee; day and night phone numbers; the
product or service sold by the business, and -- most important -- e-mail addresses.
There’s no limit to the number of companies in the database, although you’ll probably
want a minimum of several hundred.
Where do you get this company information?
From the companies themselves.
How do you gather it?
For news media with Web sites and a helpful webmaster, you can build an online sign-up
form. Don’t have a Web site? You’ll publish a sign-up form in the printed version of your
newspaper.
What does a sign-up form look like?
See the online form USA TODAY uses for its Small Business Panel. It’s at
www.usatoday.com/small/survey/smallbizsurvey.htm
How do you direct people to the sign-up form?
If it’s printed in your newspaper or magazine, you’ll want to make sure it’s in a
prominent spot. If it runs deep inside, consider placing a promo on the section front.
If you’re publishing the form online, you have more options:
* Promote it in print or broadcast with a link.
* Add a promo to your e-mail signature.
* Perhaps the most effective way is to ask business groups to include a promo, with the
link, in their electronic newsletters. What groups? Chambers of commerce and

professional trade associations. To get a diverse database, don’t forget to contact groups
with large numbers of women and minority business owners.
After people fill out a sign-up form, how does their information get into a database?
If you build an online form, the contents can be imported directly into a database
manager such as Access or a spreadsheet like Excel. This is where you webmaster or IT
department comes into play. If you use a printed form, you’ll input the data by hand.
How do I use the database?
You’re limited only by your imagination -- and the amount of detail you’ve gathered
about each company. Generally, the database works best for finding examples of
companies affected by issues in the news. Here’s an example, based on a story I did last
year:
A new study found that women business owners have a hard time getting financing -especially during start-up years. My database includes the year each company was
founded, and whether it is owned by a woman.
Using Excel, I searched for all women-owned companies less than five years old. That
produced 50 names, with e-mail addresses. I copied these addresses into a single Outlook
e-mail message. In the e-mail, I asked the companies if they had trouble getting start-up
money -- and, if so, for details. Wham! Off went the 50 messages. I got replies within
minutes.
Other than for breaking news, are their other ways to use the database?
Sure. You can randomly grab, say, 25 e-mail addresses and ask open-ended questions,
such as: “What’s the biggest challenge facing your company today?’’ Their responses
could produce surprising trend stories.
Is it really this simple?
Basically, yes. Of course, as you work with the database, you’ll learn to:
* Fine-tune your questions so you weed out responses that don’t apply. For example, the
first question I asked the women business owners was: “Have you had trouble getting
start-up money? If NO, please don’t reply to this message. If YES, go to the next
question.” That way, I avoided a bunch of doesn’t-apply-to-me responses.
* Respect privacy. Copy e-mail addresses into the blind-copy field so you don’t share the
information with everyone receiving the mail.
* Keep your database up-to-date. E-mail addresses often change when companies switch
Internet service providers or when employees leave. That means you’ll need to regularly
bring in new participants. I build a new database from scratch at least once a year.
* Create a column with dates showing when you e-mailed companies. That way, you’ll
avoid contacting the same companies over and over.

-2-

-3-

