San Francisco 2002, IRE Annual Conference
EXPLOITATION OF WORKERS - INTERNET RESOURCES
Sofia Basso, Il Nuovo, Italy (sofia.basso@ilnuovo.it)
• Surf the sites in advance to get an idea of what you can find and where
• When you find a site that fits your needs, find out whether it offers news-alerts service and sign up
• When you need workers’ stories or employees’ points of view, check out the related forums and
discussion groups: you’ll find people you may want to interview
• Use the site’s search engine to search for news/reports/allegations related to firms based in the
country or state you’re reporting from
• Remember that behind most of those sites there are activists willing to answer follow-up questions:
look for contact information and call them
www.cleanclothes.org
Clean Clothes Campaign: an international network based in Netherlands and composed of solidarity
groups, trade unions, consumer organizations, researchers.
www.transnationale.org/anglais
Transnationale: published by a French non-profit organization, it provides comprehensive and updated
information on 9,500 companies around the world, including records of violation of labor codes.
www.ilo.org
International Labor Organization (UN agency): a rich resource-site with standards, codes, legislative
texts, papers, publications and great labor databases.
www.business-humanrights.org
Business & Human Rights: maintained by an international lawyer, it offers info on 130 countries and
110 industry sectors, including records of business complicity in human rights abuses and lawsuits.
www.nlcnet.org
National Labor Committee: a human rights advocacy group that offers timely urgent action alerts, indepth reports, companies and country profiles.
www.usleap.org
US/ Labor Education in the Americas Project: a non-profit organization that supports the basic rights
of workers in Central America, particularly those employed by US companies (Starbucks, Chiquita).
www.labourstart.org
Labourstart: provided by the Labor and Society International, it runs breaking labor news. It also hosts
workers' forums from all over the world.
www.behindthelabel.org
Behind the Label: a US multimedia online community covering stories and people of the global
clothing industry.
www.workersrights.org
Worker Rights Consortium: a non-profit organization created by the US academic community to
enforce the manufacturing codes adopted by colleges. It has a Factory Disclosure Database.

www.nosweat.org.uk
No Sweat Campaign: a British interactive online campaign site that includes retailer surveys and labor
rights issues.
www.stopchildlabor.org
Stop Child Labor Coalition: formed in 1989, it offers resources on child labor in the United States and
around the world.
www.sweatshopwatch.org
Sweatshop Watch: it advocates to eliminate the exploitation in the sweatshops.
www.americas.org
Resources Center of the Americas: a Minneapolis-based non-profit organization with a section on
sweatshops.
www.antislavery.org
Anti Slavery: the world's oldest international human rights organization. It focuses on bonded labor,
forced labor and child labor.
www.corpwatch.org
CorpWatch: a US watchdog site. It includes a section on sweatshops: news, resources, background,
reports, audits and campaigns.
www.coopamerica.org/sweatshops/index.html
Co-op America’s Sweatshop site: a US non-profit organization that focuses on workers in the coffee,
clothing, shoes and rugs industries.
www.amrc.org.hk
Asia Monitor Resource Center: an NGO focused on Asian labour concerns. Its reports are fee-based.
www.thailabour.org
Thai Labour: a non-profit organization committed to promoting workers’ rights in Thailand.

