Killed on the Job
by Natalya Shulyakovskaya
The Orange County Register
714.796.7024
natalyas@ocregister.com
How many people died on the job in your community? How many of them were immigrants?
How many of them were undocumented? And has anyone investigated how and why they died?
•

Use databases from different agencies to look for trends and gaps. Cross-reference data from
different sources. Our analysis of death records showed that the number of immigrants dying
in the workplace was increasing. Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries confirmed that.
Comparison of the coroner’s and OSHA data showed that some deaths were never
investigated by the agency charged with enforcing workplace safety.
Sources of data:
California Death records database on a CD-ROM from the State Center for Vital Statistics.
(Recently, the state changed the way it releases death records. A CD with 10 years worth of
records cost $250 when we obtained it last year.)
County death records database from Orange County Healthcare Agency. The agency used to
do its own data entry on death records. (Released at no charge)
County coroner's data on autopsies and other cases reported to the coroner. (Released at no
charge)
OSHA data covering inspections and accident investigations. NICAR sells CDs covering the
entire nation or separate states and regions. (OSHA database covering California came from
NICAR database library and cost $115.)
Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries, compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Unless
you are willing to sign a very strict data-use agreement with the Bureau, do not try to request
the actual database. You can obtain extremely detailed summary reports on workplace
fatalities for the United States, your state or your county. You can ask for data tables for all
workers as well as separately for foreign-born and U.S.-born workers. (Released free of
charge.) For details, see
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/cfoi.nr0.htm

•

Use databases as a guide. Turn to paper records to see a more complete picture. Only OSHA
investigative files -- not the database -- could tell you if witnesses and workers were all
Latino, and if they were not interviewed by the investigator. Paper records often contain
names, phone numbers and home addresses for witnesses of accidents. Sometimes they could
contain copies of police reports.

•

Build your own databases or a simple spreadsheets to summarize information from massive
volumes of paper records. I logged times when calls about fatal accidents were received by
Cal-OSHA, who made those calls and whether an employer was fined for non-reporting.

•

Cross-reference databases and records from different agencies. OSHA inspection report, a
paramedic report, coroner’s records and a death certificate, combined, will tell you a lot more
about when and how a worker died, how the company handled the emergency and whether
anyone dialed 911.

•

Early on, request any record you can think of related to your story and the agency you are
looking at.
Borrow or rent an industrial-size copy machine and roll it into an agency's office to make
copies. It is cheaper, it makes it faster and it delivers an extremely clear message that you are
dead serious. Copy every single piece of paper you can lay your hands on. Some of them
might come extremely handy later, when the agency will get back to its bureaucratic senses
and tries to cut off access. It is amazing how simple records become very difficult to get once
your stories are printed and the agency launches its political clean-up operations.

•

Read agency manuals. Protocol and procedure manuals will explain how the agency works,
the mindset that guides its actions. It will also give you a roadmap to the agency's records,
including its databases and forms.
Here is the manual for the California Occupational Health and Safety Administration.
http://www.dir.ca.gov/samples/search/querypnp.htm
It goes into excruciating detail of how investigations are conducted, what forms are filled out
and what data is entered into the OSHA’s national IMIS database.

•

Very early in your reporting, read all available studies and find researchers working in the
area of your interest. Look for data on many levels -- state, national, etc.
It turns out that NIOSH provides a grant that allows one researcher to investigate every single
workplace death in Los Angeles.

•

Figure out the “food chain” of where the records are collected and accumulated. Request
them from different levels of that food chain. Cal-OSHA, under a federal grant, gathers
information for the BLS Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries. And while the state agency
could not release the data, it helped pushing the federal agency for release of the information.

•

Don’t overlook the regional office of federal agencies as sources of information.

•

Do not lock yourself into a county or state-level story; think nationally as well as locally.
Because of the way data is collected, some trends could only be seen on the national or
regional level.

•

Look for former agency employees. Meet them in person. Ask them for documents. Be
cautious, sometimes the agency will try to send Trojan horses -- employees who tell you they
want to help, but truly want to gather intelligence on where you are heading with your story.

•

Find agencies and officials (district attorneys, private attorneys, etc.) who rely on
investigations conducted by the agency you are interested in. They might help you focus your
inquiries and find necessary records. Some worker compensation attorneys might be willing

to open their files for you and share contact information. It is especially helpful when the
survivors are in Mexico or some other place not easily found through Lexis-Nexis.
•

If you want to talk to recent immigrants, especially undocumented, don't waste too much time
on phone calls. Knock on the door, come in the evening, when children or neighbors are at
home. They might help with translation. Be patient, don't rush and be watchful. If people
refuse to talk, don't leave immediately, hang by your car for a while. Somebody who might
not want to talk to you in front of in-laws might come out and lead you away to tell you
something amazing.
Ask all the questions at once. Often, you won't get another shot.

•

When OSHA inspectors cut down their fines because of companies’ good history, check it
out. Look for companies on OSHA’s own web site. Search by address to find several
companies registered to the same owners.
You don’t need to be a FoxPro wizard to do this. OSHA's web site provides a good lookup
tool at http://www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html

