God’s Little Acre:
Understanding Land Records
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Land is the most common form of wealth. It is also far easier to trace than stocks,
bonds or other, more glamorous types of property. That makes land records vital for
investigative reporters.
Land records exist to do four or five basic things:
§ Identify the owner.
§ Identify anyone with claims against that land, including lenders, utilities and the
taxman.
§ Ensure building standards are met.
§ Determine permissible uses of that land.
§ Establish the exact location of a piece of property.
Doesn’t sound like much, does it? Yet reporters routinely mine land records to
document hidden relationships, financial wrongdoing and abuses of public power. They also
combine land records with other information to expose racial discrimination and shoddy
building practices. The key is understanding where to find land records and what to look for
when you find them.
Where to look: Online vs. Paper
Services such as Lexis-Nexis are invaluable for finding land records quickly. But online
services have significant drawbacks. They invariably are several weeks out of date – not a
major consideration when you’re digging into old transactions but risky if you’re looking at
recent deals. They don’t cover every county, so you can’t be sure you are getting a complete
list of your target’s interests. Subtle changes in a subject’s name (from John A. Doe on one
record to J.A. Doe on another, for example) can mislead an inexperienced searcher.
The biggest drawback, however, is that online services encourage lazy research habits.
They provide summaries that are quick, simple and incomplete. Sometimes the most
important thing about a deal lies in details that aren’t readily apparent online – unusual
mortgage terms such as balloon payments, ostensibly unrelated land transactions that are
filed simultaneously, courtroom or political decisions made just before or after the land deal.
There is no substitute for reading the complete land record. And in most counties, you
can’t do that online. You must visit the local courthouse.
Record-keeping varies state by state, but every state keeps roughly similar records. The
key gatekeepers:
§ The county recorder or clerk preserves records of all sales, mortgages and liens.
§ The county assessor or tax collector determines the taxable value of all real estate
and collects property taxes.
§ The county or city building department inspects new construction and attempts to
find substandard buildings.

-1-

§

The county or city planning department zones land.

Who’s the owner?
Grant deeds record the transfer of land from one owner to another. The seller
(sometimes called the “grantor”) grants property to the buyer (or “grantee”).
Let’s stop for a quick definition of terms. You’ll find the words “grantor” and “grantee”
everywhere in land records. The grantor is the person “granting” something – usually
ownership in land or the right to foreclose against it. The grantee is the person receiving the
piece of paper.
Many grant deeds either state the value of the transaction or list a fee (in California a
documentary transfer tax) from which you can calculate the sale value. Beware that two
common practices may prevent you from accurately calculating value: The transaction may
be based on “full value less liens” – meaning that the buyer is assuming the mortgage or
other obligations – or the buyer may, in California and perhaps other states, pay a fee to keep
the value hidden from everybody except the tax assessor.
The grant deed typically includes the name and address of the person requesting the
recording – usually the buyer. The address usually is the address of the property changing
hands.
You’ll also find a long number stamped on the document. That’s the recorder’s
number for this document. In the old days, pre-computer, these transactions were recorded in
large ledgers. Thus you frequently will find transactions described as “Page So-and-So of Book
Such-and-Such, Official County Records.” Like everything else, however, property records are
going digital. In my home county, the book and page system has given way to a year-anddocument system. For example, “98-104566” means the 104,566th document recorded in the
year 1998. Recorder’s numbers are by far the most reliable way of tracking individual
transactions.
Quitclaim deeds record the transfer of property outside a sale. Example: You, a
homeowner, are getting married. You may ask your future spouse to quitclaim his or her
interest in the property to you; or, you being a romantic soul, may decide to quitclaim
ownership from yourself as a single person to your beloved and yourself as community
property. Another example: You qualify for a home loan but your spouse has lousy credit; the
lender says, Get that clown off the deed, and so he meekly quitclaims his interest to you. Final
marital example: You and your former beloved split the sheets; one of you quitclaims the
house to the other.
Major companies use quitclaims when they want to buy land quietly. Suppose, for
example, that the Mega-Rich Corp. decides to acquire a 100-acre parcel on the fringe of town
for a new factory. It knows from bitter experience that local landowners will jack up prices if
they suspect a deep-pockets buyer is on the prowl. So Mega-Rich instead signs up some straw
buyers to buy the land in their own names, being sure to first get their signatures on
quitclaims. On the same day these straw buyers record their purchases, Mega-Rich records its
quitclaims and announces its plans.
Individuals also can use quitclaims to disguise ownership for years after a purchase.
For example, in a very weird federal loan scandal that I covered in Kern County, California, in
the mid 1980s, a major landowner bought a vineyard through a straw buyer, who then took
out large loans from the Farmers Home Administration. The quitclaim came to light years
later, when the straw buyer and his boss started feuding publicly.

-2-

Who has claims against the land?
Remember Snidely Whiplash? Remember the mortgage he was always waving over
some unfortunate (but comely) damsel’s head?
The modern equivalent of the mortgage is the deed of trust. There are three parties to
a deed of trust: the borrower (“grantor” or “trustor”), the lender (or “beneficiary”) and the
trustee (usually a trust company or title insurer). The deed of trust lists the names of the
borrower, lender and trustee, the legal description of the property and the amount of the
loan against the property. It often lists the property’s street address and may include a notice
that the loan carries an adjustable interest rate. It usually does not list the interest rate on the
loan, however.
The deed of trust also includes another important piece of information: whether it’s
subordinated to (translation: behind) some other deed of trust. This can be a very handy piece
of information. Lots of people stack one mortgage on top of another, borrowing against the
full value of their property – and then some, if they can find a gullible lender.
Notices of default are recorded when a borrower falls behind in payments. Typically
they’re filed when a loan is three or four months behind. In other words, a default isn’t an
accident; the dog didn’t eat the check. The target of the notice is in serious financial trouble.
Notices of default typically list the amount currently owed on a mortgage – the only public
record I know of that provides that information.
Notices of sale are filed shortly before the lender moves to sell a mortgaged property.
Releases of notices of default are filed if the borrower and lender work things out.
When a mortgage is paid off, through sale or refinancing or sheer persistence on the
borrower’s part, the lender files a release or recission. This is a formal notice that the deed of
trust no longer is valid.
Tax liens are wonderful things. They tell you that John W. Doe owes the feds or the
state a lot of money. They tell you The Law has decided that John W. Doe owns this particular
piece of property – even if no other public record ties the property to Doe. They tell you how
much Doe owes and for which years. Simply wonderful.
Are owners obeying land-use laws?
In most of the United States, local and state laws limit a landowner’s rights. You can’t
build a liquor store next to a school or erect a 5-story apartment building in a neighborhood
of bungalows. Building departments enforce and occasionally ignore these rules.
There are many questions you can answer with building department records. A few
examples: What improvements did the mayor make to his house? Is the value he listed for
those improvements (the value that the building department passed along to the tax
assessor) in line with real-world values, or did he understate things? Who did the work? Does
the contractor do business with the city as well as the mayor? Who was the inspector, and
what’s his relationship with Hizzoner? Are inspectors ignoring code violations that could lead
to catastrophes after the next hurricane, earthquake or wildfire?
Zoning maps are also useful land records. Zoning regulations limit what can be built
within a particular area. At least that’s the theory. In my home state of California, people are
always seeking “variances,” custom-made exceptions to zoning. Variances offer huge
potential for abuse.
Where exactly is this property?
There are three basic ways to fix a property’s place in the universe.
The first and simplest is the address. “123 Main St.” identifies a specific location. Or
does it? If you’ve got a “Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard” in your town, I guarantee you it was

-3-

called something else as recently as 1967. Street numbers can change almost as easily as
street names. And if 123 Main St. is a new building, earlier buildings on the same lot may have
had different numbers, especially if a developer tore down two or more buildings to create it.
A long street stretching through several cities may change numbering systems every time it
crosses a city line, creating problems for researchers tracking ostenisbly neighboring
properties.
To get around the address problem, local assessors commonly assign unique numbers
to every piece of property in their jurisdiction. Assessor’s Parcel No. 123-456-7890 can refer
only to a particular piece of property. But maybe not for long. In fast-growing areas (such as,
say, the entire western and southern United States), big parcels get split into small parcels,
each with its own brand new APN.
There is, however, one guide to land records that doesn’t change -- the legal
description. Here’s a simple example that you may find on a deed or tax bill:
Lot 13 of Tract 456, Book 18, Page 5, Miscellaneous Maps
Somewhere in the local recorder’s office – on CD or microfiche or maybe in a dusty
book the size of a photo album on steroids – you will find a collection of maps. Now let’s take
my example in pieces. “Miscellaneous Maps” refers to a set of map books found in most
county recorders’ offices. (There may also be collections called Tract Maps or Subdivision
Maps or similar titles.) Find Book 18, flip to page 5, and – yee ha! – you’ll see one or more
tracts, including Tract 456. The surveyor’s map describes in exacting detail the lengths and
angles of every border of every lot. Each lot is numbered in some order; look over the map
and you should find our Lot 13. At one of the corners of the map page, you will probably find
a reference to the legal history of Tract 456, including the recorder’s number for the
transaction that created the tract in the first place. (In California, tracts are created by local
governments through the subdivision or parcel map process.)
So why would you want to go to all the trouble of reading recorders’ maps? After all,
the ones in the assessor’s office usually are much easier to use. Well, there are two reasons:
First and foremost, the recorder’s map gives you another way to trace the history of a piece of
land; if you need to know who owned a parcel 5 or 10 or 15 years ago – maybe a school site
that you think used to be an oil field sump – the legal description will tie everything together
with a neat bow. Second, if there’s confusion over a parcel’s identity – if you are not 100
percent certain that the property you found in assessor’s records is the same one you
identified in the recorder’s office – matching the recorder’s tract map with the assessor’s
parcel map will remove all doubts; either the two maps look alike (and they should be nearly
identical) or they don’t.
Finally, anyone who ever has the misfortune to investigate a rural land fraud will have
to come to grips with land descriptions like this one:
The northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter, Section 3,
Township 29 South, Range 26 East, MDB&M.
Doesn’t make much sense, does it? And yet you’ll find similar language in, or linked to,
virtually every deed, mortgage and tax lien in most of the United States. Understanding legal
descriptions will help you navigate the most tangled land records.
Legal descriptions in most of the United States are based on the Public Land Survey
System. Thomas Jefferson devised it in 1787, when Congress was trying to sell public lands in

-4-

the remote wilderness of Ohio. The system worked so well that it was used virtually
everywhere west of the Appalachians. (Exceptions: Texas, Hawaii, Kentucky and Tennessee.)
To see how it works, let’s tackle that legal description, working backwards. “MDB&M”
refers to the “Mount Diablo Base & Meridian”, one of just three surveyor’s reference points for
California. The surveyors marked east-west base lines and north-south meridians for
hundreds of miles from each reference point. Then they created a huge grid of townships,
each six miles long by six miles wide. Each township got a unique address, based on its
distance from the reference point. For example:
Township 29 South, Range 26 East, MDB&M
Translation: From the Mount Diablo Base & Meridian (MDB&M), count 29 townships south and
26 townships east. This will put you in the city of Bakersfield.
Now a township covers a lot of territory – 36 square miles. So each township is further
split into 36 sections, each a square-mile, or 640 acres. The sections are numbered in a zig-zag
pattern, from Section 1 in the northeast corner to Section 36 in the southeast corner. Each
section is divided in 160-acre quarter-sections, and these quarter-sections commonly are
quartered again into 40-acre lots and sometimes quartered yet again into 10-acre lots.
By now, with any luck, the legal description I spelled out earlier is beginning to make
sense. “The northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter” refers to a
specific 10-acre lot. Here it is:

-5-

