Lessons In Consumer Reporting
Mitch Lipka/Consumer Reporter/Columnist
561-243-6630/mlipka@sun-sentinel.com
Here are 10 lessons learned from the beat:
1) Everyone is a consumer.
At any point anyone you know is a potential target of a ripoff and, of
course, is also someone who buys things. Unlike many beats, this is one
that truly starts at a grassroots level. There are no night meetings or
published agendas. It’s up to you to listen to callers, your friends and
your family to figure out if anything might warrant your attention. Make
a database or another system to keep track of the comments and
complaints. You’ll be glad you did when you realize that you’ve noticed
a pattern or want to find the all-important real person for a story.
(Listening to Weight Watchers members boasting of an ice cream that
was “too good to be true’’ led to a story about a product that really was
too good to be true. The truth was triple the nutrition information label
claims. Realizing that one story could lead to another is also handy. The
ice cream story led to several follow-ups about just how many products
fail to live up to their claims.)
2) Keep track of complaints.
Although every consumer story must be about people and how they are
affected, not all stories reach you directly. You must establish
relationships with the economic crimes division of your state attorney
general, the local consumer affairs office, white collar crime
investigators, the Better Business Bureau and plaintiff’s lawyers.
Although the media is often the first place people turn to get some
assistance or rat out a scammer, other places are a bigger magnet for
those complaints.

3) Don’t believe everything you’re told.
That may seem obvious, but even the Better Business Bureau (which,
don’t forget is a membership organization) can provide somewhat
misleading information. Ask for raw numbers of complaints and their
resolutions rather than relying on ratings. Read the actual complaints.
You’ll be able to determine for yourself rather quickly whether there’s
really a problem. Keep this in mind: Almost every company that
generates lots of complaints will blame it on their high volume of
business. It’s usually an excuse rather than an explanation.
4) Avoid the gray area and aim for black and white in scam stories.
If there’s some reason to think that what went on might be OK, then
you’ll probably want to take a pass until you’re more convinced. There’s
always another story. Don’t waste you time with the ones that don’t seem
like wrongs that need to be righted or an outrageous situation that
warrants attention.
5) Know your bad guy.
Using Lexis/Nexis, Autotrack and the Web to get a quick answer to the
question of whether the scammer or the scam company has been on
anyone’s radar. Go through your state’s corporate records and find other
businesses the bad guy might have run. It is very rare that the current
problem company is the only one.
6) Offer a solution.
When writing about situations people might find themselves in, always
provide a solution or at least a place to go for help. This will not only
save you from having to answer all their questions, but it can actually be
helpful.
7) Read the recalls.
In the world of consumer product safety, NOT ALL RECALLS ARE
CREATED EQUAL. Most don’t rate more than a brief or a listing. Some
are clearly front-page news. The simple measures are how many units are
involved (1,000 vs. 1 million), how many injuries or deaths (none vs.
hundreds of injuries) and the type of product (extension cord vs. car seat).
While the comparisons might seem obvious, you can learn a lot from
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission press releases, which often
are the result of months of negotiation. If there are many incidents or
injuries, the question to both the company and the CPSC is why did it

take so long. Companies are required to initiate a recall as soon as they
learn of a product’s dangers. Some companies are habitual offenders of
this primarily voluntary process. If a company waited until 100 babies
fell out of high chairs before issuing a recall, that’s worth noting. You
could also ask the CPSC when they started negotiating the recall and how
many injuries were reported in the period in-between. Also, when there’s
a death in a recall, ask where. Although it’s unlikely they’ll name the
victim, it’s always worth asking at least where the victim is from.
8) Don’t ignore spam.
Not every spam is either a scam or a story. Some are. From time to time
it’s worth mentioning the Nigerian Letter, a scam first mailed and now
emailed to get people to give up their bank account numbers supposedly
to hold cash for a deposed leader of an African government. You’re
promised a reward. They take your money. People actually fall for it.
Keep an eye on email scams forwarded to you and try to determine
whether people are falling for them. Those are the ones that rate a story.
9) Indulge curiosity.
Sometimes consumers just want to know how things work. It’s great fun
to bust a scam, but it can be educational for both you and your readers to
resolve a basic question a lot of people ask about, but few know the
answer to. For instance, does anyone check to see whether you’re really
getting premium gas when you’re paying for it?
10) Know your readers or viewers.
In South Florida, where just about any business is just as likely to be
running a scam, not every scam story hits home. Make sure the audience
can meet a victim in the story. Hopefully, it’s one they can relate to at
least have a situation they can relate to. An audience of the working poor
or seniors on fixed incomes could care less if someone is conning a few
rich people. They might actually be sympathetic to the crooks. If the
audience doesn’t care, the story will fall into the great black hole as if it
had never been told.

Consumer Beat Web Sites
Consumer groups
The National Consumers League
www.nclnet.org
Good general source on scams with a national perspective.
National Fraud Information Center
www.fraud.org
A subset of the Consumers League that offers information on telemarketing
an Internet-based scams.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest
www.cpsinet.org
The original food police.
Consumer Federation of America
www.consumerfed.org/
A national consumer advocacy group.
The National Association of Better Business Bureaus
www.bbb.org
This is the mother ship of all the BBBs. You can search a national database
of companies and link up to local BBBs around the nation.
Online complaint sites
These grassroots sites can let you know whether you’re barking up the right
tree or have a problem you were not aware of in your own backyard.
www.badbusinessbureau.com/ www.ripoffreport.com
www.thecomplaintstation.com
General complaint sites.
www.movingadvocateteam.com
www.movingscam.com
Two sites started by victims of moving company scams. They include their
own blacklists of movers.

Government agencies
Consumer Product Safety Commission
www.cpsc.gov
Lists all recalls as well as has an FOI area with tons of scanned in
complaints on a limited number of cases.
Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov
Worth a daily visit to see if the commission either sued or took other action
against a local company. The commission’s actions are usually announced
on the homepage.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
www.nhtsa.gov
If someone calls up and says the engine of their 1998 Mazda Miata quit at 65
mph on the highway, you can search the NHTSA consumer complaint
database to see if others have had the same problem.
National Association of Attorneys General
www.naag.org
Links to all the state attorneys general.
Consumer information clearinghouse
www.consumer.gov
If there’s one federal site to bookmark, this is it. The site, which has loads of
government brochures, also has links to all the federal regulatory agencies.
Other sites
www.crimes-of-persuasion.com
An author who provides lots of good information about a variety of different
types of scams.
www.bankratemonitor.com
Lots of good general information for consumers and consumer story ideas.
www.consumeraffairs.com
General site with good leads on scams and a variety of other information.

