IRE PANEL’S TIPS FOR NAVIGATING
THE LEGAL LANDSCAPE FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING AFTER SEPTEMBER 11
1. Anticipate the legal challenges you might face and see if you can adjust your
story or reporting process to avoid potential liability. Among other things, this includes:
a. Consult your lawyers early and often and don’t “hide the ball” from them;
b. Research all applicable laws, codes and regulations (such as FAA regs, local
airport or other venue restrictions, newly enacted federal security guidelines, and so on);
c. When reporting government investigations, try to get your sources to provide
copies of documents or to agree to be identified as a source for the story in the event of
litigation (consider whether a signed affidavit is appropriate);
d. If you are using investigative techniques that raise legal issues, try to make a
trusted source in law enforcement aware of what you are doing so you can later say you
were “acting with the knowledge” of law enforcement.
2. Anticipate not only legal ramifications of your story, but other factors:
a. Think about disaster scenarios that may result from proactive scenarios, such as
use of hidden camera (will you cause panic, disruption or physical harm) -- this may also
have an effect on legal liability because it may effect the opinions of potential jurors (“I
don’t care what your story was trying to show, you put those people’s lives in danger
when the F-16 dispatched by the FAA almost shot down that plane you were on”).
b. Carefully review and discuss where journalism crosses the border into law
enforcement: Will your story interfere with ongoing law enforcement operations? Is it
ethical to approach law enforcement to notify it of what you’ve learned?
3. Anticipate the time, energy and resources necessary to pry loose government
information concealed on the grounds of, or under the guise of, national security:
a. First, use a crowbar to get under the “lid”: Cultivate sources inside the
system who can provide documents, records, maps, graphics, photos, videos, email and other information the government won’t officially release;
b. Where necessary, wield a sledge hammer: File FOIA requests and,
where necessary, file motions to unseal court records or lawsuits challenging the
denial of FOIA requests (but choose your battles carefully).
Panel Members:
Phil Bronstein, Executive Editor, San Francisco Chronicle
Beth Jones, Assistant General Counsel, CBS Television, Los Angeles
Allan Maraynes, Senior Investigative Producer, Dateline NBC, New York

Roger Myers, Steinhart & Falconer LLP, San Francisco, Moderator
Keith Rogers, Environmental & Military Reporter, Las Vegas Review-Journal

