COVERING THE COURTS
This memo is designed for those who are venturing into the court system
as a full-time assignment or are just in search of specific information. No
matter your assignment, always consider how court records might enhance and
perhaps advance your story. And remember, just about anything of controversy
ultimately winds up in the courts.
1. Criminal records-Both state and federal courts contain a wealth of
information in their respective criminal divisions. Learn where the cases
are filed and how to obtain access to them. Befriending a clerk or two helps
when you need to have a copy of something and are up against deadline and
out of quarters for the machine. Many jurisdictions have computerized search
capabilities. It is always a good idea to run the names of subjects through
these records. And it is possible to identify alias names for individuals
through these computer checks. And the paper files can contain a wealth of
information. Also the docket sheets for each case are frequently on computer
and can be searched for significant filings. This saves the time of
requesting an entire file.
A. Depending upon the computer system, information that can be obtained
includes:
--date of birth
--address
--names of defense attorneys and prosecutors
--charges and disposition
--alias names
--co-defendants
B. Within the paper file, you may find significant filings that can
include statements of the accused, the indictment, motions to suppress
statements, police reports, FBI reports of interviews, witness statements,
transcripts of pre-trial hearings, forensic reports, autopsy report and
grand jury transcripts.
--In the federal court, you will find criminal indictments as well as
magistrate cases. Magistrate cases include requests for search warrants
which may be sealed, but will often contain a publicly filed report (called
a "return") which lists items seized in the search. A good project is to
systematically request all the magistrate files over a period of time.
(Rarely does anyone do this in a systematic way).

2. Civil records-Both state and federal courts contain records of civil
cases, some seeking damages, others seeking injunctions to force someone to
take a certain action, divorce, bankruptcy, and traffic.
--Look for initial filings of lawsuits. Watch the docket sheet
for significant subsequent filings. These include motions to dismiss,
motions for summary judgment, motions for deposition, motions to admit
evidence and trial memorandums. Often these documents contain valuable
exhibits that are business records or other evidence relevant to the case.
--Trials-Do more than just take notes on the testimony. Obtain
copies of the exhibits as they become part of the record of the case. These
documents flesh out and help explain the testimony of witnesses.

Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

Basic questions/tips:
1. Where are documents filed? How can you get access to them on the day they
are filed? Are you allowed to view documents after hours? Where can you make
copies? How much does it cost? (In civil cases, the attorney filing the
documents will make copies available for just the price of a phone call)
2. Obtain phone directors of prosecutors, public defenders, judges, and
court reporters. Look for direct lines and after hours numbers.
3. Some jurisdictions put out a daily docket sheet. In Chicago, for example,
the U.S. Attorney's office prints a daily docket of cases scheduled for each
day.
4. Cruise the courtrooms at least once a day, preferably in the morning.
Presence and familiarity with prosecutors and defense lawyers will lead to
tips.
5. Develop a few legal sources that you use as a sounding board for legal
questions. These are trusted individuals that are never quoted, but are
there to help separate truth from fiction and legal jargon/mumbo-jumbo from
English.
6. Keep tabs on docket sheets of cases you are following. Determine when
important filings are due and remain in contact with lawyers to obtain a
copy on the same day of the filing.
7. Listen to the cross-examination.
8. Avoid developing a bias for the prosecution. It is easy to do when
covering a court beat. Defense lawyers often become better sources in the
long run.
9. When covering a trial, read the file-all pleadings, exhibits and
transcripts before the trial begins.
10. Get copies of motions if necessary.
11. Talk to the judge prior to trial. Ask policies on getting transcripts of
testimony, transcripts of sidebars, copies of trial exhibits during the
course of the trial.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
A good primer is:
The Reporter and the Law
By Lyle Denniston
ISBN: 023108031X
Paperback published 1992
by Columbia University Press
The first part of The Reporter and the Law explains the framework of the
legal process, describes various methods a legal reporter may use to develop
sources, and suggests how a reporter can live productively within the system
of jurisprudence. The remainder of the book is a detailed "how to" manual
which is beneficial to both the journalism student and the experienced
reporter. Denniston carefully describes the best ways for a journalist to
cover a trial and he analyzes each structural element of the trial for its
optimum news potential.
Xxxxxxxxx
Helpful tips also available at
Criminal Justice Journalists.....http://www.reporters.net/cjj/

