Census 202: Mapping the Data
Ire Annual Conference – 2002

Presented by:
David Herzog, Missouri School of Journalism & NICAR (dherzog@nicar.org)
David Washburn, San Diego Union-Tribune (david.washburn@uniontrib.com)
Desktop mapping is to census reporting what sound was to motion pictures. Rather than just report the
national and local census numbers, we can create maps that show readers how their neighborhoods have
changed. Also, the mapping software allows us to use census data in our investigations, adding context to
crime, education and political campaign databases. Here are some things to consider as you map the
Census.
* Talk to your graphics staff early and often. Make sure they can handle the mapping files before you go
through the trouble of creating them. ArcView has an extension you can download
http://arcsrcripts.esri.com) that allows you to convert your view into .eps files that import easily into Adobe
Illustrator. Also, review with your graphics staff the different ways you can map the data (dot density,
graduated color, etc.) before you start mapping.
* Organize ahead of time for deadline number crunching. You will be dealing with reams of data that must
be crunched in a database manager or spreadsheet before you can map it. Crunch and map the old census
data long before the new data is released and design queries ahead of time that will make the crunching of
new data much easier to do on deadline. Also, create maps with the old data so you won’t be surprised by
unfamiliar coding and formatting when you get the new data.
* If you use ArcView, familiarize yourself with the Two Theme Analyst extension which you can get from
the ArcScripts website mentioned above. It is the only way you can compare 1990 and 2000 data at the
tract or block level in places where the tract/block maps changed.
* Find other experts in your area (city/county planning department, economic development officials,
academics) who are analyzing and mapping Census data. Make friends; compare notes.
And when you’re done, keep all the maps you created. You can recycle those maps and overlay all kinds of
non-census data for some interesting news stories. Here are some areas you can examine by beat.
Politics & elections
•

•

•

Map campaign contributions by street address or ZIP Code. Overlay onto census data showing
racial breakdown, Hispanic ethnicity or income. Report on the characteristics of the areas
contributing the most money. You can even map the data to show contributions by
candidate/recipient.
Map registered voter addresses by street address or voting district. If you can get voter history
data, go a step further and show where the most active voters live. After all, these are the people
targeted by mail and door-to-door efforts during political campaigns. What are the demographic
characteristics of the neighborhoods where these regular voters live? Map by party affiliation to
uncover patterns.
Map election results by voting district, using a dot density map. Layer this on top of tract maps
showing racial, ethnic and income groups.

Municipal government
• Map sale prices and assessed values of residential real estate to see whether any neighborhoods in
your area have a higher tax burden. Overlay the results onto demographic data and see whether
minority neighborhoods are overtaxed.
• Where does your city spend its federal grant money that’s supposed to be targeted for rejuvenating
low- and moderate-income neighborhoods? Obtain grant data from your city’s planning
department and map it by address. Then overlay the results onto a census tract map that displays
income and poverty information.
• Politicians love to boast about new pools, playgrounds and sidewalks. Map the locations of the
new and improved services, and then overlay them on a map of demographic and income data to
see who’s getting the goods. Map the new services over election results to see whether supportive
neighborhoods are getting rewarded.
Public safety
• Plot the locations of proposed police and fire stations. Overlay the locations onto census data and
crime or fire data to see whether the stations are being sited based on need or political favoritism.
• Create a pin map showing the location of violent crime incidents in your city. Overlay this onto
census data and see kinds of crime occur in demographically different neighborhoods.
• Map emergency planning zones for different types of facilities (dams, nuclear power plants,
chemical factories). How has the population grown during the 1990s in these areas? Have planners
kept the evacuation details up to date?
Transportation
• Overlay the location of bus and rail routes on a tract map showing demographics. How often do
the buses run through minority neighborhoods, compared to the buses in non-minority
neighborhoods. Get out and ride the buses and rails to see which routes are the most crowded and
which have the newest buses or cars.
• Many major airports regularly take noise readings in the surrounding neighborhoods, recording the
latitude and longitude of each. You can plot the noise data, overlay that on census data by
neighborhood to learn more about the areas suffering with the loudest volumes.
• As air traffic increases, airports sometimes need to expand and take land through condemnation
proceedings. Display blocks with demographic data attached and select the blocks where the
airport plans to expand. Summarize the data to find out how many people live there. Map alternate
expansion plans. Would these be more or less disruptive than the favorite?
Environment
• Map the location of leaking underground storage tanks in your area as points. Overlay this map
onto a block map and see how many people live within 100 feet of a leaking tank, or within 500
feet.
• Toxic waste sites. You can do the same for toxic waste sites listed by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. Look at race and income, too.
• Get child lead poisoning test results from your department of health. Calculate poisoning rates by
census tract. Find the tracts with the highest rates and look at the demographics to see who lives in
the hardest hit areas.
Business
• You can map Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data to the census tract, calculating home loan
rejection rates. Map census data by tract to see whether minority neighborhoods have
disproportionately high denial rates.
• Plot the location of pawnshops and payday loan offices in your area. These businesses feed off the
poor and underprivileged. Overlay onto census data to see who lives in these neighborhoods.

