Mark Skertic
Staff Reporter
312/321-2836 – Phone
312/321-3084 – FAX
mskertic@suntimes.com

Investigating Legal Drugs
(A prescription-monitoring program tip sheet)
In April 2002, the Chicago Sun-Times published “Ritalin Roulette,” an analysis
of where Ritalin, Adderall and similar drugs commonly used to treat attention deficit
disorder are prescribed.
The stories mined a database the state of Illinois created from its prescriptionmonitoring program. To date, 18 states collect this data and more are considering doing
so. The stories are on the Sun-Times website
(www.suntimes.com/special_sections/ritalin/index.html).
This tip sheet is developed from our experience with the data in Illinois. Every
state’s program is slightly different,
You don’t have to be a doctor, pharmacist or Drug Enforcement Administration
agent to understand what’s in these databases. It takes:
•
•
•

The ability to massage the numbers into a database manager so you can sort and
group the numbers.
The patience to read dozens of reports and journal articles so you understand what
these drugs do and, just as important, don’t do.
The time to interview a range of sources, so you can write stories about your
community.

Reporting stories about drugs, you’ll find that even the experts disagree about a
pill’s effectiveness and the best treatment methods. Your numbers can provide a look at
what’s taking place in your community that no one can argue with.
If you’re going to work with data from a prescription-monitoring program, there
are several things you’ll need to know . . .

What is it?
A prescription monitoring program tracks by patient who receives drugs, when,
who prescribed the drug and which pharmacy filled the prescription. Pharmacists report
directly to the state the name of the patient, that person’s address, age and other
information.
Why does the state want this?
To track Schedule II narcotic use. These are the legal drugs for which the federal
government regulates production and usage. Sched II narcotics include methylphenidate
hydrochloride (Ritalin), dextroamphetamine (Adderall), meperidine (Demerol), and
morphine.
A complete list is on the Department of Justice website at:
www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/schedules/alpha/index.html

Which states have programs?
Eighteen states have prescription monitoring programs, and several others are
considering them. Those with programs are:
California
Massachusetts
Pennsylvania
Hawaii
Michigan
Rhode Island
Idaho
Nevada
Texas
Illinois
New Mexico
Utah
Indiana
New York
West Virginia
Kentucky
Oklahoma
Washington

What’s the data good for?
The feds use it to track crimes such as “doctor shopping,” where the same patient
will visit several doctors, hoping all will prescribe the same drug.
For reporters, the data is a goldmine of information about exactly where drugs are
being prescribed and in what quantities. Unlike some Drug Enforcement Administration
data that tracks how much pharmacies sell, this tells you where people take the drugs
home to. This becomes very important in urban areas where people get prescriptions
filled near where they work, and then make a long commute home to where the drugs are
actually used.

What should I do first?
Determine which agency in the state maintains the data. In Illinois it’s the
Department of Human Services. Then call that agency and ask for a copy of the
database’s record layout. That will tell you exactly what information it contains.

What other kind of stories can this data produce?
In addition to showing you where a lot of kids are being treated for attention
deficit disorder, it can reveal whether doctors in some areas favor one drug over another.

For example, where are more kids getting Ritalin, and where are some receiving other
treatments such as Adderall or Dexedrine.
Other story possibilities:
• Where do adults receiving ADD drugs live?
• What areas have high levels of methadone use?
• Where are controversial painkillers such as Oxycotin prescribed?

Any problem getting the data?
Plenty.
At first, we asked for data just on Ritalin. The state said that would cost $6,000 to
pull the data out of their prescription-drug monitoring database.
Fine. So we said just give us the whole database
(Very important tip: When a government agency says they can’t give you
data because it’s part of a larger data set, always ask for the whole database.)
But our problems didn’t end there. In Illinois, no reporter had ever asked for this
database before and the state refused several times to release it.
Illinois’ Department of Human Services sited privacy claims, arguing information
about individuals could not be released. We finally agreed that no names would appear,
and birth dates would be changed to ages (so instead of knowing a Ritalin user was born
on Jan. 1, 1992, our data would only show that this person was 10 years old).

Other problems?
What the state delivered had 641,735 lines of data, each line representing an individual
prescription. Each line looked like this:
60621

007M2000040620000406000019691 00904276900075 0001

00 000297000

IL###

0

Using the record layout provided by the state, here’s part of what that line meant:
Zip Age Gender Date filled

Date written Serial No. NDC No. Units dispd.

60621 7

4/6/00

M

4/6/00

19691

9042769

75

The NDC – National Drug Code – number tells you what the drug is and how strong it is.
In this example, 9042769 is 10 mg methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets. This is the
generic form of Ritalin.
The data from the state had 457 different NDC numbers. That doesn’t mean there were
457 different drugs. In many cases, the same drug has multiple NDC numbers. For
example, the NDC number 7811749 also indicates the patient received 10 mg
methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets.

How do I make sense of it all?
Download the NDC dictionary from the Drug Enforcement Administration. Mac
and PC versions are at:
www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/arcos/ndc/ndc_dic.htm

Now what?
In Chicago, we combined the state’s information with data from other sources
with the aid of a database manager program.
We merged the state’s data with part of the data dictionary. That gave use the
name of the drug instead of a code to look at.
We also merged in population data by zip code, and added another database that
put a name to every zip code.
Once we knew where use of Ritalin and similar drugs was the highest, the work
began interviewing people to bring the stories to life.

