MANAGING THE TIPLINE
IRE National Conference 2002
Matt Goldberg, KCBS-TV – Matt@tvinvestigators.com
G

Tipline Database – An electronic way of storing phone calls, emails and other
story ideas and complaints.

G

Benefits – A tipline database provides a great way to manage story ideas and keep
in touch with viewers/readers. The people who call/email you, are usually the
people who keep you in business…Don’t neglect them!

G

Data, Data, Data – The information you put in the database will only be as good
as the way you enter it. Check for spelling errors…summarize…provide useful
details.

G

Options – There are several ways to electronically store tips. The following are
three options that are relatively easy to put in place.

TEXT FILE
This option takes minutes to put together. All windows machines come with a program
called notepad (you could also use MS Word). Simply create a document that will store
tips received by telephone or email.

(The tips are sorted by date and separated by paragraph)

Storing the information in a text file allows you to locate tips easily at a later date. Since
the tips are organized by date, you can scroll through the list and locate tips that have
come in during a specific time frame. You can also perform word searches on the list by
choosing the search option from the pull down menu at the top and selecting find. (In MS
Word this can be accomplished by typing “ctrl F”)

Type in a word you are looking for like “auto” for tips about auto shops.

This will highlight specific words in the list that match the one you are searching for.
Click “find next” to find more matching words in the document.
The text file database is easy to use and easy to maintain. The downfall to this option is
in searching. You can only perform word searches, and only search for one word at a
time. I don’t recommend this option if you are receiving more than twenty tip calls or
emails a day.

TIPLINE DATABASE
This option can utilize several different types of software programs. You can use a
spreadsheet program like MS Excel or a database program like MS Access to manage
your tips.
I could fill the next fifteen to thirty pages with basics on how to use MS Access, but I fear
I probably wouldn’t do it much justice. Using MS Access to manage the tipline is
probably the most effective option because it offers numerous features for searching and
organizing data. The recent version of Access is user friendly and full of graphics. If
you have never used the program before, I suggest you do. It comes with lots of tutorials
and a good help index. You also might want to consider going to the National Institute
for Computer-Assisted Reporting (NICAR) bootcamp. In a short week, you leave with a
good understanding of how to use database software.
The following pages are some samples of forms, reports and searches from a tipline
database I created for MS Access. If you are interested in a copy of this database and
literature on how to use it you can either get a copy from me or download it from my
website – http://www.tvinvestigators.com/tipdatabase

Input Form – This is a screen that utilizes the MS Access form feature to make it easier
to input information into the database. You can create a form that opens automatically
and is mostly self-explanatory. This makes it easy for interns and volunteers to enter
information into the database.

On this form each tip sits in the database as a record. The person entering the data has
several options based on the buttons at the top of the screen. They can print tips by date,
search for specific words in a tip and organize tips based on categories.
The tipline database also has several features for users who know how to use query
functions in MS Access. This allows user to do advanced searching with multiple
characteristics.
Reports/Printing
When a user is ready to print out information, the tipline database organizes the
information in a prepared report. The following page is a sample of a report for a specific
date range.

ONLINE DATBASE
This options allows you to create a database that will live on a website. By putting the
database online, you create the ability to enter data from anywhere at anytime.
Creating an online database can be difficult and requires a minor understanding of web
design and publishing. The easiest way I have found to create an online database is with
MS FrontPage. This program has wizards that will walk you through creating the
template and than putting it online. Since the database will live online, you will need
server space to host it. The cheapest way to do this is by using a free service like
Angelfire (http://www.angelfire.com). You can create a free website that will host
database. You can even make the website password protected, to prevent unwanted users
from accessing it.
The online database works a lot like the computer database. (For a demo of this option,
check it out online at http://www.tvinvestigators.com/panel)
You can create a form page for entering data.

View/Search Data
The information stored in the database can be searched by word and sorted by criteria.
Since it’s stored as a database, you can view the information in a list form.

The online database can also be downloaded to an MS Access file. This allows you to do
more searching and sorting of the information. It’s also a good way to backup your data.

YOU DECIDE

As you can see, there are several different ways to manage the tipline. It all really
depends on cost. MS Access retails for about $400. You can also buy it bundled with
MS Office for about $700. If you don’t have it yet, I strongly suggest you buy it.
Besides managing your tipline, you can use the program to perform all kinds of
computer-assisted tasks for stories.
If you have questions, or like one of the options I have outlined and aren’t sure how to
proceed – drop me an email (matt@tvinvestigators.com). I’d be more than happy to
help you create a database catered to your needs.

