Untold Stories on Campus
(and how to find them)
IRE National Convention, May 31, 2002
Marcel Dufresne
Associate Professor, Journalism
University of Connecticut,
Marcel.dufresne@uconn.edu
*LIST OF USEFUL CAMPUS CRIME WEBSITES ON PAGE 3
OVERVIEW: CRIME, SECURITY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT :
•
•
•

•

Campus police data can show how and where crime is increasing/decreasing.
The effect of alcohol abuse on campus crime is far-reaching, in terms of injuries and
property damage. How are colleges dealing with it?
Campus Courts (a.k.a. Campus judiciary system) are often poorly equipped to handle
serious cases, including sexual assault. The system can also be used to protect some
students from criminal prosecution and to enable universities to keep official crime
figures down.
What are colleges doing to make campuses safe? How colleges and university deal
with prevention, protection and law enforcement, including campus judiciary
systems.

1. Crime: Data /Documents
UCR (Uniform Crime Reports). These are reported annually to the FBI and
must be made public: Numerical reports cover only most serious crimes. Data on major
crimes goes back 5-6 years and can be quickly entered into a speadsheet.
Campus incident reports (data): Available from campus police or department
with jurisdiction. Analysis can identify most frequent crimes and where crime occurs.
You can expect the usual FOI and data hurdles.
Campus Arrest reports. Also available from campus police, often in press
releases. Computer data is often incomplete because some state laws allow a criminal
conviction to be expunged after a short time. It is not a reliable indicator of arrests
historically. Better to build a database from paper records collected over time.
2. Dorm Security: What systems are in place to keep residential buildings secure?
Security audits done by journalists and others often find easy access to dormitories.
Student themselves often ignore or find ways to override security measures.

1

3. Campus Courts (Campus Judiciary System): Campus courts take various
approaches to handling offenses, ranging from counselor review, to a student panel, to a
committee of top student affairs administrators. In some case, especially in cases of
serious crimes and sexual assaults, these courts are often poorly equipped to investigate,
collect testimony and render decisions.
Recent FERPA Changes: (see page 3). Changes in federal rules can help open the
system. The changes are explained at:
http://www.campussafety.org/reporters/coveringcrime.html
The complete text of these regulations is available on the U.S. Department of Education
web site at: http://ocfo.ed.gov/Fedreg/finrule/q300/070600a.txt.
4. Budgets: There’s no telling what you’ll learn by reviewing five years of police
budgets. A simple spreadsheet can show spending patterns for protection and security and
isolate priorities.
5. The response to alcohol abuse: How does your college or university balance
prevention, treatment and enforcement. What is the impact on campus crime?
Other untold stories:
• Potential conflicts of interests among Boards of Trustees. Ties between top gift
givers and political leaders who sometimes share lists of contributors.
• Scientific Research: When funding is tied to findings. Who finances studies and who
is served by results?
• Graduation rates among athletes. The NCAA has three years of searchable data
online for Division 1 and II schools, at http://www.ncaa.org/grad_rates/. Complete
data for several years are available on CDROM
• Treatment of Research Animals. The U.S. Department of Agriculture investigates
alleged violations of the federal Animal Welfare Act. Some say their enforcement
often amounts to a wrist slap.

2

Web sites /data sources for covering campus crime
IRE National Conference, 2002
Incident and arrest reports: Details about lesser crimes can be had from incident
reports and arrest reports that can be obtained from campus police at public universities
and college. In those cases, state FOI laws are your best way to obtain data or paper files.
A Caution: The most reliable database for arrests should be constructed from paper
documents collected over time. Some states expunge arrest records for some crimes when
certain conditions are met, so computer data will probably be incomplete.
These sites all provide a measure of help in covering campus crime issues. Several sites
offer crime statistics and compliance reports. Several handbooks for journalists are also
cited.

Must Have Sites
1. Security On Campus, Inc. http://www.soconline.org (also
http://www.campussafety.org/
Non-profit organization geared to the prevention of college and university campus crime,
provides campus crime statistics, victim assistance and updates on crime and security
trends. An essential resource.
2. Covering Campus Crime: A Handbook for Journalist spj.org/campuscrime/
This publication is designed to help campus journalists do a better job reporting on
campus crime.
3. U.S. Department of Education http://www.ed.gov/offices/OPE/PPI/security.html
The Department is charged with seeing that universities and colleges comply with the
Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act of 1990.
4. College and University Campus Crime Statistics
http://www.campussafety.org/information/crimestats/
Includes campus crime statistics from more than 500 colleges. Also features links to
statistical sites maintained by various schools and publications.
5. Student Press Law Center, http://www.splc.org/report/
Provides continuing coverage of the issue and attempts to strengthen the law. Publishes a
handbook for journalists.

Secondary Sources
6. Campus Crime (A commercial site) http://www.bpinews.com/edu/pages/cc.htm
Campus Crime provides the latest information on campus security, legislation, case
studies and successful crime deterrent programs, as well as coverage of the legal issues
surrounding the act.
7. Campus Safety journal: (another commercial site)
http://www.campusjournal.com/
A periodical that features information about security and safety on our nation’s
campuses. It claims to cover any discussion, issue, or problem in campus safety or
security.

3

