Pietro Parravano, Pew Oceans Commission
IRE Talking Points

Page 1 of 6
May 31, 2002

• Good morning and thank you for including a commercial
fisherman in today’s panel.
• I’d like to now discuss some of my experiences as one of two
commercial fishermen on the Pew Oceans Commission.
• For the past two years, lobsterman Pat White and I have had the
incredible opportunity to talk to fishermen from Maine to
Alaska.
• Reflecting on my travels, a question can be asked: “Tell me
what fish you are eating and I will tell you where in America
you are.”
• A quick look at what we ate along the way leaves no doubt
about who I am: a fisherman who is proud of his industry and
lucky enough to sample the best seafood in the world.
o On a visit to the Louisiana Bayou, we ate seafood gumbo in
the kitchen of a local shrimping family.
o In Kodiak, Alaska, local fishermen prepared wild-caught
salmon and fresh shellfish.

Pietro Parravano, Pew Oceans Commission
IRE Talking Points

Page 2 of 6
May 31, 2002

o While in Rockland, Maine, commissioners were treated to a
lobster bake that had many returning for seconds and thirds.
• These and many other meals came to symbolize for me and for
my fellow commissioners the importance of preserving
America’s fishing industry. We saw that behind each serving of
raw oysters or grilled salmon is a fishing family determined to
continue a way of life that has existed in this country for
hundreds of years.
• And these fishing families support coastal communities that
give this nation much of its character, heritage, and history.
• As we conclude our national review of ocean policies and begin
developing our recommendations on pollution, coastal
development, and fishing, we do so with a greater appreciation
for the role professional fishermen play in bringing fresh
seafood to our tables, providing jobs, supporting families and
communities, and preserving a piece of American culture.

Pietro Parravano, Pew Oceans Commission
IRE Talking Points

Page 3 of 6
May 31, 2002

• I agreed to be part of the Pew Oceans Commission’s review of
ocean policies because fishermen need to be part of the solution.
As one fisherman put it, “Either you’re at the table, or you’ll
end up on the menu.”
• I don’t claim to speak for every fisherman, but I do provide a
fisherman’s perspective on the commission.
• We are now beginning the difficult job of taking all that we
have heard and learned and developing the recommendations
needed to keep our industry and our oceans healthy.
• At this point, one thing I can say for sure is that change is
coming to our industry. The question is whether fishermen will
help drive that change or get run over by it.
• I’d like to share with you some of what I have heard from
America’s fishermen.
o Professionalism. If you want to become a doctor, you go to
medical school. If you’re wish is to be a carpenter or
electrician, you can enroll in any number of apprentice

Pietro Parravano, Pew Oceans Commission
IRE Talking Points

Page 4 of 6
May 31, 2002

courses. However, even though fishing is America’s oldest
and most challenging profession, there is no college or
apprentice program to train future fishermen. The time has
come to recognize fishermen for who and what they are –
professionals. We need programs to teach the next generation
of fishermen and sustain an industry and way of life.
o Knowledge. My colleagues and I became fishermen because
we love working on the water and we love feeding people.
Fishermen posses a great deal of knowledge about the ocean
and its fish that has accumulated over generations. We need
to find ways to bring that knowledge to bear on resolving the
problems facing our industry today.
o Habitat. Fishermen continually tell us that the most
important thing we can do for our industry is protect habitat.
Fishermen know that better than anyone. Whether its upland
salmon runs or coastal wetlands or in the deep ocean, our
future depends on healthy habitat. This is why fishermen are

Pietro Parravano, Pew Oceans Commission
IRE Talking Points

Page 5 of 6
May 31, 2002

every bit as concerned with coastal development that limits
our access to the oceans, polluted runoff that chokes coastal
waters, and introduced species that disrupt ecosystem
functions as we are with the Magnuson-Stevens Act or
fishery management reform.
• More than anything else, I sense a deep desire to restore the
pride and optimism in being a commercial fisherman.
• The work of the Pew Oceans Commission – the first such
review of national ocean policies in over 30 years – can restore
that pride.
• As a fisherman, I realize that our industry must change in order
to survive.
• I and the other members of the commission believe that we have
to find a better way to manage the nation’s fishing industry. A
federal court is not the place to decide where and when
fishermen can work.

Pietro Parravano, Pew Oceans Commission
IRE Talking Points

Page 6 of 6
May 31, 2002

• The commitment to improve fishery management exists. We
have to summon the leadership necessary to make it happen.
• After all, we are talking about people’s livelihoods. We are
talking about our communities.
• We are talking about part of our national heritage.
• Thank you again for the opportunity to speak to you today.

