Media Tip Sheet
June 2002
Contact:

Justin Kenney
703-516-0605
kenneyj@pewoceans.org

The American Fisherman – Fishing is America’s oldest industry. There are many comparisons between
the American fisherman and the American farmer. Both derive great the satisfaction from providing food
for the table. They pass on knowledge and experience from generation to generation. Although they work
alone, they support many related jobs. A fisherman, for example, needs someone to repair his boat, supply
the ice, provide the fuel, and work onboard. Both are part of the nation’s culture and heritage.
However, the American fisherman today faces many challenges well beyond those met at sea. Dwindling
stocks and increasing regulations mean more time spent at the docks than on the water. Lawsuits and
council meetings dominate talk at the local coffee shops. Gentrified waterfronts increasingly give way to
condo, art studios, and T-shirt shops, leaving fishermen with no place to work. Foreign imports – often
from nations with weaker environmental standards – drive down prices, leaving little or no profit margin.
What’s the future hold for America’s fishermen? What will become of such famous fishing communities as
Gloucester, Kodiak, and Newport? Will the family fisherman go the way of the family farmer? Members of
the Pew Oceans Commission have spoken to fishermen from Rockland, Maine to Kodiak, Alaska.
Coastal Sprawl – More than 53% of Americans live in coastal counties, which comprise only 17% of the
nation’s area. With the summer vacation season upon us, populations in coastal towns will swell as millions
of tourists visit the nation’s beaches. However, coast’s popularity as a place to live and visit comes at a
cost. In a recent report prepared for the Pew Oceans Commission, Dana Beach of the South Carolina
Coastal Conservation League links sprawl development with the declining health of U.S. coastal waters.
“Americans have long enjoyed living, working, and playing along the coasts. However, we see increasing
evidence that this love of the coasts and oceans comes at a cost to the very beauty that attracts us there in
the first place,” said Leon E. Panetta, chair of the Pew Oceans Commission.
“Although the problems associated with coastal sprawl are complex, the solutions are straightforward, ”
said Joseph Riley, mayor of Charleston and chair of the Commission’s coastal development committee.
“Communities need to make active decisions about where and how to grow if they are going to protect their
quality of life.”
Online Link: Coastal Sprawl: The Effects of Urban Design on Aquatic Ecosystems in the United States,
http://www.pewoceans.org/oceanfacts/2002/04/12/fact_25649.asp.
Farming Fish – America’s fishermen account for only four percent of the world’s catch each year. Yet the
American consumer’s consumed 19 percent of the world’s seafood eaten in 2001, a percentage that
continues to rise. Also rising is the likelihood that the fish, shrimp, or shellfish purchased at the market or
restaurant has been farm raised. Aquaculture—the farming of finfish, shellfish, or aquatic plants—
continues to grow rapidly worldwide, with production doubling by weight and value from 1989 to 1998. In
the U.S., aquaculture facilities now exist in every state and certain regions are seeing rapid growth.
“The reality today is that aquaculture is supplying a significant source of protein to consumers as wild
ocean fisheries are depleted or reach their limit,” said Leon E. Panetta, chair of the Pew Oceans
Commission. A report prepared for the Commission examines the role of the emerging U.S. aquaculture
industry in meeting the nation’s demand for seafood and its current and potential impacts on the marine

environment. The report recommends steps to ensure that domestic aquaculture grows in a sustainable
fashion, and calls upon the U.S. to take a global leadership role in adopting best practices.
“There are a number of issues related to this growing industry that can affect the quality of our oceans. This
report looks at those concerns and presents recommendations for balancing the expected growth in
aquaculture production with the protection of those natural species and habitats that are essential to the
future of our oceans.”
Online link: Marine Aquaculture in the United States: Environmental Impacts and Policy Options,
http://www.pewoceans.org/oceanfacts/2002/01/11/fact_22988.asp
From the Fields to the Oceans -- Despite 30 years of progress in reducing pollution from ocean dumping,
waste treatment facilities, and toxics such as DDT, America’s coastal waters remain in peril. A report
prepared for the Pew Oceans Commission finds that polluted runoff from farms and cities – often far inland
– went largely unabated or actually increased over the past 30 years, in many cases negating gains made in
controlling direct sources of pollution. Scientists from the University of Maryland and University of Rhode
Island point to increases in plant nutrients as the most pervasive pollution risk for estuaries, coral reefs,
seagrass beds, and other coastal ecosystems.
“We’ve done a good job tackling many of the obvious causes of ocean pollution – ocean dumping,
discharges from industrial facilities and sewage plants, and toxic pollutants,” said Leon Panetta, chair of the
Pew Oceans Commission. “Now we need to get serious about the less obvious sources of pollution that
flow from our cities, farms, and ships if we want to protect our coastal waters and the communities they
support.”
Online link: Marine Pollution in the United States: Significant Accomplishments, Future Challenges,
http://www.pewoceans.org/oceanfacts/2002/01/11/fact_22987.asp.
Alien Invasions -- The historic battleship USS Missouri is moved from Puget Sound to Hawaii, carrying
mussels that recolonize on a nearby submarine. Marina floats are towed from New Jersey to Massachusetts,
along with a population of Asian crabs. Atlantic salmon reproduce in the Pacific Northwest after escaping
from fish farms. An owner of a home aquarium releases Mediterranean green seaweed into a lagoon near
San Diego, leading to an established population of this green algae.
So begin the latest chapters in the ongoing story of a growing threat to U.S. coastal waters: introduced
species. These tales are more than just curiosities. Introduced species crowd out native species, alter
habitats, disrupt nature’s balance, and impose economic burdens on coastal communities.
In his report to the Pew Oceans Commission, James T. Carlton, Ph.D., of Williams College and Mystic
Seaport, describes a “game of ecological roulette” playing out along our coasts as hundreds of species
arrive each day by way of ships’ ballast waters, fishing activities, and other means. Carlton details that the
rate of marine introductions has risen exponentially over the past 200 years and shows no sign of leveling
off.
“Once an introduced crab, fish, or seaweed takes hold in a coastal area, it can cause tremendous
environmental disruption and result in millions of dollars in damage,” said Leon E. Panetta, chair of the
Pew Oceans Commission. “For coastal areas already threatened by polluted runoff, poorly planned coastal
development, or declining fisheries, the effects of introduced species are especially damaging.”
Online link: Introduced Species in U.S. Coastal Waters,
http://www.pewoceans.org/oceanfacts/2002/01/11/fact_22986.asp
###

