From Main Street to Wall Street
Finding Business Gold for Your Computer
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Computer-savvy journalists can mine a Mother Lode of business data from
government Web sites and databases. The federal government collects a vast amount of data
in its roles as regulator, record-keeper, buyer and promoter. The government makes this
information available in two forms – in ultra-specific documents that may involve a single
product of a single company and in databases that summarize entire marketplaces. Both
forms are useful. The key is knowing where to look.
♦ Gold Mine #1: Securities and Exchange Commission (www.sec.gov)
The SEC can’t get any respect these days. Hundreds of companies have restated –
translation: admitted they falsified – quarterly earnings statements; in other words, they
feared Wall Street analysts more than SEC lawsuits. Even SEC Chairman Harvey Pitt seems
more determined to make nice with corporate honchos than to be a tough cop.
Still, anyone seriously interested in business data needs to visit the SEC Web site. Its
features include:
1. EDGAR – the ultimate source on public companies
(http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html). Almost every
public company in America must file regular electronic reports with the SEC, and
they are all here. Download a few years worth of quarterly (Form 10-Q) and annual
(Form 10-K) reports for companies that concern you. Copy the balance sheets and
income statements into Excel for easy analysis. While you’re at it, do the same
thing with executive compensation (Form DEF-14A). While the main focus of this
handout is data that you can manipulate on a computer, don’t overlook the many
human stories lurking in SEC footnotes. I found one of the most harrowing stories I
ever wrote – the account of a Colorado woman’s death from Creutzfeldt-Jakob
Disease – in a throwaway line in a company’s 10-Q.
2. SEC News Digest (http://www.sec.gov/news/digest.shtml) is a quick rundown on
who the SEC is suing today, and why. If you are among the handful of reporters
who routinely covers fraud, this should be a mandatory daily stop.
3. Litigation releases (http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases.shtml) provide more
details on the cases covered in the SEC News Digest. In many cases SEC links
litigation releases with copies of the complaints and settlements it files in federal
court.
♦ Gold Mine #2 – the Food and Drug Administration (www.fda.gov)
As its name implies, the FDA is supposed to ensure the safety of food and drugs.
Everyone from multinational drug manufacturers to seafood distributors is subject to FDA
regulation. The FDA has a handful of databases and an enormous library of documents.

-1-

While many documents are available only through the agency’s slow-as-molasses FOIA
office, many more are on its Web site. Places to go:
1. Warning letters (http://www.fda.gov/foi/warning.htm) are formal demands that a
company comply with FDA regulations. In my limited experience, companies that
get warning letters already have gotten – and ignored or resisted – informal
requests to improve their practices. You can search warning letters by company
name, date or subject. If your target company gets a warning letter, I recommend
searching every related subject to see if your target is part of a larger trend or a
lone wolf.
2. FDA Enforcement Report (http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases.shtml) makes
the SEC News Digest seem a strong candidate for the Nobel Prize. Dry is not the
word. It is simply a long list, compiled weekly, of every recall in the country. But if
you want to know what foods or health products are alarming the federal
government, this is THE place to go.
3. Advisory committee meeting transcripts
(http://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases.shtml). The FDA has scores of advisory
committees telling it how to handle new technology and frightening new diseases.
These committees typically include some of the leading academic and industrial
experts. If you’re interested in something on the bleeding edge of health, you’ll find
a lot of answers and sources here.

-2-

♦ Gold Mine #3 – Other regulatory agencies
The Federal Trade Commission (www.ftc.gov) and Consumer Products Safety
Commission (www.cpsc.gov) both archive press releases and studies documenting unsafe
products and illegal business conduct. The National Association of Securities Dealers, a selfregulating group, has done a lot to undermine the credibility of industry self-regulation. But
after a series of scandals in the mid 1990s NASD took one small step in the right direction: It
began posting regulatory actions against securities brokers and dealers. You’ll find them at
www.nasdr.com. And don’t overlook state securities regulators. Some of them have detailed
information online; you can find a complete list at the North American Securities
Administrators Association (www.nassa.org).
♦ Gold Mine #4 – the Census Bureau (www.census.gov)
There may be a better site for journalists on the Web, but I really can’t think of any.
Of course the Census Bureau is the place to go for information about people and places, but it
also has an amazing collection of business and economic data. Unlike the SEC, FDA and other
regulatory agencies, the census measures entire marketplaces and businesses. Why is this
important to an investigator? Look at it this way: The company or companies you’re
investigating are part of a larger market; you can’t really understand what they’re doing, or
who they’re potentially cheating, until you get a handle on that market. Here are a handful of
the many, many riches on the census site:
1. The Briefing Room (www.census.gov/cgi-bin/briefroom/BriefRm) is a great place
to visit when you need ideas for a quick off-the-news daily or weekender. Current
items include the latest national homeownership rate, the trade deficit,
manufacturing inventories and wholesale and retail sales figures. Note that these
are not applicable to individual companies – but they are a big part of the market
in which those companies operate. There is also a schedule of releases of economic
indicators at www.census.gov/epcd/econ/www/indijun.htm.
2. My all-time favorite Census product is County Business Patterns. County Business
Patterns breaks down employment by North American Industrial Classification
System (NAICS) code to the state and county level. It is a peerless way to profile
your local economy statistically. You can quickly determine how many people
work in any of more than 1,000 industries. You can also determine the total payroll
and get a rough idea of the number of large and small businesses within a
particular area or business. You can use a simple lookup tool for state, county and
metro-area data, including in-state comparisons. Or you can download all the data
for several years, allowing county-by-county and year-by-year comparisons. If
downloading gets to be too much of a pain, or if you want the national Zip code
file (which I was unable to find online), you can buy the national data on CD for
$50.
3. The Economic Census, last prepared in 1997, provides similar information. Use it
for the same purpose as County Business Patterns, to get an idea of the local
marketplace. The numbers are older (every five years vs. annual for County
Business Patterns), but as is typical for the bureau you get more precision in turn
for the longer wait. At least that’s the theory.
♦ Gold Mine #5: Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov)

-3-

The BLS is the keeper of some of the government’s most politically sensitive measures of
the economy, including the unemployment rate and the Consumer Price Index. Those two by
themselves would ensure BLS a place on many reporters’ list of bookmarks. Dig deeper,
however, and all kinds of amazing things become available.
The Occupational Outlook Handbook (http://www.bls.gov/oco/home.htm) is an
important resource if you’re looking at a particular job. (This just in: The outlook for news
reporters is for slower than average job growth and increasing use of freelancers; stay away if
you can’t stand erratic schedules and lots of deadlines, BLS advises.)
The BLS data download site (www.bls.gov/data/home.htm) is a treasure trove. Among the
items you can download: the national compensation survey, mass layoffs and detailed
information on occupational injuries, diseases and deaths by industrial category.
♦ Gold Mine #6: International Trade Administration (www.ita.doc.gov)
These days even the smallest town has a stake in the global economy. ITA measures U.S.
exports by destination country and by originating metro area
(http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/industry/otea/). ITA reports total dollar value of exports for 181
metro areas to a few dozen countries and trading blocs (1993-1999). It also breaks down
exports by industrial classification for 43 major metro areas. You will, I’m sure, be impressed to
know that our host city (and my hometown), San Francisco, exported $247 million worth of
apparel to the world in 1999.
You can get an idea how important exports and imports are to a particular industry by
checking http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/industry/otea/usito98/tables_naics.htm. ITA breaks
down imports by year and by country for hundreds of NAICS codes. If you’re investigating or
profiling a company, get its NAICS code and check imports and exports for its industry. A
company complaining that it can’t export or that imports are killing its business may in fact
have no one but itself to blame.
♦ Gold (okay, Tin) Mine #7: Occupational Health and Safety Administration (www.osha.gov)
For several years, IRE/NICAR has sold the OSHA database of on-the-job injuries and
deaths. But if you’re interested in one particular company or industry, try OSHA’s in-house
search tool at http://155.103.6.10/cgi-bin/est/est1 to view all inspections at a particular site.
You also can search by Standard Industrial Classification code (the predecessor to the NAICS
code) at http://155.103.6.10/cgi-bin/sichq/sic1; this is valuable if you want to compare your
target company with its industry. Finally, you can narrow your search to accidents (as
opposed to inspections, which may focus on paperwork violations) at http://155.103.6.10/cgibin/inv/inv1.
♦ Gold Mine #8: Pacific Information Resources Inc. (www.pac-info.com)
The states regulate dozens of professions – physicians and lawyers, of course, but also
architects, barbers and cosmeticians. Pac-Info is a marvelous deadline resource, with links to
professional regulators in all 50 states and every Canadian province. While most of these
regulators only offer lookups (and pretty poor ones in many cases), this is simply too good a
resource to pass up. In California, for example, Pac-Info links to licensing information (and in
some cases lists of licensees) for accountants, architects, acupuncturists, attorneys, athletic
managers and automotive brake adjustment stations – and that’s just the A’s!

-4-

♦ Gold Mine #9: U.S. Patent & Trademark Office (www.uspto.gov)
So the guy you’re looking at says he has patented perpetual motion. So you think he’s lying.
You could ask him to show you the patent and hope he doesn’t delay you past deadline. Or
you could go to this site and find out in a few minutes that there’s no such patent or that it’s
already owned by Bill Gates.

-5-

