EDITING NUTS AND BOLTS – Jon Menell (jmenell@kstp.com / 651.647.2873)
Anchor the Heads and Tails of shots – look for defining action or beats. Vital shots and vital cuts.
Only Show me something new to Tell me something new. Don’t repeat ideas. Look for the conceptual
cutoff to a shot for your edits. Know when the viewer is ready for something new.
Editing is about coming to grips with the truth of what material “is” and what it “can be” – NOT what it was
“intended” to be. The more preconceptions you have the harder it is to see the true potential of sound and
pictures.
Avoid “conveyer belts” (editor’s fault) and “grocery lists” (writer’s fault)…Do not replace conveyer belts
with “Arthur Murray Dance Steps” (cookie cutter technique).
If it blew you away on the raw tape but lies like a dead fish in your story – you have cut off the setup,
however subtle it was. Go back to the source tape. Make sure you take the root or the flower will die.
Think small. Details…details…details. Convey humanity every chance you get. Look for “telling” shots
and moments (story signifiers).
Dynamic pace and texture: Slow/fast warm/cold loud/quiet small/big hard/soft clear/unclear. Imagine
it’s a meal. Think of how you combine different textures when you eat – not just on the plate, but also in
the order you eat them. Whimsy counts for a lot.
Do not illustrate – Generate! Track should guide the story – Not tell it. Do not spend time Telling your
audience what you could be Showing them.
Do not think in terms of “nat sound breaks”. The entire story should feel like “natural” sound – even the
reporter tracks. Think in terms of conceptual changes or introductions.
Respect your collaborators and yourself. Defend the story…not your ego
Do not worry overly about consistency. No two elements are the same, they should not be dealt with the
same way. Editing decisions are entirely situational. Trust your instincts.
Be a viewer. Practice forgetting. If you know “everything” how can you relate to your audience?
Factual truth is only meaningful in context with human truth.
.
The best (most convenient) measure of human truth is yourself. Be honest with yourself as a guide to
understanding your viewer and your material.
Don’t be afraid to edit/write/shoot off your subject. Be playful. You are creating/discovering relationships
when you work. We biologically think in additive terms: Cause and Effect. You cannot put together a
meaningless sequence (just unclear or uninteresting ones). Explore the material.
Sequences that work look obvious later.
Do not fear confusion in your stories as it is often an invitation to think. The most engaging moments are
often the moments we let the audience have for themselves. Pause. Let them make the connection.
Don’t forget to ask “what should come next?”
In stories, like life, the most affecting things are naturally occurring. Remember to let the story Grow,
Breathe and Happen.

