Using the Internet
Beat Development
A few caveats:
• Don’t allow the availability of information on the Internet to keep you from walking
the beat. When it comes to developing a beat, there is no substitute for face-to-face
interaction.
• Just to drive the point home, initial beat development is all about developing
contacts. While learning the organizational structures of the entities you’re covering
is important, actually meeting the people who hold their titles (and their secretaries)
is more important.
• Even with a T-1 line and a state-of-the-art computer, you can still find a local phone
number faster by opening the phone book than by using an online directory.
Similarly, you can look up a word faster in a hard-copy dictionary than you can
through an online dictionary. The Internet is not always your best option. On the
other hand, I’ve generally found online phone directories more reliable than
directory assistance in getting out-of-town phone numbers, so sometimes speed
isn’t everything.
Online beat development:
Online beat development pretty much follows the pattern of shoe-leather beat
development: You start at the center and work outward.
For example, if your beat is local government, a logical online starting place is any web
sites put up by your city and county governments. From there, you should look for
community web sites -- local chat rooms, bulletin boards, etc. -- and community group
web sites such as those for the local Chamber of Commerce, economic development
authorities, taxpayer groups, etc.
As you get more familiar with the beat, you'll find several state and federal agencies
interact regularly with city and county government. Their web sites are another good
place to go surfing. Also, most elected officials belong to organizations -- such as the
Municipal League or Association of Counties -- and these organizations increasingly
maintain their own web sites.
What journals or newsletters do the mayor, recorder-treasurer, county commissioners,
citizen groups, etc. read? An increasing number of these publications are online.
Look for the "intellectual" sites of your beat such as political sites if you cover
government or research sites if you cover health or environmental news. As for business
sites, the problem will be weeding through them rather than finding them since investor
sites are one of the main growth areas on the Web. A good starting point, although it
requires a subscription, is the Wall Street Journal.
Finally, try some productive goofing off on the Internet. Use Google to find any sites
mentioning your town or county. Think up some keywords or buzz phrases used by city
or county officials and run searches to see who else is using them.
Online beat monitoring:
As you come across web sites, you need to be thinking about how often you should be
checking them. How often are the sites updated? Do they provide news or notices of
upcoming events, or are they pretty much static?

1

Using the Internet
Set up bookmark or shortcut folders and sort the sites according to the frequency you
plan on checking them. A good start is to have folders marked "Daily," "Beginning of
Week," "End of Week", "Beginning of Month," "End of Month," "Occasional" and "For
when I'm really bored."
This is a dynamic process. Sites change. For example, if you find that you're constantly
missing notices on one of your monthly sites, move it over into one of the weekly folders.
On the other hand, if you check a site several times without finding anything new,
consider bumping it over to monthly or even occasional.
Sign up for e-mail alert services:
An increasing number of web sites are willing to send you an e-mail every time they
add something new to their sites. Even though these can generate a lot of notices that
won't lead to any news stories, they're generally worth subscribing to. If the site allows
you to customize the service, spend some time learning its parameters and try some
different configurations to see which ones work best.
Visit other news sites:
Most of the major media sites are at least worth a daily or semi-weekly perusal. These
include the New York Times, Washington Post, CNN, Time, Newsweek, etc.
Depending on your beat, try to find some newspapers in cities about your size and,
particularly, with similar geography or demographics. Check them at least on a weekly
basis to see what's going on and, therefore, may be happening in your neck of the woods
in the near future.
Check out some of the Internet news services such as Yahoo! and Lycos. In addition to
their general headline news, they're starting to offer a wide array of specialized news
services. Some of them will probably fit your beat.
Sign up for mailing lists:
Good starting points are the journalist discussion groups such as IRE-L, NICAR-L,
SPJ-L and CARR-L. An increasing number of "beat" mailing lists for business,
environmental and education writers are also available. Some of the general journalism
sites listed below provide links to signup pages for these lists.
From there, check with the sources on your beat to see if they belong to any mailing
lists. If so, see if you can join them. Also, check some of the list directories available on
the list for mailing lists dealing with issues or subjects that connect to your beat.
Over time, you're going to find that some lists are more useful than others. That's no big
deal. Just unsubscribe from the ones that seem to be wasting your time.
Look for blogs:
While many blog or weblog sites aren't the "new wave of journalism" that they're hyped
as, some are useful, depending on your beat. Finding them is still mostly a matter of
keeping you ears open to where the sources on your beat are spending their online time.
If you can find a blog that ever city official is checking regularly, for example, it's a good
bet the city reporter ought to also be checking it regularly.

2

Using the Internet
Useful Beat-Development Sites
Mailing Lists, Usenet, etc.
The basic ones for journalists are IRE-L, IREPLUS-L, SPJ-L, CARR-L and NICAR-L.
The IRE and SPJ web sites provide signup information for them.
A Journalist’s Guide to the Internet also provides signup information for these and
other journalism-related lists at http://reporter.umd.edu/listserv.htm. The site is
maintained by Christopher Callahan at the University of Maryland’s journalism
department.
As for finding other mailing lists, this is one of the few things that has become more
difficult on the web.
A web site formerly known as Liszt provided one of the best databases of mailing lists
for several years. Unfortunately, it was taken over by Topica, which has a real talent for
eating up bandwidth with useless information. Still, it’s probably worth a visit to search
for mailing lists and newsletters that connect to your beat. The addresses are either
http://www.liszt.com/index.html or www.topica.com.
Another fairly mediocre site is Publicly Accessible Mailing Lists:
http://www.alastra.com/paml/indexes.html
The link above for the journalist’s guide to the Internet also provides links to a few
mailing list databases that I haven’t tried yet, but they look promising.
As for finding usenet groups, Google provides one of the better services (which used to
be DejaNews), at www.groups.google.com.
A better, at least less painless, way of finding mailing lists is to ask reporters from other
newspapers who cover the same beat as you. If you join IRE-L, for example, you can
send out a request to all other cop reporters about any mailing lists, usenet groups, chat
rooms, etc. that they’ve found useful.
Beat sites
Many journalism sites provide beat directories or databases that list groups and
individuals who could be possible sources. Here are a few of them.
• http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/initial-search-beat.html – IRE’s Beat Source
Guide
• www.facsnet.org – operated by the Foundation for American Communications, a
nonprofit partly funded by news organizations. Although this is one of the more
irritating sites to surf, it does provide a lot of information including a card file of
organizational contacts.
• http://powerreporting.com/ -- operated by Bill Dedman, a Pulitzer-prize winning
reporter and consultant to the Boston Globe. Has a lot of beat information.
• http://reporter.umd.edu/ -- A Journalist’s Guide to the Internet provides some beatspecific information as well as general-interest journalism links. It’s a site worth
checking out.
• www.reporter.org – Another good link site.
Miscellaneous tips:
• Handling e-mail: Netscape and Internet Explorer both allow you to create e-mail
folders to store messages in. Don’t be shy about using them to group your e-mails.

3

Using the Internet

•

My e-mail folders, for example, include one for messages from some of the major
groups on my beat. In some cases, I’ll have a folder dedicated to a specific
organization. In other cases, because of the lesser volume, I’ll group e-mail
messages by the interests of the people sending them. The advantage of this system
is that when I need to contact people interested in coal truck weights, for example, I
can go to that folder and find a ready list of contacts.
Never accept a web site at face value. Find out who runs it, who pays for it, etc. If
the people who run the site aren’t willing to tell you these facts, take anything they
post or say with a large grain of salt.

4

Using the Internet
Finding specific data:
A few more caveats:
• Don't wait until deadline to search for data. Even the best Websites aren't userfriendly if you're in a hurry.
• On the other hand, build up a list of Websites that you can use on deadline. By
studying them ahead of time, you can jump right to the information you need. This
is particularly important for "emergency" Websites dealing with plane accidents,
storms, etc.
• Spend some time searching for and familiarizing yourself with sites relevant to your
beat. In addition to government sites, look for sites maintained by associations of
government officials, special interest groups, etc. The more you know about what's
out there, the better you'll be able to know when a search will be useful for a
particular story.
• Don't become blinded by the Web. While it is a good resource, one of the best ways
to find data is still talking to people who handle it. If an online search is taking too
much time, pick up the phone.
Using search engines:
• Know how they work. Different search engines use different syntax for their
searches. One of the most important things to know is whether a search engine
"ANDs" or "ORs" the search terms you enter. A quick way to find out is to run a
search on a single word, note the number of hits, and then repeat the search with a
second word. If the number of hits increases, the search engine is "ORing" the
terms, which means it's returning any page that has any of the terms on the page. If
the number of hits decreases, the search engine is "ANDing" the terms, which
means it is only returning pages that contain all the terms.
• Know their limitations. Some search engines such as Google are developed with
programs called "spiders" that roam the Web gathering information. Their strength
is that they tend to pick up more information. Their weakness is that they tend to
produce a lot of noise -- false hits -- on a search. Other search engines, such as
Yahoo, are built by humans cataloging Web pages. They tend to produce less noise
in searches, but are also less likely to have all the Web sites relevant to your search.
A Google example
Google, www.google.com, automatically "ANDs" search terms, which means it only
reports back sites that have all the terms on them.
Enclosing a phrase in quotes will only return sites that have that phrase on them,
instead of sites that have the individual words anywhere on the page.
Putting a minus "-" sign in front of a term will exclude pages that have that term.
In general, adding a term to the search will limit it much more than excluding a term.
Using a phrase instead of individual words will limit the search much more than just
adding a term.
Example: Finding information about Todd Ritchie, plant manager for Pechiney Rolled
Products

5

Using the Internet
Search terms
Todd
Todd Ritchie
Todd Ritchie Pechiney
"Todd Ritchie"
"Todd Ritchie" -baseball
"Todd Ritchie" -baseball -pitcher
"Todd Ritchie" -baseball -pitcher -pitches
"Todd Ritchie" Pechiney

Results
3.8 million
67,000
18
11,500
4,620
3,210
3,060
2

Of course, limiting searches isn't always a good thing. It's quite possible that using the
last example eliminated some pages that would provide interesting information on Todd
Ritchie when he worked at the plant when it was Ravenswood Aluminum or Century
Aluminum or even before he worked at the plant. On deadline, however, these are useful
tools for cutting the "noise" on a search and getting the one or two Web pages you need.
Learn about the "Invisible Web"
NEC Research Institute, which is wholly owned by NEC Corporation, a computer
company, currently estimates that no search engine catalogs more than 16 percent of the
Web that could be indexed. Much of the remaining 84 percent is in databases or other
frameworks that the search engines can't easily index.
This is a particularly important statistic for journalists because much of the data we
seek is found in those databases. Consequently, a search with a general search engine
probably isn't the best way to start a data search.
Some useful alternatives include:
• The Invisible Web, www.invisibleweb.com, is a site that catalogs databases and
other repositories of information that a general search engine isn't likely to find.
• The Librarians' Index to the Internet, lii.org, is another site that catalogs hard to find
resources.
• INFOMINE: Scholarly Internet Resource Collections, infomine.ucr.edu, is another
librarian-built site for databases, scholarly papers, etc.

Search government sites only:
One way to cut down noise on a deadline search for government information is to use
Google's government site search engine, www.google.com/unclesam. It limits your
search to federal (.gov), state and military (.mil) sites.
Get creative in a general search:
Think about how newspapers and other media generally report the data you're looking
for. For example, if you're trying to figure out what agency provides statistics on the
West Virginia's gross state product, a search for the phrase "gross state product" will
bring up 16,600 hits with the first one being for the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

6

Using the Internet
Similarly, using "anglers spent" will bring up hits on reports that discuss spending by
saltwater, Great Lakes, freshwater and all types of anglers. More importantly, some of the
first hits refer to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, telling you that that agency studies
spending by anglers and, probably, other outdoor enthusiasts.
If your search produces a lot of hits where Websites are reporting statistics without
citing where they came from, try adding the phrases "according to," "said in a report" or
"released by" to the search. These are some of the most common ways people attribute
statistics in written documents.
A few thoughts on using data
Regardless of whether you get it online, over the phone or in person, there are several
things you need to know about any data that you include in your story.
1. Where did it come from? People, interest groups in particular, have a penchant for
using numbers without citing the source of the numbers. In fact, some people and groups
are not above inventing numbers to persuade you, and the public through you, that they
know what they're talking about.
2. How was it derived? While some groups, particularly scientific ones, can be very
precise about what a statistic actually measures, you can't rely on the terms they use until
you know how they define those terms. "Income," for example, means several different
things in several different government reports, so you can't just grab an "income" statistic
and use it without knowing what types of income it actually measures.
3. What could bias the measure? Statistics on fatalities in accidents involving large
trucks and passenger cars are a good example of how a measurement can be biased. In
most of these cases, the fatalities were in the passenger car, leaving only the trucker to
tell police how the accident happened.
4. Is the measure based on a survey? If so, what is its margin of error?
Some other cites you may want to spend some time getting to know:
The Census Bureau, www.census.gov, is one of several federal sites that has a mother
lode of data. However, like most of the other sites, it's difficult to use until you
understand how the Census does things. One of the best ways to learn the site is to start
with learning what kinds of information the Census gathers. FedStats can help with that.
Census FactFinder, factfinder.census.gov/servlet/BasicFactsServlet, is particularly
useful for quickly getting data from the 2000 and 1990 censuses as well as some of the
other Census surveys. It also provides a mapping utility that can help you visualize data
down to the Census tract level. Take some time to learn it.
For more information on productive surfing, check out Nora Paul’s guides:
http://www.poynter.org/faculty/npaul.htm. In particular, try this one:
http://www.poynter.org/research/car/car_6steps.htm
Other sites with tips or other useful information for journalists:
The Poynter Institute
• http://poynter.org/dj/tips/index.htm – wide range of tips for everyone from
managing editors to cub reporters.

7

Using the Internet
Investigative Reporters and Editors
• http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/ -- tip sheets from working journalists, a library
of award-winning stories and other useful stuff.
Individual sites
• http://www.assignmenteditor.com/ -- created by a television station managing
editor, it provides links to a wide range of free and subscription sites useful to
journalists.
• http://www.newslab.org/ -- funded by the Park Foundation, NewsLab is focused on
television news but that doesn’t mean print reporters can’t steal some of its ideas.

8

Using the Internet
Obtaining electronic data:
West Virginia's open records law requires agencies to provide electronic copies:
§29B-1-3 (emphasis added)
(3) The custodian of any public records, unless otherwise expressly
provided by statute, shall furnish proper and reasonable opportunities
for inspection and examination of the records in his or her office and
reasonable facilities for making memoranda or abstracts therefrom,
during the usual business hours, to all persons having occasion to make
examination of them. The custodian of the records may make reasonable
rules and regulations necessary for the protection of the records and
to prevent interference with the regular discharge of his or her
duties. If the records requested exist in magnetic, electronic or
computer form, the custodian of the records shall make such copies
available on magnetic or electronic media, if so requested.

General procedure:
1. Confirm the records exist in electronic format. Considering the increasingly
computerized nature of government records, you would think this would be easy, but it
can still take some arguing to convince government agencies that they have what you
want in electronic format.
2. Convince the custodian of those records that he or she can provide them in a format
you can read. Notice I said convince instead of determine because it's exceedingly rare
that you run across a computer record system that can't at least save its records to a text
format.
3. Submit the FOIA specifying the records you want and the format you want them in.
4. Keep pestering the agency until it releases the records.
For a more highbrow version of the above, check out the Reporters Committee for
Freedom of the Press guide to electronic records at: http://www.rcfp.org/elecrecs/
Conclusion:
What I've tried to do here was give you some starting points for developing your own
Internet and data finding strategies instead of trying to be the last-word on any of these
subjects.
If you have questions about any of the things we covered today, please feel free to email me at brianbowling@dailymail.com.

9

