Better Watchdogs:
Covering Appalachia
Ken Ward Jr.
The Charleston Gazette
kward@wvgazette.com
Sept. 14, 2002

Getting into a "Documents State of Mind"
1.The Law: Too often, reporters are afraid of the law. Make it your friend. Understand the legal duties and
limits on agencies you cover. Find out what annual and other reports or audits are required. They are a wealth
of information. Read the rules and regulations, too. State statutes, rules and regulations for all states are
available online at
http://www.wvsos.com/adlaw/register/openmeetingshandbook.htm. Federal laws and regulations are
available at http://www.access.gpo.gov/su_docs/index.html. Get copies of the laws and regulations most
relevant to your beat. Keep them on your desk, or in a handy file on your computer.
2. Audits: The federal General Accounting Office is the best place to find audits and reviews of just about
every topic imaginable. And they investigate not just federal agencies, but state enforcement of federal
mandates. Their website is www.gao.gov.
3. Avoid relying just on press releases: If a government agency of politician announces that they've cracked
down a polluter, protected workers' safety or created a bunch of new jobs, ask for the records to back it up.
Train the flacks that you always want these records. Be especially wary of press releases that come over the
fax at 4:45 on Friday afternoon. If possible, hold the story until you can get the documentation, and check it
out.
4. Depositions: Interviews taking during the evidence-gathering portion of a lawsuit are a goldmine. Unlike
reporters, lawyers can compel people to answer their questions. Particularly helpful if you're investigating a
company or a government agency that has been sued. Ask the lawyers doing the suing for copies. They will
almost always provide them -- often in electronic format that is easy to search.
5. Federal Agency regulatory agendas: All agencies publish at least every other year a list of new regulations
that they plan to try to write and implement. Get these, and you can be ahead of the game in terms of what
agencies will do on issues that affect your readers. Just as important, you can find out what projects they have
canceled, by tracking agendas for several years in a row. Check the Federal Register,
http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/index.html for these documents, or just check the agency's website,
usually under "regulations."

