Managing Projects and Project Reporting Off the Beat
John Voskuhl
Projects Editor
Lexington Herald-Leader
At the Lexington Herald-Leader, Editor Amanda Bennett and I declared earlier this year
that every reporter is a projects reporter.
What does that mean? It means that every reporter in the newsroom -- it doesn't matter
what section you're in, it doesn't matter what your beat is -- is going to work on major
stories. We call it the Two-Notebook Theory.
The idea is that while you're working out of one notebook on the good and necessary
daily stories -- that is, the accounts of the school board meeting or the latest issue to
confront the city council or the weekender profile of the new transit authority chief -you should be keeping a second notebook as well. This second notebook should be filled
with ideas, and occasionally with interviews you're able to squeeze in as you flesh out
your ideas.
When you have an hour before the editor gets around to reading your daily on a
Wednesday, you're not just shooting the breeze with other reporters. Maybe you're
talking to them about a Second Notebook story. Or maybe you're on the Internet,
checking to see whether anybody else has ever written your Second Notebook story, or
looking for studies or other writings about the topic of your story. Or maybe you're
making a couple calls to try to track down sources for your Second Notebook story. Or
you're making yet another call to try to nail down that elusive interview that would be
key to a great Second Notebook story.
So, why don't we just split a group of reporters off from the staff to go out and Do
Projects? Because the best stories, and thus the best projects, come from journalists who
know what the hell is going on. And the only journalists who really know what the hell is
going on are those who are working a beat the right way.
I am supposed to talk to you today about how to manage project reporting in between
your beat reporting. But what I am really here today to tell you is that there is no other
way to pull off great project reporting: It all begins -- and then it continues through the
middle and it finally ends -- with great beat reporting.
Once a beat reporter turns up a great idea, I might say, "Hey, you're now going to work
full-time on this project." What I'm really saying, in a sense, is "Hey, I'm making your
beat for the next three months this project. Go out and master it, make sources, find the
issues that create tension or public interest and then let's talk."
It is all beat reporting. So how do you start? Here are a few tips:

1. Inoculate yourself against Project-itis.
Here are the warning signs: You're paralyzed at the keyboard. This is your big chance for
glory. You've done fine at your daily work, and now you're ready for the Big Project. But
… you find you can't write it well enough. Better roll out some big words, some dewy
metaphors that will glisten on the page. An anecdotal lede that would bring a tear to
every eye on a potato. And maybe you start a paragraph with something like, "After a
four-month investigation, the Clarion-Parakeet found …"
When I see the writers who work with me struggle with this kind of overwrought stuff,
truly eat their souls up over it and torture themselves with it, I have to chuckle. Because I
know that once they turn it in to me, we're going to strip it down into a good story.
Good projects are nothing more than good stories. Nothing more. Don't feel like you have
to turn a good story into a multi-part examination full of self-important paragraphs. The
key is to put so much effort into it that, to the reader, it's effortless.
2. Bubble up, not trickle down
Good stories, and thus good projects, come from things you notice, or things you learn
when you are reporting on the real world and IN THE REAL WORLD.
Good stories are not born, and do not dwell, in morning news meetings. Good stories do
not gestate in editor's offices, or anywhere near the cars of editors as said editors drive in
to work.
Good stories can only very seldom be midwifed by telephone lines or fax machines or email.
Good stories are found, birthed and delivered by reporters. The best stories are stories
reporters have found. If you are a reporter who doesn't find stories, you're not really a
reporter. You're a piece of equipment that your editors use, not unlike a pencil.
Don't be a tool. Report. If you work your beat correctly, you will be an unending source
of ideas for good stories, and thus for good projects.
If your editor has an idea for a story, listen to it. Evaluate it. Discuss it. It might be worth
something. After all, many editors were once reporters. But be smart. Have such a long
list of great, authentic story ideas that you can always convincingly argue your editor into
giving the story that was birthed in the morning news meeting to some other hapless
reporter.
3. Start small, and get big
This is the only way to be truly novel. There are plenty of good reporters out there who
say things to editors like, "We should do this great story that the Kansas City Star did!
They found a long list of federal judges who had conflicts of interest! Let's get that list
here for our federal judges!" And I'll say, "OK, go ahead."
Those kinds of stories, while valuable uses of time, are almost always disappointing -and of course, never novel.
Why?
Because the reporters who do them have started big and tried to get small. There was
something big happening somewhere else. We read about it and try to determine if it was
happening here. Maybe it is happening here -- but if it is, it's probably just luck.
A much, much better strategy is to start small and try to get big. Nail down whether
something unusual is happening here -- and then figure out if it's also happening

elsewhere. Not too long ago we did a two-day series on the growth of the SSI disability
program in Eastern Kentucky. Before we published it, we checked to see whether that
kind of growth was happening anywhere else in the country. It wasn’t. But if it were,
we'd have had a national scoop on our hands. That's an example of starting small and
trying to get big.
So how do you start small?
4. Start with people
There are scads of top-notch investigative reporters out there who sing the praises of
documents -- lots of documents, big, tall stacks of documents that these reporters cart
home from the agency of your choice and dive into like a duck in a bog. And they often
find great stories in them. "I love big stacks of documents," one such excellent reporter
said at a recent IRE gathering.
I hate them. I find nothing to like in big, tall stacks of documents.
But I absolutely adore the two or three or four documents in that tall stack which tell the
story.
So how do you avoid the stacks and get to the good stuff? Source up.
I will argue that nearly every truly great scoop starts the old-fashioned way: Somebody
tells.
Investigative reporters and editors sometimes note with pride that our business is
particularly great because we pry out secrets people don't want to tell us. But really, have
you ever had a secret you didn't want to tell? Somebody, somewhere always wants to tell,
and it is the job of the reporter to get that person to a place where he or she will tell.
If you buy that, then you must accept that good stories -- and thus, good projects -- are
born in the lives of people who are far from the newsroom. Notice that I am not saying
they are born in the lives of institutions. Maybe some of you cover city hall. City Hall has
no stories. The people who work in City Hall, the people who are worked over by City
Hall and the people who WORK City Hall have all the damn stories.
How many times have you turned in a story about something that's happening at City
Hall and your editor says, "OK, can you make some calls and figure out a way to get
some PEOPLE into this story?"?
That's backward. Start with the people.
A potentially great beat reporter, and thus a potentially great projects reporter, loses a
little greatness for each week that goes by in which she doesn't meet any new people on
her beat.
Two other thoughts on people vs. documents:
1. Documents are indeed great, because they never change their stories on you. But if
you find must FOIA a big, stack of documents, don't just take copies. Find out if your
state law allows you to REVIEW and make copies of documents. If you're allowed to
review originals, go do it. Why? Because you'll need to set up shop in the agency you
want to write about. You'll have to be a presence there for the day, or two days or
three days it will take you to plow through the files you've requested. That's a chance
to meet people and schmooze people. It's a chance to advertise that you're a reporter
who cares about getting facts. It's a chance to spread around a few business cards.
Maybe that'll pay off on this story, or maybe it'll pay off months from now on another
story. Either way, it can't hurt.

2. Many times people will want to talk off the record, which is fine -- IF they can point
you to the documents that will make the case. To me, this is the best way to work a
beat. Use sources and moles to learn where the taters are in a field, and use FOIA -advisedly -- to dig 'em up.
5. When starting with people, make 'em the right people
Good beat reporters, and thus good projects reporters, find two kinds of people on their
beats:
People who have all the answers.
People who have some of the questions.
Which is it better for a reporter to be on good terms with? Here's a hint: People who have
all the answers rarely share them, for various reasons. They either don't know how
important the answers are -- or they do know how important, and damaging, the answers
are.
What sort of people have some of the questions?
A. Disgruntled workers.
B. Former workers.
C. The people who are affected by any agency on your beat.
D. The people who inspect any agency on your beat.
E. The people who lobby any agency on your beat -- and particularly those who lobby it
unsuccessfully.
F. People who work in similar agencies in towns that are not on your beat.
G. People who work in supporting roles to the people who have all the answers on your
beat.
All of these people are flawed as sources -- and you'll have to find ways to deal with their
various flaws -- but they can all be good starting points. Another thing to remember about
making sources in any agency, institution or system: Life is like high school. You want to
meet the class gossips, the class clowns, the hyper-observant nerds, the alienated cool
guys.
6. Your great source-making has turned up a super tip. Now what?
It's time to work up a pitch for your editor. Here's what you don't say:
"Boss, I want to look at sanitation contracting in the tri-county area."
When a reporter says that kind of thing to me, I reply: "Fine. Go look at it. Come back
when you can describe the view."
In short, a general topic isn't enough. You need to do enough pre-research to have a verb
-- at least a conditional verb -- for your pitch. Something like:
"Boss, sanitation contracting in the tri-county area may be controlled by one company
that masquerades as different outfits submitting different bids in order to avoid looking
like a monopoly."
And I'll reply: "How do you know?"
And you'll say: "I don’t know yet. But I will know once you give me the time to look into
it. I have a source in the Central County finance department who says …."
Get it? A smart reporter once said, "Work your editors like you work your sources." And

it's a great strategy: Trade some information with them. Prepare before you talk to them.
Don't waste their time.
7. Stay flexible and check in regularly.
Make sure your story stays intellectually honest all the way through, and make sure your
editors know every time the facts dictate that your story idea must change.
For instance, maybe you learn that there is no single company masquerading as several
companies, but instead, one family in which three different brothers all have different
companies. That's the kind of subtle factual change an editor needs to know quickly.
8. Write as you go.
This is a slightly controversial suggestion -- since some fear it could lead reporters to
marry themselves to a thesis even after facts come in to disprove it. But I believe that as
long as a reporter cleaves to the cardinal rule of journalism -- intellectual honesty -- it's
not really an issue.
Understand that what you write as you go is designed to sharpen your own understanding
of your material and how it fits together.
Understand that if you write something that you later learn is wrong, you must modify it
or trash it, no matter how great you thought it was at the time.
And understand that what you write as you go is for your use -- not for the story. Some of
what you write may wind up going into your drafts. Chances are it won't.
9. Draft three times.
Drafting seems to be a casualty of the computer age. Nobody writes all the way through a
story any more before tinkering with the top.
In my view, enterprise stories should go through three drafts before an editor ever sees
them. After the first one, the reporter should look for holes in the facts. Spellings,
timelines, etc.
After the second one, the reporter should look for organizational issues. Is the meaning
clear? Is the lively material balanced against the boring but necessary material? Is there
appropriate context, definitions and other B material sprinkled through appropriately?
After the third draft, the reporter should be looking at ease of reading. Does the story
contain any speedbumps that will stop readers?
10. Final thought
The kind of journalism we're talking about here -- accountability stories, investigative
stories -- is terribly important stuff. It's one of the things that make this country great. It
changes laws; it changes lives. It ennobles our craft and makes it worthy of the First
Amendment.
But it ain't rocket science.
It is really just hard work. It takes an unusual commitment of time to make every reporter
in a newsroom into a projects reporter -- and it takes an uncommon commitment on the
part of the reporters. They must shrug off the inertia of simply writing for the daily grind
and commit to writing for the daily and for the far horizon of project land.
In these times, though, that's the only way it's going to happen at a lot of newspapers.
Make the commitment.

