Tipsheet: Watching Out For Legal Perils For Journalists In The United States
By Bruce E. H. Johnson
Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Seattle
brucejohnson@dwt.com
1.
Defamation – because of First Amendment, for public officials and “public figures”, the New York
Times “actual malice” (knowing falsity or reckless disregard of the truth) rule applies. Masson case illustrates
different between good journalism and actual malice principles.
2.
Defamation – again because of First Amendment Gertz decision, for private individuals, the
“negligence” standard (at a minimum) applies. In some states (New York, for example) a different standard
(gross irresponsibility) may apply. No presumed damages absent actual malice.
3.
Defamation – “of an concerning” rule is also a constitutional principle. But in prepublication review,
watch out for the unintended plaintiff.
4.
Defamation – plaintiff bears the burden of proving falsity under the First Amendment, probably also
abuse of or lack of privilege. Rhetorical hyperbole is given constitutional protection. Broad opinion and fair
comment privileges exist.
5.
Defamation – traditional common law rules may be applicable to some libel and slander claims, if they
are not matters of public concern.
6.
Defamation – different state laws may govern retraction and clarification and these (California’s, for
example) can be very technical and retractions or corrections should not be undertaken absent involvement of
competent counsel.
7.
Defamation -- current areas of legal controversy include “neutral reportage” rule, scope of public reports
privilege, implied libel or libel-by-implication (especially involving public officials or public figures), tortious
interference, disparagement or trade libel, copyright and fair use, journalist privilege, anti-SLAPP statutes, and
scope of “commercial speech” exception.
8.
Defamation – in the US, the “single publication” rule applies, even to Internet claims. Also “wire
service” defense is generally available. Also, in recent cases such as Yahoo, US courts refuse to enforce foreign
judgments inconsistent with First Amendment (Canadian law is example).
9.
Contempt of court risks (since 1940) and prior restraint concerns (since 1931) are very low in US.
Extensive voir dire and jury sequestration powers available instead of contempt orders.
10.
Invasion of privacy – invented by US authors in 1890 – include false light, disclosure of “offensive”
(and non-newsworthy) private facts, intrusion upon seclusion, and misappropriation. Also, some statutory
liabilities for invasion of privacy – but Bartnicki v. Vopper establishes possible First Amendment exception to
liability for otherwise illegal disclosure of matters of public concern.
11.
As shown by recent Zeran, Blumenthal, and Amazon cases, Section 230 of CDA eliminates republisher
liability, to a large degree, for Internet-related state law claims where content is provided by others. Probably
includes linking rights as well.
12.
Major risks today are newsgathering liability claims – ride alongs, hidden cameras and recordings,
paparazzi statutes, promissory estoppel, misrepresentation, etc.

F:\docs\14826\6\Tipsheet Watching Out For Legal Perils For Journalists.doc
Seattle

