1

FOI IN CANADA
(CAJ-IRE Conference, Oct. 5, 2002)
Officially, Canadians subscribe to the notion that governments should be accountable to the public. There is
no shortage of political rhetoric about the importance of openness and transparency in a democratic system.
And we do have federal and provincial acts protecting a citizen's right to access information in the public
interest.
But there are growing concerns about the accessibility of public information in Canada, especially among
journalists.
Canadians do not read, see or hear the kinds of Freedom of Information (FOI) stories that fill American
newspapers and news reports, largely because Canadian journalists can't get access to the kinds of
information that is routinely available in the U.S. And many fear the regulatory regime is getting more
restrictive every day.
A good deal of public information in Canada is locked in government file cabinets, tightly guarded by
eagle-eyed bureaucrats. Often, it takes months to access information which should be provided within 30
days. And even when the struggle to get information is successful, Canadian journalists are increasingly
being billed thousands of dollars for access.
A Queen's University study on access to information in Canada concluded that federal departments'
handling of access have "changed significantly over the last five years. Federal institutions take longer to
process requests and are less likely to release information.
Expanding the black hole of public information is a growing number of public-private agencies that are not
covered by access legislation.
They include:
[Nuclear] Waste Management Organization
The Canadian Foundation for Innovation
The Canadian Millennium Scholarship Foundation
Genome Canada
Canadian Blood Services
Nav Canada
The Greater Toronto Airport Authority and other major airport authorities
The Canada Pension Plan Investment Board
The Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences
The St. Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation
Canada Health Infoway Inc.

By Robert Cribb

2

Hints for Filing Freedom of Information Requests in Canada:
Getting access to public information in Canada can be a tough slog. But if you're persistent, the effort can
help uncover stories that you'll never get from press releases or well-crafted political speeches. It's part
imagination (dreaming what might be there) and part research (getting a hold of it).
Here are some tips to help you through the process:
1. Familiarize yourself with the kinds of information that governments collect. Documents and data such as
studies, briefing notes, audits, opinion surveys and spending reports can all hold the basis of important
stories. The InfoSource guide is a useful resource cataloguing government information accessible to
journalists.
2. Once you know what you want, you need to figure out which government department has it. Does the
information fall under provincial or federal jurisdiction? Which department? Who handles requests for that
department? Check the resources listed on the main Access to Information site here for help and contact
information. Call the Access to Information co-ordinator and introduce yourself. They can be helpful in
focusing your request. They know what's on file and how you should ask for it. If they are dismissive or
unhelpful, complain. It's their job to facilitate public access to records. You pay them. They work for you.
Demand assistance. Researching the department can also be useful in learning what kinds of information is
on file. Every department has some sort of departmental regulations. You should read them before filing
requests.
3. You can submit your request in letter form or simply using a basic form including your contact
information, a description of what you want, and the method of access you prefer. Carefully craft your
request with the intent of plucking out what you want, while discarding the mountains of paper you don't
want. It's a good idea to speak with the information commissioner at the appropriate agency to get a sense
of what is available and how your request should be worded. The challenge is to cast your verbal net wide
enough to get the documents you want but not so expansive as to trigger a $28,000 photocopy and search
bill. Ask for records instead of notes or reports to ensure your request covers information stores on
computer disks. Ask for "any and all" records or communications "including, but not limited to reports,
audits and reports related to . . . " And if you are asking for data which you hope to analyze using
spreadsheet programs, be sure to ask for it in computer form.
4. You must include a $5 cheque payable to the Receiver General of Canada in the case of federeal
requests. For provincial or municipal requests, inquire to whom the cheque is payable. Your cheque buys
you a few hours of the agency's search time and usually up to 100 pages of photocopies. Anything beyond
that will likely mean added fees. These can run into hundreds of dollars so make sure you negotiate a cap
on the fees or request an advance fee estimate. In cases where the documents are voluminous, you should
indicate whether you want to review the records first or simply have copies made. Reviewing the records
will likely save you money since many of them won't be useful to you. Those that are, you can have copied.
You can always negotiate any fees imposed. Ask for a breakdown on the costs. And consider narrowing
your request in order to reduce fees.
5. While federal agencies are supposed to respond within 30 days, that response is often limited to a short
note recognizing your request. Extensions are frequent and it can take months to access some information.
Response times vary from department to department. Be sure to call the FOI administrator occasionally to
check-up on the progress of your request. And if things are getting out of hand, complain forcefully.
6. If the stone wall is high, your best recourse is taking your complaint to the federal or provincial
information commissioner. They can look into cases where information has been denied or unreasonably
delayed and attempt to pressure bureaucrats to release records. But information commissioners in Canada
can't compel government departments to provide access to records. You can always take your fight to the

By Robert Cribb

3

courts. It can be costly, but if the cause is right, it can also be the good fight that becomes part of a good
story. Don't be afraid to fight for information in the public interest.
Web Resources:
Open Government Canada (www.opengovenrmentcanada.org) This is a one-stop resource for Canadian
FOI information, including a letter-generator for all federal requests.
InfoSource: (http://infosource.gc.ca/index-e.html) Contact names and addresses of government departments
subject to the Act. The Directory of Federal Government Enquiry Points lists contacts by agency and
office, with mail, E-mail address and phone numbers. The Directory of Federal Government Databases lists
all government information databases, their formats, and availability to the public. And once you've found
the department and information you're looking for, Access to Information and Personal Information
Request forms are also downloadable.
FOI Law.net (http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/asroberts/foi/track/) This page allows you to search a database
of requests for information filed with departments and agencies of the Canadian government under
Canada's Access to Information Act. It contains descriptions of over 28,000 requests filed between January
1, 1999 and December 31, 2001. You can use this database to identify requests that relate to your own
research interests. Next, you can contact departments and agencies to obtain records already made public in
response to those requests.

By Robert Cribb

