Educate yourself on the military beat
Compiled by Noelle Phillips, military reporter, Savannah Morning News

Books
“Pen & Sword: A Journalist’s Guide to Covering the Military” by Ed Offley
A how-to book for reporters covering the military, especially good for beginners but even
has excellent reminders and tips for veterans.
“Black Hawk Down” by Mark Bowden
A great story that does two things for military reporters: Shows how the beat produces
great stories and educates reporters about a significant military battle.
“Things They Carried” by Tim O’Brien
Great writing and an excellent reminder that war really is about people.
“Fall from Glory: The Men Who Sank the U.S. Navy” by Gregory L. Visitca
A story of big politics, big money and a big military and how the combination of the
three tied into the Tailhook scandal.
“America’s Team – The Odd Couple. A Report on the Relationship Between the Media
and the Military by Frank Aukofer and William P. Lawrence.
A news reporter and retired Navy admiral examine this necessary but conflicting
relationship in a book published by The Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at
Vanderbilt University.
“Inside Delta Force: The True Story of America’s Elite Counterterrorist Unit” by Eric
Haney.
An original member of the top-secret Delta Force opens the doors on the training and
early missions of the unit. A good read but also gives insight into the unit at the forefront
of the war on terrorism.
Publications
Army, Navy, Air Force or Marine Corps Times. Weekly papers published by Gannett that
are tailored for each branch of the armed services.
Any newspaper with a full-time military beat such as the Washington Post or Virginia
Pilot.
Web Sites
www.defenselink.mil -- The Defense Department’s very own Web site that serves as the
gateway to almost every other military web site.

Note: Almost every base has its own Web site and the addresses follow a similar format
of the base name or abbreviation, followed by the branch abbreviation, followed by .mil.
For example, Fort Stewart’s address is www.stewart.army.mil while the Beaufort Marine
Corps Air Station is www.beaufort.usmc.mil.
www.globalsecurity.org -- A private, non-profit web site full of information on
everything from a detailed description of an M-16 to a timeline on when the U.S. will
attack Iraq.
www.sftt.org -- Soldiers for the Truth. Offers columns, opinions and analysis on military
issues. Home for DefenseWatch, an online magazine.
http://call.army.mil -- Center for Army Lessons Learned. A database of research on past
mistakes and how they can be used to improve combat and training.
http://safety.army.mil -- The U.S. Army’s Safety Center. The place to find reports and
statistics on accidents.
www.military.com -- Military.com is geared toward the troops. Runs a daily list of
headlines and touches on other current topics.
www.csis.org -- Center for Strategic and International Studies. A non-partisan think tank
with experts on military strategy and foreign policy that affects the military.
www.cdi.org -- Center for Defense Information. A non-partisan think tank on military
issues.
www.rand.org -- Rand Corp. One more think tank with reports on the military.
www.nmfa.org -- National Military Family Association. The Web site for an organization
that speaks for the troops’ spouses and children.
http://www.ngb.dtic.mil/ -- National Guard Bureau. The home page for the headquarters
of National Guard units. Links to state National Guard pages can be found here.
http://www.tfeagle.army.mil -- Got a local Guard unit heading to Bosnia to keep the
peace? This is the Web site for you.
http://www.house.gov/hasc/ -- The House Armed Services Committee page. See what the
politicians are doing when it comes to the military.
http://www.senate.gov/~armed_services/ -- The Senate Armed Services committee page.
www.savannahnow.com -- Savannah Morning News. Hey, I gotta plug my paper.
www.google.com -- Google, the search engine. If all else fails, hunt for it.

