Using property records for investigations
Brant Houston
Executive Director, IRE, October 2002
573-882-2042, brant@ire.org

The local newspaper:
Legal notices: Notice of zoning changes, of defaults (failure to pay mortgages or loans) and other
land issues.
Basic use: Way to track changes in communities and the individuals and businesses whose
finances are going bad.
The recorder/registrar of deeds:
Grantor/grantee record: An index that shows alphabetically who sells or transfers the property
(grantor) to the buyer or recipient (grantee). Shows if owner mortgaged property. Shows if there
are notice of defaults or liens (claims) against the property and if they have been released.
The indexes give the book and page number for where the actual documents are located.
Basic use: Finding owners, sellers, borrowers, lenders, claims and business or individuals whose
finances are going bad.
Deeds: Quitclaim, warranty and deed of trust. Quitclaim is just transfer, not sale. Not proof or
ownership. Warranty says owner does own the property. Deed of trust is really mortgage
document.
Basic uses: Helps in tracking who owns it, possible straw buyers, and loans on property.
Tax lien index: Show any tax liens filed against the property.
Basic use: Finding out owners, who owes money, property used for loans and what businesses
are going bad.
Uniform Commercial Code filings: Documents showing personal property (equipment, etc.) for
which loans have been taken out. Lenders file. Good way to find assets of a company.
Maps: Legal descriptions allow you to track the history of the land and to find exactly the land
owned.
Assessor's office:

Tax assessments- real property: Has name and address of owner being assessed taxes and the
amount the owner should pay.
Basic uses: Finding out who owns property by street address, parcel number, or legal description.
Tax assessments - personal or unsecured property: Lists property and assessment for cars, boats,
planes, equipment.
Basic uses: Finding out what a business or individual owns other than buildings and land and
indicating its value. Good for finding out cars owned in particular and license plates.
* Remember that assessed value is not necessarily appraised value. Disparity in assessments of
the same kind of property is a huge issue everywhere. *
Appeals board, board of equity: Place where owners appeal property assessments.
Basic use: Finding out if there is favoritism in appeals and decisions.
Tax collector's office:
Tax collection records: Individual records telling if property owners have paid taxes on time or at
all.
Basic use: First stop in backgrounding public officials and businessman to see if they are paying.
Tax delinquent file: Usually a separate file on late payers.
Basic use: Reporting who isn't paying taxes and indicator of businesses or individual finances
going bad. One of the first files to get when you hit town.
Planning and Zoning office:
Zoning maps: Shows commercial, residential, rural and other kinds of zoning.
Basic use: Not helps identify where business and residential buildings are supposed to go, but
shows uncontrolled development and political influence.
Zoning applications for changes: Critical zoning documents. Change usually increases value of
the property.
Basic use: See where changes are being made, whether they violate "the master plan" for the
community (the overall plan), and who benefited from the change.
Building Inspections Office:
Application records: Applications to build or add onto a building.
Basic use: Tracking development and change in the community that might be missed in legal
notices.

Complaints: Complaints, usually by neighbors, on alleged violations.
Basic use: Tracking construction problems and disputes and the inspectors' performances.
Violations: Violations of the building code during or after construction.
Basic use: Tracking bad contractors and slumlords and proposed fines.
Blighted property file: Many inspection offices have a list of the worst properties.
Basic use: Where the worst property is and the fines that have been levied. Always worth
following to housing court or municipal court.
IRE Resource Tip Sheets and Publications with more detail:
"Investigative Reporter's Handbook," 2002, Chapter 19, "Investigating Real Estate: Housing,
Commercial Uses and Zoning," Brant Houston, Len Bruzzese, and SteveWeinberg.
IRE tip sheet 1616: "God's Little Acre: Understanding Land Records", Ron Campbell, Orange
County Register, (year 2002)
IRE tip sheet 1617: Excerpt from Don Ray's "Checking Out Lawyers," Don Ray, Freelance
The IRE Journal, Nov.-Dec. 1998, "Land scandals by the sea," Thomas Maier, Newsday,
Uplink, Sept.-Oct. 2001. Issue contains many stories on property and tax investigations.
Uplink, June 2000, "A taxing issue," Richard Dalton, Newsday.
Uplink, June 2000, "Write the flipping story," Dan Browning, Star-Tribune (Minneapolis).

