Census Analysis For Free
By Matthew Waite
waite@sptimes.com
St. Petersburg Times
Savannah IRE Regional Conference
Oct. 20-21

Introduction
Most newspapers (mine included) have spent thousands of dollars on database and
mapping software to do sophisticated analysis of all kinds of data, all of which came in
handy during the 2000 Census. For a lot of others, the $1,200 for mapping software and
$600 for database software scared the calculator out of a number of newsroom bean
counters, and a lot of requests were denied.
Well, turns out, all that cash really isn’t needed to do basic Census and mapping analysis.
This tutorial will show you how to do basic Census mapping – with a trick and a turn
here and there – without spending a dime.

What you’ll need
n
n
n
n

A web browser and internet connection
OpenOffice.org 1.0.1, free from www.openoffice.org
ArcExplorer 4, free from www.esri.com
An unzip program, any number of which are free online

This was all done using Windows based computers, but that doesn’t mean you have to
have a Windows machine. OpenOffice.org 1.0.1 is really designed for Linux and has
been ported over to Windows. They’re working on a Mac OS X port now. ArcExplorer
will work on any operating system that will run Java. I’ve never used the Linux or OS X
versions, but the means to do all of this will be nearly the same for all of them.
OpenOffice.org and ArcExplorer are free. There is no real catch.
And the means to do this with Excel are identical to the OpenOffice instructions below.
This isn’t a complete tutorial, just a step-by-step guide on how to use this software to
create a map. You’d be wise to learn more about the spreadsheet software, and you’d be
wiser still to learn about the Census data and what it is you’re looking at. There are a ton
of sites on the web that can get you up to speed on the Census (Steve Doig’s site at
Arizona State University, http://cronkite.pp.asu.edu/census/ is a must read). And NICAR
sponsors a Census related e-mail listserv that has dozens of reporters who can answer
your questions.
This tutorial assumes you’ve already installed OpenOffice.org 1.0.1 and ArcExplorer 4.

Step 1: Getting some data for free
First thing you need are maps. Fortunately, there are freely available maps that work with
ArcExplorer 4.

http://www.esri.com/data/download/census2000_tigerline/index.html
ESRI’s site is much easier to navigate than the Census. Click "Download Data," then
click your state on the map that comes up. Then, find your county (or select a layer if you
want to do statewide maps). At a minimum, you’ll want: (1) the level of geography
you’re working with (tracts, for instance); (2) the roads file to give you some idea of
where you are; and, (3) if you are near any kind of water – river, ocean, lake, etc. – you’ll
want the water boundary file. Census extends tract boundaries into rivers and out to
territorial limits in the ocean. Without the water file, your maps look goofy.
For our example, we’re using Washington County, Neb. To save time, just download the
2000 tract map file. When you get them downloaded, unzip the files – there should be
three files for each layer – into a folder you’ll be able to find again.
Next, we need some Census data – the Census maps don’t have any in them. The Census
Bureau – after several failed attempts – has come up with a pretty great web-based means
of getting Census data without having to know Structured Query Language and Census
speak.

http://factfinder.census.gov/
Just about anything you could ever want is on American Factfinder. You can get quick
access to major tables (population, race, etc.) and detailed data down to the Census Tract
level for the most minute data collected in the long form (households without adequate
plumbing, for instance). Take some time and get to know how to navigate the site: it can
be a lifesaver on deadline.
For this example, we’re using my
home of Washington County, Neb.
Scenic, beautiful Washington
County is a mix of bedrooms for
nearby Omaha and farms. The
county seat, and only real town, is
Blair, my hometown. The place to
pick up news in town is the Blair
Maple, a greasy spoon diner on
Main Street where you can get your
first cup of coffee at 5 a.m. with the
farmers. They love to complain

about three things: Nebraska football, the weather and all these people who work in
Omaha and live in Washington County.
The Census asks people where they work, and have made that part of Summary File 3,
the long-form data. If you click on “2000 Summary File 3” under the “Data Sets”
heading, we’ll get started finding out how many people do leave Washington County to
go to work.
Step one gives you a list of options.
The one you’ll use the most is
"Detailed Tables." Click that. Now
you have to select a geographic level
– in this case, "tracts." Then, pick a
state – Nebraska in this case. Now, a
county: "Washington." Now
Factfinder will populate the small
window with all the tracts in your
county. In this case, there are only
five, but click "All Census Tracts"
anyway then, click the "Add" button. All of the Census tract numbers should move to the
bottom window. Click the "Next" button. A new window will appear giving you all the
data you could ever want. Scroll down to "P26. Place of Work for Workers 16+ --State
and County Level." That will tell you how many workers leave the county. Click the
"Add" button, and when "P26" is in the window below, click "show table."
Now we have some data.

Step 2: Getting the free data into the free spreadsheet
This is where we learn an
excruciatingly hard concept called
copy and paste – with a little twist.
All you have to do is click and hold
your mouse, drag it over your table
until all the contents of the table are
highlighted and then release.
Go up to “Edit” then “Copy.”
Open up OpenOffice.org 1.0.1. By
default OpenOffice will open to a blank sheet with your cursor in Cell A1. This is all
good. Go up to “Edit” then down to “Paste Special.” This is the twist.
When you click “Paste Special,” a window will pop up that says “Source: Unknown
Source” and it will give you three options. You want “HTML format,” which is what you

copied from the Census Bureau website. Click on “OK” and you should be the data that
once was on the Census website.
Now begins some housecleaning that you’ll see the importance of later.
First up, we need to switch our columns around. The Census bureau site, unfortunately,
lists the topics on the left hand side going down and the tract numbers are across the top.
For mapping purposes, we need exactly the opposite. Thankfully, “paste special” will
help us again.
Click and hold the mouse in Cell
A1 and drag it down and right until
all of your cells with data in them
are highlighted. Go to "Edit" then,
"Copy." Then, without doing a
thing, go to "Edit" then, "Paste
Special."
A new window will pop up,
different than the one before –
OpenOffice recognized where the
data was coming from. This time,
click in the check box by
“Transpose” (under the options area). Then click “OK.”
Voila. Reversed data.
Now, more housecleaning. We are going to convert this spreadsheet into a database file
format that only handles field names with 8 characters. So, the "Worked In State of
Residence" header has to go. In A1, type "tract," and then change the next four cells (B1,
C1, D1, E1) to eight character headers.
One more housecleaning note: In the "tract" column, all we need is the number, not all
the stuff the Census Bureau gives you. So change "Census Tract 501.01, Washington
County Nebraska" to just "501.01." You’ll see why in a second.
Okay, one last housecleaning step. For the most part, the Census provides counts. They
don’t do percents. We have to do them ourselves. Thankfully, this is no problem.
In G1, type "PctOut," or whatever you want to symbolize the percentage of people who
work outside the county. All spreadsheet formulas begin with an equals sign, so type this
formula in cell G2:
=(E2/B2)*100

Hit "Enter." What the formula means is the number in cell E2, the number of people who
work outside the county, will be divided by B2, the total number of workers. All of that is
multiplied by 100, to give you the percentage value.
Now, at the bottom right corner of the cell, you’ll see a little black box, and when you
move your cursor over it, your cursor changes. Well, move your cursor over that black
box so that your cursor changes, click and hold, and then drag down until you reach the
bottom of your data. If you let go, you’ll see that all those cells were filled in. The
spreadsheet is smart enough to know to fill in the right formula for you (if you don’t trust
it, click on any of the cells and up above you’ll see the formula behind the number).
Okay, highlight that row, copy it and go to "paste special." This time, you’ll have to
uncheck everything but "Strings and Numbers." Hit "OK." What that did was remove the
formulas, leaving only numbers. You’ll see why in a second.

Step 3: Free data, free spreadsheet, now free map
In OpenOffice.org Calc, go up to "File," then "Open." Change the "Files of Type" box to
"dBase." This is a type of database file that the mapping software uses. Navigate to where
you put your map files and there you’ll find the databases behind your map. The database
you want ends in "trt00" for Tracts 2000 (the whole thing – tgr31177trt00 – means Tiger,
31 is the numerical code for Nebraska and 177 is the numerical code for Washington
County). Click that database file and open it. A window will pop up with a lot of
unintelligible muck. Just hit "OK." Don’t worry – it’s going to open over your
spreadsheet.
In that database table, you’re going to notice that Ah HA! It too has a tract field. And,
don’t you know, it’s in the same order as our spreadsheet.
So, using your handy dandy copy skills, go up to window and go down to our spreadsheet
(unless you saved it, it’s called "untitled"). Click, hold and drag over the cells and go up
to "Edit" then, "Copy." Click on "window" and go back to your database. Click on the
first open cell at the end of the row and then go to "Edit" then, "Paste." Boom. You
should have data that lines up.
Okay, now we have to save this file, but in "dBase" format. If you go to "File" then
"Save" you’re going to have something completely counterintuitive happen. It’s going to
ask you if you want to save it as an OpenOffice.org spreadsheet file. SAY NO. You want
a "dBase" file or the mapping software won’t work.
With the file saved, you can quit out of OpenOffice. It’ll throw some hooey about data
loss. Just hit yes, you want to quit.

Step 4: Looking at your free map
Open up ArcExplorer.

ArcExplorer comes with a fine manual on how to use it that I encourage you to read. This
will just get you through a real basic example.
On the tool bar at the top you’ll see a row of buttons. One of those has a little red plus
sign on it and something that looks like three layers of paper. That button is how you add
layers to your map. Click it. When the Catalog window opens, navigate to where you put
those Census maps we downloaded earlier. Click on the one that ends in “trt00.” Now
this is a little confusing. You can see that the Catalog window has it’s own set of buttons,
and they look a lot like the ones on your main screen. To add a layer, you need to click
the “Add Layer” button in the Catalog window that looks like the “Add Layer” button
you pushed to get to the catalog widow. Behind the window, you should see that file
added to the window on the left. Close the catalog window.
Click the check box next to the tgr3177trt00 number and you should then see your map.
Pretty, isn’t it?
We’re not done yet. Double click the colored square on the left. This will bring up a new
window. When the window pops up, a whole lot of stuff we did before is going to come
into focus.
In the “draw features using” box, change that to “Graduated Symbols.” Below that box,
you’ll see a box that says “None.” If you click that, you’ll suddenly see all the fields in
the database we created. Aha. Scroll down to your percentage field that you calculated
and click on it. Below, the values should fill in automatically. The larger the number, the
darker the color.
Click “Apply” and the colors on your
map will change. Then hit “OK.”
I can tell you from looking at the
map that the lightest areas are Blair,
the lone town in the county. Omaha
is to the south. To the west is
farmland.
And, we can go back to Factfinder
and get the number of people in the
county leaving every day, the
number who left in 1990, and we can tell the farmers down at the Blair Maple if it is
indeed getting worse like they claim.
To get clean maps for your graphic artists, you’re going to have to buy the real software.
However, you can get them something to start with by going to "Edit" then, "Copy Map
Image to File." You have only one option, so save it as a "JPEG" file. Any graphics
software can read that file, and it’s better than nothing.

