Investigating Business, etc.
A few quick places to start learning about businesses
Chris Roberts – mcroberts@thestate.com – (803) 771-8595
Assistant Business Editor/Sundays
The State newspaper -- 1401 Shop Road -- Columbia, SC

The obvious places to start:
The company's Web site and other marketing tools, courts, your own archives, the phone book (to find neighbors
and competitors), ex-employees (who may hold a grudge), trade journals, etc.

Some tried-and-true sources:
Secretaries of State: www.nass.org/sos/sosflags.html
What you'll find: Incorporation records. Some states also include indications that a company has had troubles with
liens, etc. (Also: www.sba.gov/hotlist/businessnames.html)
PACER federal court data pacer.psc.uscourts.gov
What you'll find: Access to federal court record. You'll page 7 cents a page, but in many jurisdictions you've got
access to the actual court filings.
Accurint: www.accurint.com
What you'll find: A (fairly) cheap way to track down information about a person or business. You can run a
person's records for less than $5.
Hoovers: www.hoovers.com
What you'll find: Comprehensive company and industry information. Find a company name for free, but you must
be a member for more information.
Lexis: www.lexis.com
What you'll find: What others have written about your subject. You also can also find information similar to
Accurint. Hope your company has an account, or sneak onto a college campus library.
Google: www.google.com
What you'll find: A hosepipe of information, when sometimes all you need is a trickle. Use the "advanced search"
to narrow the focus of your search.
10K Wizard: www.10kwizard.
What you'll find: Easier access to filings by public companies. You can download spreadsheets, too. Easier to
navigate than the SEC's Edgar site. The company has been known to give free accounts to journalists.
My Yahoo! my.yahoo.com
What you'll find: Set up a free account, and then create a portfolio of stocks for online warnings.

And sources for general business and economic information:
Bureau of Economic Analysis: www.bea.gov
What you'll find: Regularly updated data on state and regional economies. You'll get data on gross state product
and personal income data for states and counties
The Census Bureau: www.census.gov
What you'll find: Another flood of data. Click on "C" for County Business Patterns; click on "E" for the "Economic
Briefing Room"
Your state's demographic experts: (In South Carolina, it's the Budget and Control Board's office of research.)

What you'll find: At the very least, your state's statistical abstract, Census data, etc.

