Whiskey is for drinking; water is for fighting over
-- attributed to Mark Twain

TEN TIPS FOR REPORTING ON WATER
-

Think of water as a currency. To local governments, clean drinking water is more
valuable than oil. The community that has control of the water has power over its
neighbors and the rate at which they grow.

-

Start from grade one. Educate yourself before you start doing any reporting. Seek out the
experts and water users, and then talk to as many as possible before you write a word.
Get familiar with their language.

-

Go to the top. Ask the experts the obvious questions you thought of in grade one, and
make them tell you in plain language answers to big-picture questions. These guys love
to talk, and they don’t often get people willing to listen.

-

Keep your eye on the water. Water politics gets lost in the abstract; never lose sight of the
real thing. Tour your local water treatment plant, float the source of your city’s drinking
water, watch as it’s being pumped from the aquifer.

-

Find people tied to the water. People like farmers, developers, crabbers, fishermen, and
industry rely on the water for their livelihood. They make good stories.

-

Don’t get lost in the science. We’ve discovered the phenomenon of dueling geologists –
one community gets a geologist to say what it wants to hear; others consult for the
opposing side. Science is always changing, and politics is always looking for an answer.
“All models are wrong, some models are helpful,” one expert told us.

-

Some basic questions to ask about your town: Who are the biggest users, who were the
biggest sellers, what is the rate structure, who doesn’t have water they need, and how did
the ones who are growing get the water they have. The answers will guide you through
water’s political landscape.

-

Remember: It’s not always exciting, but it’s always important. Water doesn’t seem sexy,
but it is quickly becoming one of the most important issues in the world. Soon, all
journalists will be covering water. Today, few do.

-

Think graphically. It can simplify and enlighten at the same time. It’s hard to picture an
aquifer flowing 1,200 feet down.

-

Drink plenty! Water or alcohol.

Savannah Morning News water project team:
Kate Wiltrout, 912-652-0397, katew@savannahnow.com
Bret Bell, 912-652-0456, bretb@savannahnow.com
David Charles Donald, 912-652-0335, ddonald@savannahnow.com

WATER WEB SITES
Carl Vinson Institute of Government
Georgia water management planning
www.cviog.uga.edu/water
Center for a Sustainable Coast
www.sustainablecoast.org
Drought in Georgia
interests.caes.uga.edu/drought
Georgia Environmental Protection Division
www.state.ga.us/dnr/environ/gaenviron_files/gaenviro.htm
Georgia Ports Authority
www.gaports.com
Groundwater Foundation
www.groundwater.org
National Drought Mitigation Center
enso.unl.edu/ndmc/impacts/impacts.htm#enviro
The Nature Conservancy
www.nature.org
The Savannah Group opposition
Group opposed to aquifer storage and retrieval
www.theceo.org
The World's Water
Information on the world's freshwater resources
www.worldwater.org/links.htm
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Water home page
www.epa.gov/OW
U.S. Geological Survey
Water resources of the United States
water.usgs.gov
WaterWiser
The place for water conservation information
www.waterwiser.org

