The census avalanche

How to find the numbers you need
The 2000 census gave us literally
gigabytes of data that can add context to
the stories we write every day. But first
we need to know where to look.
In an effort to make that search easier,
the Census Bureau developed American
Factfinder -- http://factfinder.census.gov/
-- a gateway to 1990 and 2000 census
numbers, recent population estimates
and the latest economic survey data.

Under Show Me, we would choose
from the Census 2000 Quick Tables,
telling Factfinder to show us General
Characteristics: Population and
Housing.

Here’s a user’s guide to the site.
Quick profiles
At the top of the Factfinder home
page, in a section labeled “Basic Facts”,
you’ll find a quick way to look up basic
demographic profiles for the nation as a
whole or for individual states, counties,
cities and towns. This section of
Factfinder has a lot of the most
commonly sought numbers from the
2000 census, plus some from 1990.
You must make three choices:
1. Whether you want a table or a map.
2. The kind of table.
3. The geographic area.

Say we want to know how many
children lived in Roseville, Minn., in
2000. We want hard numbers, so we
would select the Tables radio button.

And we would tell Factfinder to
display the numbers for a city or town.
When you select that option, the screen
will refresh, giving you a chance to drill
down to a specific state -- Minnesota -and place -- Roseville city.
After making these selections, click on
Go to view the table.
Quick geographic comparisons
The “Basic Facts” feature of
Factfinder also offers a quick way to
compare states, metro areas, counties,
cities and census tracts. The steps are the
same as choosing a city profile. Just tell
Factfinder to show you a Geographic
Comparison table. Say you want to
compare the median rent in the Twin
Cities with other U.S. metros. Under
Show Me, select Financial Housing
Characteristics.

2
Then choose For United States -Metropolitan Area. You’ll get a table
with figures for all U.S. metros.

Tell Factfinder you want a commadelimited file, save it to your computer,
and then open it in Excel.

Need more detail?

Confused by the headings? To learn
the difference between contract rent and
gross rent, click on the hyperlinked table
name at the top of the chart.

At the bottom of the window that pops
up, you’ll see the names of the census
tables from which the chart was culled.

Click on Median Gross Rent, and
you’ll get another window listing the
measures for that table.

Click on Gross Rent, and you’ll find
out it includes the cost of utilities.
Want to save the metro table so you
can sort it to see where the Twin Cities
metro ranks? Select download from the
top of the page.

What if you need more-detail, or if you
want numbers broken down by race?
Then it’s time to move to Factfinder’s
“Data Sets” feature. This is where you
get detailed figures down to the
neighborhood level from 1990 and 2000.
First, you’ll need to understand some
census terminology.
The Census Bureau releases data in
summary files. Summary File 1 contains
all the short-form information. The short
form goes to all U.S. households, so
Summary File 1 contains what the
Census Bureau calls 100-percent data. It
covers age, race, ethnicity and home
ownership.
Summary File 3 contains information
from the long-form, which goes to 1 in 6
U.S. households. So Summary File 3
contains sample data. It covers
economic, social and general housing
topics.
Summary File 2 contains short-form
data for detailed race groups. This is
where you can get home-ownership and
race detail for Minnesota’s Hmong
population or for other specific racial
and ethnic groups. In 2003, the Census
Bureau will release Summary File 4,
which will contain long-form data for
these smaller groups.
Also understand some basic census
geography: The smallest geographic area

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

December 2002

3
for which data is summarized is a
neighborhood block. Because of privacy
concerns, only short-form figures are
available at that level. Long-form
numbers are available down to the blockgroup level. A block group is just what it
sounds like: a collection of blocks. A
collection of block-groups make up a
census tract.
A word of caution: Because the long
form is sample data, there is a cloud of
uncertainty around every number, like
the error-margin in a poll. The cloud
becomes larger at smaller units of
geography. Although tract data generally
is reasonably accurate, the numbers
become much murkier at the blockgroup level. So if it’s neighborhood data
you seek, it’s best to stick to tracts.
Another caution: Tract lines are
redrawn for each census. Although the
lines in the city of Saint Paul stayed
virtually the same between 1990 and
2000, much of the rest of the metro was
radically redrawn. Do not compare 1990
and 2000 tract data without checking
tract maps to see if the boundaries
changed. A tract with the same ID
number in 1990 and 2000 could have
radically different boundaries.

selection method, choose geo within geo.
(Normally at this step, you would accept
the default choice: list. However, we
want to see the census tracts within St.
Paul, so we choose geo within geo to get
Factfinder to filter the list of Ramsey
County census tracts down to just St.
Paul.)
Under Show me all, choose census
tracts.

Under Within, choose Place.

Then select the state, Minnesota, and
the place, St. Paul city.
Next, you’ll select the tracts. We want
to see them all, so choose All Tracts,
then click the Add button.

Now let’s walk through pulling
numbers from the data sets on
Factfinder. Let’s try to find out which St.
Paul neighborhoods have the highest
private school enrollment.
Education is a longform topic, so click on
the link for 2000
Summary File 3. From
the choices that pop up,
select Detailed Tables.
Next, you must
specify the geography
you want, in this case
St. Paul census tracts. Under choose a

Then click Next.
Now it’s time to pick the table that will
give us our private school enrollment
figures. Factfinder will list every table
available in the long-form data. Scroll

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

December 2002

4
down the list until you see what you
want, in this case, Table P36: Sex by
School Enrollment by Level of School by
Type of School for the Population 3+
Years.

And where the heck is that? Factfinder
can help you find it. Go back (two steps)
in your browser to the screen where you
selected the census tracts for display.
Select tract 348, then click Map It. Tract
348 is part of the Mac-Groveland
neighborhood, along the river.
Want to compare to 1990?

To be sure this table contains the
numbers you want, use the What’s this?
feature. It will show you the categories
for the highlighted table.

First, remember the caution about
comparing census tracts. Since St. Paul
is one of the few places where tract
boundaries didn’t change much between
1990 and 2000, you can seek out the
1990 numbers on this topic.
Repeat the exercise. Just choose 1990
Summary Tape File 3 from the data set
offerings on the opening page. The 1990
numbers are in Table P54: School
Enrollment and Type of School.
Find a neighborhood

Back on the main screen, click the Add
button to select table P36, then click
Show Table. The table will list figures
for all St. Paul census tracts. If you click
on the table name, you can get
definitions for all the table’s categories.
Note that this table doesn’t have one
neat figure for private school enrollment.
The subject is broken down by sex and
age. You’ll have to download it to Excel
and sum the numbers.

What if you want demographics for a
specific neighborhood? An easy thing to
do is pick a street address in that
neighborhood, then ask Factfinder to
show you the census tract.
Go back to the step in this handout
where we chose the selection method.
Instead of choosing geo within geo, this
time choose address search. The screen
will refresh and prompt you for an
address. Type one in, and hit Go.

To download, select the download link
at the top of the page. Then choose
Comma-delimited (transpose rows and
columns). Save it to your computer, and
open the file in Excel.
Note: It’s important to select transpose
rows and columns so you’ll be able to
sort by census tract.
In Excel, compute the percentage of
kids who are enrolled in private school,
then sort to see which census tract has
the largest percentage. It’s tract 348.

Factfinder will display the tract
number for the address. Select the tract,
then follow the steps in the previous
example to get its census numbers.

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

December 2002

