Global Investigative Journalism Conference
Copenhagen, May 1-4, 2003
Running out of water: The global fight for clean environment
Sunday, May 4, 9:00am-10:30am
Maud Beelman, mbeelman@icij.org
Director, International Consortium of Investigative Journalists
*Compiled by the staff of ICIJ (www.icij.org), a project of The Center for Public Integrity
(www.publicintegrity.org)
ICIJ, a network of 84 investigative reporters from 43 countries, conducts long-term investigations
on cross-border topics such as smuggling, money laundering, and crime and corruption.
Journalists are invited to join ICIJ based on their professional experience and/or expertise in their
home countries.
In February 2003, ICIJ published the results of a yearlong global investigation into water
privatization. The investigation tracked the explosive growth of the six most globally active private
water companies over a 12-year period and created the first comprehensive database of such
information. The investigation found that three of these companies, two based in France and one
in Germany, dominate the world market. It also revealed how the companies have worked closely
with the World Bank and other international financial institutions to gain a foothold on every
continent. Analysts predict that, within 15 years, private water companies will control 65 percent
to 75 percent of Europe’s and North America’s public water systems. The Water Barons report
can be read online at http://www.icij.org/dtaWeb/water/ and is also available in book form.

Water Companies
The six most globally active private water companies are Suez (www.suez.com), Vivendi
Universal (www.vivendiuniversal.com), RWE (www.rwe.com), Bouygues (www.bouygues.com),
Bechtel (www.bechtel.com) and United Utilities (www.unitedutilities.com). For company reports
that may not be available on their Web sites, companies in the United States have to file reports
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (www.sec.gov) and companies in the United
Kingdom have to file with Companies House (www.companies-house.gov.uk). Several of these
companies are French, and the French Commission des Operations de Bourse (www.cob.fr) has
very little historical information available on its Web site.
Organizations Opposing Water Privatization
The Public Services International Research Unit (www.psiru.org), based at the University of
Greenwich in England, has been monitoring the privatization of public services globally for
several years. The group has a good database of information about companies and the presence
of multinationals in countries around the world. PSIRU’s main source of funding comes from
Public Services International (www.world-psi.org), an umbrella organization for public service
trade unions around the world.
Public Citizen, a U.S.-based watchdog group, opposes water privatization and has several
reports on its Web site about the issue (www.publiccitizen.org/cmep/Water/).
Amsterdam-based Corporate Europe Observatory is a watchdog group that contends there is too
much corporate influence on the European Union. In preparation for the Third World Water Forum
in Kyoto, Japan, the group published five water briefs explaining its views on the water debate
(www.corporateeurope.org/water/infobriefs.htm).

1

The Council of Canadians (www.canadians.org) has an ongoing campaign against water
privatization, with a specific focus on Canada. Maude Barlow, an activist who has been working
on water privatization issues for several years, is the national chairperson. Barlow is the author of
Blue Gold: The Global Water Crisis and the Commodification of the World’s Water Supply, a
report on the state of water privatization around the world. The report can be downloaded at:
http://canadians.inline.net/display_document.htm?COC_token=024TX24&id=245&isdoc=1&catid
=78
Water Industry Groups/Sites
Waternunc.com contains an archive of industry press releases, which are frequently not available
in company Web sites. The site is available in English, Spanish, French and Japanese, although
the most extensive version of the site is in French.
Although focused on water issues in the United States, www.waterinvestments.com is a good
source for water investment information and provides quick access to financial analysts’ reports
on the water industry.
The World Water Council (www.worldwatercouncil.org) organizes a World Water Forum every
three years to bring together industry leaders to discuss the state of water around the world.
The European Services Forum is the largest services industry group in Europe and advocates the
liberalization of services around the world (www.esf.be).
The Coalition of Service Industries is the largest services industry group in the United States,
which, just like ESF, favors the liberalization of services around the world (www.uscsi.org).
International Financial Institutions
The World Bank often sponsors or aids in the creation of private water systems around the world.
Descriptions of these projects are available on the bank’s Web site at:
http://www4.worldbank.org/sprojects/
Negotiations are currently ongoing for the World Trade Organization’s General Agreement on
Trade in Services, which aims to open up service markets around the world. Critics of the
agreement say it could increase water privatization. The official GATS site is
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/serv_e.htm
United Nations Environment Programme’s Freshwater Portal (http://freshwater.unep.net/)
includes several studies and useful statistics on the state of water around the world.

2

