The next wave in Computer-Assisted Reporting: Social Network
Analysis
NICAR 2003, Charlotte
Sarah Cohen -- cohensh@washpost.com
Why social network analysis?
Any science that uses as its academic examples terrorist networks, gang activity and interlocking boards of
directors has to be something that journalists can use. Social network analysis, invented by anthropologists
and sociologists and now adopted to criminology and political science, is one of those rarities.
At its core is the idea that relationships between organizations and people are just as interesting as their
more commonly used descriptors. But using the methods does require a new way of thinking about both
data collection and analysis.
The science part of this field uses as its main tools graph theory and matrix algebra. It makes the textbooks
and articles particularly tough going for people unschooled in higher level mathematics -- that is, us.
At the easiest end, though, is a powerful set of graphic tools that take connections you’ve collected
elsewhere, such as those made in terrorist indictments or phone calls made by several government officials,
and graph them to find the key links in a chain of connections – a reporting lead. Some examples:
·

An analysis of the September 11
hijacker network, done based on
publicly available data, helped show
that the group had successfully kept
their contact sparse.Few members of
the plot had been observed with many
others. Researcher Valdis Krebs used
a more detailed dataset to describe
Mohammed Atta’s central role.

·

In Boston, researcher Anthony Braga
mapped gang activity to find the
members and the groups with the most
influence throughout a violent
neighborhood. Police used the
information to set priorities on arrests
and identify which would be the most
influential in brokering a peace.

·

Economics researchers have used
network theory to help describe the
isolation of some countries in terms of
trade, diplomatic relations and other
characteristics.

Earlier this year, The Washington Post published a story showing that a group of 23 language schools in the
Los Angeles area that accounted for 33,000 student visas over the past five years, including at least one
terrorist suspect. Although we identified the core group through more traditional means, the social network
visualization tools helped us see how they were related (through people who signed the visas) and where
we should focus the street reporting. It also helped reduce the group to a more cohesive set of schools by
automatically eliminating the schools and officials at the outskirts of the main network.

Tools
Datasets we collect are well suited for some of the packages available -- connections revealed through
government personnel records, campaign contributions, boards of nonprofits, corporate directors, contracts,
lobbyists and virtually anything else that links people or organizations with government agencies can be
mapped in the social network programs.
We can also use these tools as a framework for some of the databases we build of our notes, seeking out
connections as diligently as we seek out documents and data on terrorists, criminals or commissions.
UCINet , made by Analytic Technologies, is the most commonly used social network analysis software.
It’s difficult to just pick up the software and the manual and play around. The methods it suggests might be
interesting, but there is no explanation of what any of them mean. And getting data into the program isn’t
simple. A 30-day copy is available at http://www.analytictech.com/. It costs $250 for commercial users like
us.
Pajek is a free program made by Vladimir Batagelj, a Slovenian researcher. Once you get data into it, it is
pretty easy to create graphics that will help you visualize the relationships in your data. But the metrics, or
descriptive measures of the network, are very difficult to understand in this program.
The programs are clearly made for researchers by researchers. But doing matrix algebra on your own is not
a reasonable proposition. Even SAS requires a special module for matrix operations. You can find a more
complete list of software on the International Network for Social Network Analysis website at
http://www.sfu.ca/~insna/INSNA/soft_inf.html
Another option, which isn’t really social network analysis software but does many of the same things, is
Analyst’s Notebook made by I2 Limited (www.i2inc.com) . It’s very expensive ($4,000 the first year,
$600 afterwards) but your graphics department may
have an interest in it for drawing timelines and other
graphics. It is used almost exclusively by law
enforcement agencies to follow contacts among actors in
an investigation or find common phone numbers called
by suspects or the like. It is primarily a graphics
program, not an analysis program.
Here’s a small piece of a graphic we’ve been using as a
reporting tool for stories about a complex web of
relationships among a troubled parent company, its
owners and its clients and subsidiaries.
In this case, we’ve set up several kinds of links –
transactions, owners, investors, and officers. We can use
those to select and show only organizations linked by
common owners, for example, or only those that have
transactions with one another.
The software is particularly useful when you want to
track many fields at once and have lots of different kinds
of links and “entities”. It also encourages you to
document the source of the information, making it easy
to find all of the details and links that depend on, say,
one court case.
Analyst’s Network lets you import data pretty easily and has the ability to follow connections over time.
The graphics it makes automatically still need work. And it's not that easy to learn.

Describing networks and their actors
At some point networks become too big to effectively look at on a graphic. Instead, you need tools to
reduce them into meaningful sub-networks or find a reporting lead and hide everything else. This is one of
the strengths of the social network software, though you’ll need to study a little to make any sense of it.
As more reporters begin using social network analysis, we'll probably learn a lot more about what we
would expect to see in the kinds of networks we study – particularly those of the size that would be
generated by many of our large databases.
Some examples of the kinds of analysis done with networks include:
·
·
·

Finding clusters of closely linked actors, usually defined as being more closely linked to one another
than to the rest of the network. The terrorist networks have several clusters, with a single contact
connecting them.
Describing the network as a whole -- the largest distance between actors (diameter), or the portion of
possible connections that actually exist. (density).
Analyzing the position of each actor. These measures can range from the number of direct ties each
has to the strategic role it plays in the network. Some other methods help you figure out which people
in a network are essentially interchangeable.

Learning more
To learn more about the ideas the measures that have been developed (and there are many of them), here
are a few sources:
·

University of California at Riverside professor Robert Hanneman has written his own online textbook - http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/SOC157/TEXT/TextIndex.html . It is among the easier to read, so
long as you don’t get too hung up on trying to do the matrix algebra by hand.

·

The classic textbook is called Social Network Analysis, by Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust.
It's really hard to read.

·

Sage Publications has produced Social Network Analysis, A Handbook. Although the writing I is
overly formal and stilted, the descriptions are at least reasonably straightforward and the use of
mathematical notation is restrained.

Cool Sites
As social networking grows, its graphics are becoming integral to some innovative web sites. Some
examples are:
www.theyrule.net -- a site that links the boards of major corporations in a variety of ways, from the "7
most powerul" board members in the Fortune 100 to "3 degrees of Warren Buffet".
www.namebase.org -- a database of magazine, newspaper articles and selected book indexes that maps
how often others are mentioned on the same page or in the same story.
www.touchgraph.com maps connections retrieved from a google search or a topical index from
Amazon.com.

