Making an Index for Environmental Surveys
(CAR and reporting on the environment, 2003 NICAR Conference, Charlotte, N.C.)

David Charles Donald
Precision Editor

Savannah Morning News
Voice: 912-652-0335
111 W. Bay St
Fax: 912-234-6522
Savannah, GA 31401
E-mail:ddonald@savannahnow.com

The Problem: I need to find out how different segments of the community identify
themselves as either more pro-environment or pro-development. Knowing this will add
much to my data analysis on a survey gathering community opinions about water
resources, a big issue in Georgia. But much that I’ve read says that determining who is
pro-environment is difficult and often not to be trusted. Survey respondents often give the
socially acceptable reply of identifying themselves as pro-environment, even when they
truly aren’t. Can I find a more reliable way to see how people really think of themselves
on environment vs. development continuum?
The Solution: Create my own index (or scale) that allows more reliable responses, better
data analysis and, consequently, deeper understanding of environmental attitudes in the
community. Here’s how.
o On a survey, asking multiple questions about a single concept can lead to more
reliable answers. But we need to know two things. Do the multiple questions
really measure the same concept? And can we collapse them into one measure
that allows comparing the concept to other data, such as demographic background
of the respondents, so that we get deeper understanding of our community?
o If pro-environmental questions aren’t to be trusted, how about approaching it
from the other end of the spectrum? Let’s find out how pro-development the
respondents are. Write a number of questions that, on the surface, seem to
measure what you’re trying to discover. Here are the ones I wrote (and borrowed)
to get at the concept of “pro-development.”
Now I am going to read you a list of statements. On a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being strongly
disagree and 10 being strongly agree, I want to know how much you agree or disagree with each
statement.
1. Material growth makes for happier living.
2. Growth in material consumption helps raise the level of civilization.
3. Economic development can proceed without disrupting the balance of nature.
4. I am reluctant to conserve material goods and services when it affects my daily life.
5. I have worked hard to get where I am – and am entitled to the “good things in life.”
6. Humans have the right to modify the natural environment to suit their needs.
7. In our community, economic development should be pursued more aggressively.

o

Run the survey (with your other questions, including demographic information.) Record
the answers and put them into SPSS.

o

Now you want to know if the answers tell you whether the questions measure too much
of the same concept, making them redundant. Or do they measure too little of the same
thing, making them unfit for my index. To do this, run a correlation analysis. In SPSS

release 11.5, go to “Analyze” on the menu bar. Highlight “Correlate” on the drop down
menu and click on “Bivariate.” In the dialogue box, move the seven index variables into
the box for analysis. Leave the defaults checked. Run the statistic.
o

One of the defaults is a measure for Pearson Correlation [r]. You’ll have a matrix with 42
boxes, each question correlated with another question. (Actually, you’ll have 49, 7 X 7,
but each question will correlate with itself). You want the Pearson to measure between .2
and .5. If it’s below .2, it’s not correlated enough to let you know you’re measuring the
same concept. If the Pearson is above .5, then your questions are essentially redundant.
On the seven pro-development questions, all correlated but two, Nos. 3 and 5.

o

The final test is to take the remaining 5 questions and run the statistic Cronbach’s alpha.
Again, in SPSS, go to “Analyze” on the menu bar, highlight “Scale” and click on
“Reliability Analysis.” Now in the dialogue box, move your five remaining variables into
the analysis box. Leave the “Model” window on “alpha” and press the “statistics” button.
Under “Descriptives for,” check “Scale” and “Scale if item deleted.” Click “Continue.”
Run the statistic.

o

You’ll get two results you’ll want to look at. The more important one is alpha. You want
this number above .7. If it is, then you know your questions are measuring enough of the
underlying concept. If they’re above .8, you can even use it in what is known as
“confirmatory” analysis and that’s great. The results also show you an alpha score for the
questions if you deleted each one. If the alpha score drops below .7 or .8 when the
question is deleted, you know you want to keep it. For the pro-development index, they
five questions scored .81 and the alpha dropped below .8 if we deleted any of them.

o

Obviously, you don’t want to go through this with your readers. At this point, you’re
gaining peace of mind for yourself for the next, and final, step.

o

Those five questions can now be made into an Index, allowing us to get one number that
measures our concept. Take the five questions and compute a mean score (an average for
the five responses). That’s our Index score. Give it a name. Because these questions are
about development and a person’s interest in material goods, I called it the DMG Index.

o

You can now create categories for those who are pro-development and anti-development
from the Index and cross tabulate them against your demographics, confidently giving
you a deeper, more reliable understanding of those in your community.

The Power: Which is what we did on our on-going series “Water: The Power. The Profit” in the
Savannah Morning News. When we cross tabulated the pro-development index (the high category
meaning more favorable toward development and material growth, the low meaning less
favorable) by race, we found something we didn’t expect. Blacks were much more prodevelopment than whites (Deep South Savannah is a very black/white town). We then cross
tabulated the index against education level and income level, controlling for race. We found race
to be the bigger explainer, although lower income and education associated with pro-development
as well. That surprised us and many in our community. While blacks vote overwhelmingly for
Democrats and Democrats supposedly lean more on the environmentalist side rather than
development, it didn’t work out this way. Why? That’s where traditional reporting takes over. To
read the survey results, including stories based on the index, and the entire water series on the
Web, go to Savannah Morning News’ site:
http://www.savannahnow.com/features/water/

