Backgrounding Business
&
Pretty Much Any(thing/one) Else

Neil Reisner/Miami Daily Business Review
Backgrounding businesses is among the core tasks of any journalist.
A business has gotten into trouble. Maybe a local funeral home chain, part of the publicly-traded
company that owns more funeral homes than any company in the country. You've heard of a source. Maybe
he works for a large corporation, maybe she owns a local mom-n-pop dry cleaners. You need to find out more
about the funeral home conglomerate; you want to get a handle on how reliable the dry cleaner is.
Whether your interest is Cadavers R’ Us, Inc. or Mary Stainbuster, the process and ways of thinking
are pretty much the same.
The starting point: Think through what institutions might have an interest in collecting information
on a particular business/person. Where might records be that will tell you something about corporation, its
activities, triumphs or problems? Where might records be from which you can learn about a dry cleaning
business or its owner?
The trick: Don't make it more complicated than it needs to be.
In these days of instant information, computer-assisted everything and the notion that anythinguseful-is-on-the-World-Wide-Web-somewhere, we tend to forget about some of the simplest and best
resources.
The phone directory, for example. Many journalists ignore this useful compendium of
business/personal information, choosing instead to ask questions like: "Does anyone know where I can find a
phone number for Cadavers R’ Us?
Well, yes, probably, but why bother? As the old jingle goes: "Let Your Fingers Do the Walking."
Another example: The newspaper morgue. Some reporter, somewhere, likely wrote at some time
about the business in which you’re interested. So check the online or off-line morgue of the newspaper in the
city you think the person is in. If the morgue isn't online, pick up the phone and ask a reporter or researcher
at the paper; most often they'll help you out.
Another example: The local library. Reference librarians are wonderful people whose reason for
living is to help folks find out stuff. A call to the local library where you think your target is can be most
useful.
As newspapers around the country make their archives available either through commercial online
services or on the World Wide Web, newspaper clips are even more widely available. And services like PR
Newswire make press releases available from companies around the country.
Journalists’ first stop often is the county clerk’s office or the courthouse, where there is a wealth of
public records containing what they need. With the explosion of online services, the job has been made easier
-- too easy, according to some, because it leads young reporters to ignore paper -- as some (but not all) of the
data becomes available at the click of a mouse.
Still, paper records remain the foundation of backgrounding; virtually anything found online began
its life on a piece of paper. Journalists who rely exclusively on what can be found online can miss revealing
information. The key is to develop a “document frame of mind,” thinking about what kinds of documents
might be generated by an individual or company and where they might be kept.
So, which do journalists use more often, paper or online resources? Both and neither. The pragmatic
approach is best -- do whatever works. Sometimes a reporter will have time only to do a quick online check.
Others times he’ll seek much more detail.
Remember that public record laws vary state-by-state so what may be available in one may not be in
another. Likewise, the record custodians may vary.
Remember, too, that records often provide addresses, dates of birth, information on assets and
liabilities and other identifying information not directly connected to the subject of the record, itself.
Finally, while public records are “official” documents and therefore reliable, they can be out of date,
contain typos, etc. Verify, verify, verify!

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 2 of 8

Publicly Held & Private Companies/Profiles
•

Company Web Sites
http://www.NAMEOFCOMPANY.com
Don’t forget the obvious. Go directly to the source first.

•

Hoovers Online
http://www.hoovers.com
Search a database of more than 10,000 profiles of companies, both public and private. Free
searches provide basic information on companies, with links to additional on-line sources. A
$9.95 per month subscription enables access to more in-depth profiles.

•

Dun & Bradstreet
http://www.dnb.com
D&B profiles thousands of businesses, including officer names, general business information,
payment patterns, debts, liens, and judgments, etc. Most information is self-reported and must
be considered in that context, but for privately held companies these sources often provide the
best available information

•

CorporateInformation.Com
http://test.corporateinformation.com
A portal/search engine providing access to information on companies around the world.

•

Forbes.Com Tools
http://www.forbes.com/tools
A collection of tools from Forbes Magazine. One neat feature: A people tracker that helps
background business leaders.

Corporate Filings
•

Security & Exchange Commission/EDGAR
http://www.sec.gov
The SEC’s EDGAR database enables researchers to search for all SEC documents from publicly
traded companies that file electronically. Proxy statements contain information on executive
compensation. 8K and 10K filings contain company financial data.

•

Edgar Online/Free Edgar
http://www.edgaronline.com

http://www.freeedgar.com
A low-cost subscription service that searches across SEC forms. It also provides information on
insider trading, company profiles and more. Because Edgar Online can search SEC filings for
particular names, it’s a way to learn how companies or people are connected. You can also create
"watch lists" to track particular companies. Free Edgar is a more limited version.
•

10-K Wizard
http://www.10kwizard.com
Another site that searches EDGAR filings. An especially nice feature allows searches for insider
trading.

•

National Association of Secretaries of State
http://www.nass.org/busreg/busreg.html
Corporations register with the secretaries of state in whatever state they incorporate. This site
offers links to all of those offices

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 3 of 8

Stock Quotes/Business Data/Business News
•

Yahoo Finance
http://finance.yahoo.com
Get stock quotes, finance data, news, insider trades and the like for any publicly traded
Company.

•

My Yahoo

http://my.yahoo.com
Yahoo, as you like it. Build up to six customized pages on which you can have anything from
company links to stock quotes to business & general news to local movie times.

•

PR Newswire/BizWire
http://www.prnewswire.com
http://www.bizwire.com
Distribute press releases for public and private companies. Archives are available. Older releases
are on Nexis/Lexis.

Other Resources
•

Bureau of Labor Statistics
http://www.bls.gov
The federal government’s repository of statistics on virtually every part of the labor market in
every region of the country.

•

All WhoIs
http://www.allwhois.com
Perhaps the best “WhoIs” search engine. Use to find out who owns a particular domain name. A
good way to get a company phone number…or at least a number for the folks who administer the
Web site.

•

EasiDemographics.com (The Right Site)
http://www.easidemographics.com

•

SiteNet
http://www.sitenet.com
Site selectors help corporations decide where to (re)locate; they have a good sense of what’s going
on in the world of corporate real estate.

•

Portico
http://indorgs.virginia.edu/portico
Portico is a portal site maintained by prospect researchers, the folks who tell fundraisers at nonprofits how much a prospect might afford. To do that, they have to do a lot of backgrounding.
Among the best features here are links to virtually every tax assessor that’s online across the
country.

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 4 of 8

Other Public Records (* indicates those most useful for backgrounding business)
These records can be obtained in almost every jurisdiction in the country. They can be kept at the state level,
the county level or locally depending on the state. Many of these records are becoming available online,
especially those concerning real estate, corporations, courts and licensing, whether professional or not. Those
that are often online are marked with an asterisk on the following list.
•

Birth Certificates: Learn precisely when someone was born, where, to whom and what their birth
name is. Typically kept at local City Halls or by state departments of vital statistics.

L Boat registration: Find out who really owns that yacht, where and when it was purchased, how much
it’s worth and a bit about what it looks like. Often kept by state motor vehicle departments.
L Building permits: How much did someone spend to renovate their home and what kind of work was
done? What was involved in building that office building? Who were the contractors? Did they get paid
(see “mechanics liens,” below)? Kept at city building departments.
L Business Licenses: Most counties and/or municipalities require all business owners to have business
licenses which can be useful when you need to find a business owner or the people behind a business.
•

Criminal Court Records: Has an individual or company ever been indicted? Convicted? For what?
When? Criminal records can reveal the secrets that people don’t want you to know. Usually available
from the local superior court or its equivalent, sometimes available centrally from the state.

•

DBAs/Fictitous Business Names: Individuals doing business under fictitious names must file
documents naming the people behind the storefront. Depending on the state, filed at the county
courthouse (usually with the county clerk) or with the same agency that registers corporations (usually
the secretary of state).

•

Death Certificates: Typically contain such information as name of deceased, dates of death and birth,
Social Security number, place of birth, occupation, place and cause of death, name of deceased’s parents.
Kept by local or state departments of vital statistics.

L Deeds & Mortgages: The basic property records, showing who owns real estate, who loaned them the
money to buy it and, usually, how much they borrowed. If a deed doesn't list a purchase price, it can
often be calculated based on the value of tax stamps required for a land transfer to be valid. The stamps
are sold at a pre-set value of $X in stamps per $Y of purchase price. Find out X, multiply by Y and you
can approximate the purchase price. Kept in county halls of records. Sometimes online or through
available through major information brokers.
•

Divorce Files: Can provide addresses and detailed financial information. Remember that divorce filings
can contain all kinds of unsubstantiated allegations. And, you can assume that the financial information
therein is the minimum disclosable. Kept at the courthouse where the divorce was filed. Old files are
often archived in a central location.

•

Drivers license, accident reports, vehicle registrations: Some people say you are what you drive.
And whether someone drives a brand new Mercedes or a `69 Toyota can provide insight into their assets
and their values. Drivers licenses, accident reports and vehicle registrations can help identify where
someone lives, what he or she looks like, their date of birth, whether they face a tremendous lawsuit
resulting from a collision, etc. Kept by state motor vehicle departments. Access varies state by state.

•

Education: State education departments, school districts and private schools will usually confirm when
a person was enrolled and where. College registrars will ordinarily confirm degrees, years of attendance
and, sometimes, majors. Many will confirm over the phone; others require a written request.

L Economic Development Authorities: Developers seeking local, state, or federal grants, bonds, loans
or loan guarantees for projects must provide detailed information on the project and themselves to the
funding authority. These can include financial statements, resumes, and names of other investors and
more. Entrepreneurs seeking to locate in "business incubators" must provide similar information. Kept
by the funding authority.

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 5 of 8

L Government contracts: Provide insights into an individual’s business. Contract documents often
include financial statements and more. Kept by the contracting agency; sometimes available centrally
through the office of the treasurer at the local or state level. At the federal level, try the General
Accounting Office.
L Grant Applications: Like contract documents or applications before economic development authorities,
government grant applications often contain personal or company financial statements. Available from
the funding agency.
L Health inspections: Companies dealing with food or other consumables, such as vitamins or medicine,
are usually subject to regulatory inspections. The reports generated can say something about the
condition of the company. Available from the regulatory agencies.
L IRS Form 990: Tax documents filed by non-profit organizations and foundations, containing
information on personnel (including top salaries), grants, boards of directors, etc. Available through the
IRS and, often, through state attorneys general. By federal law, any non-profit must provide three years
worth of 990s for inspection during business hours at principal places of business. Until recently they
were not required to make copies available or to honor requests by mail. Recent legislation requires nonprofits to provide copies and to accept mail requests.
L Judgments: Documents filed by the winner of a lawsuit, legally recording the debt owed by the loser.
Judgments are cleared when the debt is paid. Usually kept at the county courthouse, in the same place
deeds and mortgages are kept.
L Lawsuits (state and federal) and Bankruptcies: Lawsuit and bankruptcy case files can provide
everything from someone’s address to detailed financial statements, sometimes for both defendant and
plaintiff. Remember that the lawsuit itself contains only allegations until adjudicated. Can provide
insight into an individual’s financial situation and business dealings. Lawsuits filed in state court are
usually kept at the county courthouse where the suit was filed. In some courthouses, it’s possible to
check court jurisdictions throughout the state from the local courthouse. Old lawsuits are often archived
at a central location for the entire state. The clerk of the federal district court keeps Federal suits.
Bankruptcy records are kept by the clerk of the federal bankruptcy court, usually at the same location as
the district court.
L Liens: Any encumbrances on a piece of real property, including tax debts, special tax assessments, debts
to the winners of lawsuits, etc. Liens must be cleared before a property can change hands. Usually kept
at the county courthouse, in the same place deeds and mortgages are kept.
L Limited Partnerships: Limited partnership agreements provide information about companies, real
estate developments and the like. More detailed information is usually available about the general
partner than the limited partners, but the documents can be very enlightening. Usually kept by the
same agency that keeps incorporation records; sometimes kept at the county level.
L Liquor licenses: Provide names, addresses, dates of birth, investors and, often, financial statements of
anyone involved in the licensed establishment.
•

Marriage Certificates: Provide names, addresses, dates and place of marriage, officiator, etc.
Sometimes yield surprises, such as the politician whose marriage certificate was dated two years after
the birth of his second child. Usually kept at city hall, sometimes by state departments of vital statistics.

L Mechanics Liens: Liens on property filed by contractors who do work on a property and want to make
sure they’ll get paid. Can provide insight into whether an individual or business pays their bills, what
kind of work they’ve had done, etc. Kept in the county courthouse, usually in the same place as deeds,
mortgages and other line and judgment documents.

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 6 of 8
•

Military records: Can provide information about location and dates of service, rank, jobs, medals and
more. Must be requested under the Freedom of Information Act from the National Personnel Records
Center in Overland, MO, near St. Louis. It’s a complicated process and something of a crapshoot, but can
yield valuable information.

L OSHA Inspections: The federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration and its state
equivalents enforce federal safety standards at companies nationwide. OSHA reports provide insight into
workplace safety; its investigations of serious or fatal accidents can be incredibly enlightening.

•

Pet licenses: Sometimes its useful to know whether someone has a pet – it can be a great conversation
starter. But pet licenses can also be a great way to learn someone’s address and phone number? Why?
Because many people don’t know they’re creating a public record when they fill out a pet license form.
Kept by the licensing entity, usually a city or county.

L Professional Licenses/Disciplinary records: Licensing information is typically available for
practitioners of all kinds of trades from beautician to physician. These typically contain name, address
and license date. They sometimes contain information on education. Disciplinary actions, which come
before the licensing board, are typically public, as well.
L Property Tax Records: Property tax records contain the legal description and assessed value of a piece
of property. They also contain the name and address of the individual to whom tax bills are sent.
Property cards often contain detailed descriptions of any structures on the property including
renovations or additions for which permits were pulled. Kept by local taxing authority, usually the
municipality or the county. For a list of property assessors nationwide who make data available online,
go to Portico, listed under “Other Resources,” above.
•

Salaries: Salaries of public employees (including officials, teachers and staff) are typically public and
available for the asking. Salaries of top-paid employees at non-profit organizations are available in IRS
Form 990. Top executive salaries of publicly traded companies are available in proxy statements filed
with the Security and Exchange Commission.

L UCCs: Uniform Commercial Code filings are the equivalent of mortgages for property that isn’t land.
They’re typically filed with the county by lenders who loan money on equipment or who accept
equipment as collateral. Another way to learn about an individual’s debt.
•

Voter Registration: Provide name, address, date of birth, party affiliation and in what elections an
individual has voted.

•

Wills: Sometimes provide detailed financial information. More often, though, the information therein is
minimal; the detailed information is usually in documents not required to be filed. But wills will almost
always provide the names of beneficiaries, executors and attorneys. Kept in the probate or surrogate’s
court where the deceased lived.

General Information
•

The US Bureau of the Census
http://www.census.gov
The official source of information on the nation, states, counties, municipalities, even
neighborhoods. Conducts authoritative demographic studies that can be useful for targeted
marketing.

•

FedStats
http://www.fedstats.gov
A potpourri site with links to dozens of federal statistics agencies.

•

FirstGov
http://www.firstgov.gov
A gateway to all branches of the federal government, agencies, etc.

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 7 of 8
•

THOMAS: Congress On-line
http://thomas.loc.gov
THOMAS (named after Thomas Jefferson) provides links to both houses of Congress. Offerings
include bill-tracking and the Congressional Record.

•

The CIA World Factbook
http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/pubs.html
A CIA handbook containing detailed profiles of every country in the world. Updated annually.

•

MapQuest
http://www.mapquest.com
Maps of a neighborhood or a region.

World Wide Web Indices and Search Engines
Indices and search engines help researchers search huge chunks of the World Wide Web at one fell swoop.
An index, such as Yahoo, is a collection of interesting Web sites assembled and maintained by human beings.
A search engine, such as Google (the current favorite among Web researchers), or Altavista, scans every
word on millions of Web pages and presents the addresses of pages meeting user-specified criteria. Always
check out the “Help” links to learn how to refine and focus your searches.
•

Yahoo: http://www.yahoo.com

•

Google: http://www.google.com

•

All The Web: http://www.alltheweb.com/

•

Invisible Web: http://www.invisibleweb.com

Professional or Affiliate Associations
Virtually every profession has its own professional association which often will provide an address or phone
number for one of its members or reach out to a member on your behalf. One way to find a professional or
affiliate association is to type "american XXXX association" into a search engine and see what pops up.
That's how I found many of the organizations listed here. Another way is to check the Encyclopedia of
Associations, available in most good libraries.
•

•

Air Line Pilots Association
http://www.alpa.org/
Represents pilots in the US and Canada. Find news releases, an ezine, a list of job opportunities, and
reports on air safety.
Airplane Owners
http://www.landings.com
Find pilots and aircraft owners at this site.

•

The American Association of Cosmetology Schools
http://www.beautyschools.org/main/web.html
Links to a variety of professional groups

•

American College of Radiology
http://www.acr.org
Summary of the activities of this professional association, with details of policy, education, and
research guidelines.

•

American Institute of Architects
http://www.aia.org/
Professional organization of architects

Reisner/Backgrounding Business/Page 8 of 8
•

The American Medical Association Physician Locator
http://www.ama-assn.org/
Find physician addresses and credentials. From the AMA home page, click on “AMA Health Insight”
and then “Physician Select.”

•

Martindale-Hubbell Lawyer Locator
http://www.martindale.com/locator/home.html
The on-line version of the well-thumbed, multi-volume lawyers directory. Find addresses, phone
numbers, professional credentials. Westlaw provides similar information through West’s Legal
Directory: http://www.lawoffice.com/

•

National Funeral Directors Association Online
http://www.nfda.org/
The National Funeral Directors Association (NFDA) is the largest funeral service organization in the
world.

Telephone/E-mail Directories
These sites let you look up names, addresses phone numbers, and e-mail addresses. Most are updated only
as often as printed directories and most do not contain unlisted numbers. However, they’re always worth
checking. Try more than one. Some also include reverse directories. Inconsistent results; try more than one.
•

555-1212.com
http://www.555-1212.com
Also has a reverse directory by address. Plug in the address and it'll give you the listing.

•

Reverse Phone Directory.com
http://www.reversephonedirectory.com/
Exclusively a reverse directory

•
•

Yahoo People Search
http://www.yahoo.com/search/people/

•

Switchboard
http://www.switchboard.com

Internet Mailing Lists and Newsgroups
The Internet is full of discussion groups on almost any conceivable topic. Those online conversations are
archived and can be searched. It’s sometimes possible to gain insight into what makes a person tick by
retrieving his or her postings.
Internet mailing lists, sometimes known as listservs, allow people interested in a particular topic to talk
among themselves via e-mail. Mailing list postings are sometimes accessible via search engines such as
Google, HotBot or Altavista. For a list of more than 50,000 mailing lists, searchable by topic, check out
http://www.topica.com, where you can also create your own mailing list.
Newsgroups are another kind of Internet conversation. Unlike listserv mailing lists, newsgroups don’t arrive
via e-mail. Rather, you have to connect your computer to a news server. But you can search an enormous
archive of newsgroup postings at http://groups.google.com. Formerly called Deja and before that called
DejaNews, the archive now is owned and updated by the folks who run the Google search engine.
Mailing lists and newsgroup postings are often also available via the major search engines. Be sure to search
both the World Wide Web and Usenet, the component of the Internet where a lot of these conversations take
place. Many search engines have an option to search either.

-- 30 --

