WATER POLLUTION
Lisa Stiffler, Seattle Post-Intelligencer
lisastiffler@seattlepi.com

2003 NICAR conference, Environment panel
Charlotte, North Carolina

Water pollution is deceptive. Rarely will you find something as blatant as the Cuyahoga River ablaze,
alerting you that something is amiss. The damage happens out of sight, underwater. Plants and critters die and often
no one is the wiser.
But databases tracking the release and cleanup of dangerous chemicals, plus surveys of fish contamination
levels, can give insight into what’s happening below the surface. The computerized records can also help track down
the offending parties and shine a little light on regulatory agencies to see whether they’re protecting the public and
environment.
Historic pollution:
Sediments are great for taking a peek at the past. In some places plugs of mud are sampled and analyzed like tree
rings to look at historic pollution trends. At very least there should be samples measuring the current state of
contamination. Try NOAA, USGS, the Army Corps and state ecology or wildlife agencies to see if any have local
data on sediment contamination.
Pollution levels are meaningless without info on risk. NOAA’s site includes a chart showing the risk posed
by pollutants at different concentrations for fresh and saltwater, plus detailed descriptions of some polluted coastal
sites by location, including critters affected. (www.noaa.gov; http://response.restoration.noaa.gov/cpr/cpr.html).
Sediment cleanup standards for Superfund or state programs are also available, though the standards don’t always
agree (http://epa.gov/waterscience/cs).
Polluted site cleanup information can also provide data on where contamination is and help identify historic
sources. Some sites are controlled by the Superfund program, others are state-led cleanups. EPA has a searchable
site for some federal cleanups (www.epa.gov/superfund/sites/npl/locate.htm). It’s fine for looking up individual
sites, but doesn’t do the big picture (e.g. how many sites have PCBs, etc.). Washington’s Ecology Department has a
decent database for that kind of analysis, just as an example (www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/tcp/cscs/CSCSpage.HTM).
Sediment and cleanup data can generate stories on: whether regulations are successfully cleaning the environment;
locate ongoing threats by finding sites whose cleanup is languishing; evaluate the efficiency of a cleanup program;
identify responsible polluters; find potential sources of banned, long-lived chemicals (e.g. PCBs, DDT, etc.).
Current pollution:
The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program regulates water pollution released from
industrial and municipal facilities, and stormwater pollution for local governments, construction sites, industry and
sand and gravel operations (http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes). The EPA has delegated NPDES responsibility to state
governments except in AK, ID, DC, MA, NH and NM. The amount of pollution released is supposed to be ratcheted
down with each permit renewal. Permits expire after five years. When renewals are delayed, higher pollution levels
remain in effect.
The problem with NPDES permits is that pollution generally is tracked by concentration, not total amount.
EPA’s Toxic Release Inventory totals pollution by the pound (www.epa.gov/triexplorer/chemical.htm or The
Right to Know Network www.rtk.net). But TRI includes only the largest industrial polluters and a limited suite of
chemicals. It doesn’t cover the government so totals are a low-ball estimate of what’s released, plus lets sewage
treatment plants and others off the hook.
NPDES and TRI data can drive stories that: pinpoint where polluters are and what they’re releasing; what kind and
how much toxic waste is dumped; who’s violating permits; if the regulatory agencies let some companies pollute
more than others, and if they’re renewing permits and tightening pollution levels; and who dumps the most waste.
Don’t forget stormwater – the biggest water pollution threat on the horizon, if it’s not already king. Most
NPDES stormwater permits don’t set limits for discharge or even require monitoring of contaminants. Some cities
and counties will do testing on their own. Check your local public utilities to see if this data is available.
Also check on damaged waterways that have Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) restrictions limiting
the pollutants legally dumped into them. These so-called 303(d) list waterways are searchable online
(www.epa.gov/OWOW/tmdl/index.html). This can help illustrate long-term effects of pollution.
Some states test marine life for contamination levels, sometimes issuing local health advisories.
Remember, this is what readers want to know: Can I eat the fish? Check state health and fish and wildlife
departments for data and warnings. The EPA has some info too (http://epa.gov/waterscience/fish).

And finally, some enviros include: Waterkeeper Alliance has some 100 local groups focused on water
issues (www.keeper.org). Natural Resources Defense Council has the national perspective (www.nrdc.org).
Surfrider Foundation works on beach and ocean issues including pollution and erosion (www.surfrider.org). They
have compiled data to try to answer another pressing question: Is it safe to go in the water?

