10 Tips for Making Surveys Work in Any Newsroom
(CAR and reporting on the environment, 2003 NICAR Conference, Charlotte, N.C.)

David Charles Donald
Precision Editor

Savannah Morning News
Voice: 912-652-0335
111 W. Bay St
Fax: 912-234-6522
Savannah, GA 31401
E-mail:ddonald@savannahnow.com

1. Become the expert. If your newsroom has no experience with public opinion surveys and no
mechanism for them, become the expert yourself. They can be created and managed by a
single journalist. All it takes is wanting to do it.
2. Get training. Political science and sociology departments in most universities can provide the
background for getting started. Also, see the readings on the attached book Web site list for
help and inspiration.
3. Collaborate. Many university professors need real world survey experience for their students.
You get the expertise of the professor and the bodies to make the telephone calls on a small
budget. They get to participate in a real survey, not a pretend survey.
4. Piggyback. If you have a marketing department or even a local polling firm your newspaper
works with, see if you can add some questions relating to your beat. This is called an
omnibus survey and is used regularly in the polling biz.
5. Learn SPSS or SAS. They’re excellent for analyzing survey data. And the big plus is that they
handle large data files well and do other data duties that are more restrictive or not available
in Excel and Access.
6. Take a “can do” attitude. Most hurdles to doing quality, scientific community surveys,
including the money trap, have simple solutions.
7. Become best friends with your graphics people. Most of the results make for good bar
charts. Save the writing for putting flesh and bones on the results and explaining what the
findings mean.
8.

See it as a simple extension or the next step of your CAR development.

9. Keep control and independence. It’s about journalism. As a journalist, you have a lot to offer
to the survey process. Don’t delegate the final decisions to your collaborators. Make great
journalism, not sociology.
10. Find inspiration. I’m always reminded of this quote by Nicholas Lemann from the
December 1991 IRE Journal:
Today, journalists might do well to dream the following dreams: they might dream
of taking over from social scientists, during what everyone agrees is a dismal,
petty, doctrinaire time in the academy, as the explainers of American society; and
they might dream of accomplishing all three goals – of being portraitist,
investigator, and explainer – at the same time, in the same work.

A Short Annotated Book and Web Site List for Surveys
(CAR and reporting on the environment, 2003 NICAR Conference, Charlotte, N.C.)

David Charles Donald
Precision Editor

Savannah Morning News
Voice: 912-652-0335
111 W. Bay St
Fax: 912-234-6522
Savannah, GA 31401
E-mail:ddonald@savannahnow.com

Dillman, Don A. (1978) Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Out of print, but if you can find a used one, it will give you a complete, step-by-step
approach to conducting a scientifically valid telephone survey on a tight budget. Makes an
excellent reference for quick decision making during the survey process.
--------------------------. (1999) Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored Design Method. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
The author’s latest edition. While the methodology for Internet surveying is still being
worked out, it shows promise as a way for journalists to conduct valid surveys in an
inexpensive, relatively quick fashion.
Meyer, Philip. (2002) Precision Journalism: A Reporter’s Introduction to Social Science
Methods. 4th ed. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield.
If there’s one book to guide your thinking about journalists doing surveys, this is it. Keeps
you thinking like a journalist and approaching your survey like a journalist while you’re
learning some real nuts and bolts of practical surveying. Available from IRE with a
member’s discount.
Salant, Priscilla. (1994) How to Conduct Your Own Survey. New York John Wiley &
Sons.
Designed for anyone who wants to conduct a valid and reliable local community survey but
who doesn’t have many resources. Keeps you on track with many practical suggestions.

Web Sites:
Bill Trochim’s Center for Social Research Methods:
http://trochim.human.cornell.edu/index.html
A great site from a Cornell University prof. Includes methods tutorials to practice what
you’re learning. Also can answer questions on the quick.
The Odum Institute for Research in the Social Sciences
http://www2.irss.unc.edu/irss/home.asp
Has an extensive database of past survey questions. It’s key word searchable. Why reinvent
the wheel?

