Burrowing into HMDA
John Byczkowski
The Cincinnati Enquirer
johnb@enquirer.com
513-768-8377
n Buy: Home Mortgage Lending: How To Detect Disparities by Jo Craven McGinty, from IRE.
This covers all the basics and will save you a lot of time.
n Buy: Data from IRE. They’ve got HMDA data going back to 1992, and it’s cheaper than buying
it from the Fed, except for the newest data. Through 1995, the data is in *.dbf format, and it
imports easily into Access. Starting in 1996, the data comes with its own software, and must be
extracted to a text file. Email me if you need Access import specs.
n Buy new data: From the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. Raw data is $50
per year. New data is released by the last day of July. You want “Loan Application Register (LAR)
& Transmittal Sheet (TS) Raw Data.”
http://www.ffiec.gov/hmda/publicdata.htm
n Run the data: Again, refer to McGinty for guidelines on dealing with tables and for the basic
aspects of how to consider data. Play with it; run ranks and crosstabs any way you can think of:
Count up loans approved and rejections by bank, by race, by bank and race. (Rank ‘em.
Who’s doing the most business?)
Consider income levels. (use Census Bureau breakdowns for low/mod/mid/high at
http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/histinc/ie1.html). Who’s doing the most business
with low income borrowers? High-income borrowers?
Add up loan amounts. Which banks are lending the most money?
Consider census tract. This can be tough because the HMDA data contains information
on population and minority population, but it’s still – through the 2002 data – based on
1990 census data. Come up to speed on 2000 census data for your area.
n Run rejection rates, but be careful. The rejection rate is rejections divided by approvals-plusrejections (read McGinty for tips on calculating this). Two things distort rejection rates. First, many
big subprime lenders reject 50 percent to 80 percent of all applicants, and this causes problems
with regional totals on rejections.
Second, when you look at rejections by census tract, you may find that most rejections are
coming from lenders who make no loans at all in that tract, and that the lenders who are making
loans aren’t rejecting many applicants.
It is useful to look at each lender’s rejection rate, in total, by race, by income.
n Get the list of subprime lenders:
http://www.huduser.org/datasets/manu.html
The HMDA data does not distinguish between mainstream lenders and subprime lenders, who
target consumers with less-than-perfect credit. (Read the McGinty book for tips on dealing with
HMDA’s list of institutions.) I created a “subprime?” yes/no check-box in the institutions table,
then checked off the subprime lenders named in HUD’s list. In 2001 there were only 178
subprime lenders, so it doesn’t take that long. Also, the keeper of the list, Randall Scheessele
(email: Randall_M._Scheessele@HUD.GOV) is very helpful.
Run counts on loans by subprime lenders. This is especially important if you’re looking at
refinancings.
n Get CRA reports on banks: CRA stands for Community Reinvestment Act, and it basically
requires banks to loan money back into the neighborhoods that provide deposits. Banks are
generally reviewed only for the business they do in their home markets or home states. It’s not
likely an Ohio bank will be reviewed for loans it makes in Florida. Few lenders fail this test, but
you can still get good information out of these reports.

Create another column in the institutions table in the HMDA data – a yes/no checkbox – to
check whether the institution gets a CRA review for lending in your area. Then, calculate how
many loans are made by lenders who get reviewed for lending in your area. In Cincinnati, lenders
who get CRA reviews for their lending in the region account for only 31 percent of the loans
made.
Keep in mind that the CRA evaluation is based on income, not race, and only tracks low- and
moderate-income activity. The evaluation does contain an opinion regard fair lending standards –
which are race based – but this section is usually only a few sentences long and provides almost
no useful details.
You may have to check several different sources to find local lenders:
Federal Reserve
http://www.federalreserve.gov/DCCA/CRA/crarate.cfm
Office of Thrift Supervision
http://www.ots.treas.gov/crasql/cra-search-form.cfm?catNumber=69
Comptroller of the Currency
http://www.occ.treas.gov/crainfo.htm
note: This site has a lousy search function. Where the other sites search just for CRA reports, this one
searches its entire site for the report. Use a precise name for the search.

n The difference between race “not provided” and “not applicable.”
“Not provided” (race code “7” in the data, gender code “3”) indicates the loan application was
taken by telephone or by mail. Through 2002, lenders were not required to collect gender and
race information from those who apply by mail or phone.
In Cincinnati, the share of home purchase loans with no race information was 19 percent in
2001, up from 2 percent in 1992. Are the not-provideds more black than applications overall? I’ve
seen nothing to indicate that. Run these numbers by census tract to see which tracts generate
them.
“Not applicable” (race code “8” in the data, gender code “4”) means there’s no person there.
You should not see 8’s under information for the primary loan applicant. When this shows up
under the coapplicant, it means there is no coapplicant.
HMDA does not give information on marital status. If there’s no coapplicant, it could mean the
applicant’s partner has been left off the application for some reason (the partner’s credit could be
so bad, for instance, that he/she is best left off the application) or there just is no coapplicant.
Among blacks in Cincinnati, nearly half of all primary applicants are women, and 86 percent of
them cite no coapplicant on the application. It would square with census data to say that these
are mostly single women.

Changes coming in HMDA data
n Nothing for 2002 data. It’ll look just like 2001.
n For 2003:
•
•
•

It’ll use 2000 census tracts and population information.
Lenders taking applications by telephone must collect information on gender and race.
“Hispanic” will no longer be a race. The data will come from a new, separate question on
ethnicity.

n For 2004: The Fed is becoming increasingly concerned with subprime and predatory lending,
and will institute a number of changes to track these loans.
•
•

•

Lenders must report if the interest rate on the loan is 300 basis points above that of a
comparable Treasury security.
Lenders must report if the loan falls under the protection of the Home Ownership and
Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) – that is, if the loan rate is 800 basis points or more
above that of a comparable Treasury security, or if the loan’s fees equal more than 8
percent of the loan amount.
Lenders must report denials of pre-approvals.

