10 Dos for Building CAR in Small to Mid-Sized Newsrooms
(Doing CAR in small and medium-sized newsrooms, 2003 NICAR Conference,
Charlotte, N.C.)

David Charles Donald
Precision Editor

Savannah Morning News
Voice: 912-652-0335
111 W. Bay St
Fax: 912-234-6522
Savannah, GA 31401
E-mail:ddonald@savannahnow.com

Do:
1. Have reporters sit next to you while you do your analysis. They may pick up some skills so
they can do it next time, and you’ll get an ally who’ll see just how much you add to the
newspaper (or broadcast station). No Lone Rangers. Share.
2. Insist your reporters gather all documents electronically if possible. City and school board
budgets are probably prepared in a spreadsheet like Excel. Having Excel on your computer
won’t help you if you don’t have the data to import into it.
3. Attend news meetings where story ideas are brainstormed. Wait for your opening, and when
you see the possibility of how CAR will improve a story, pounce. Follow through.
4. Get to be the numbers person in your newsroom. No number is unimportant. Sometimes, a
single number makes the story work and garners unbelievable praise from editors.
5. Start small. Editors like the big packages, but they really adore daily copy that makes their
lives easier. Show them that CAR can add context and reader interest. All the better when
you do it on a deadline story.
6. Broaden your definition of CAR. It’s more than sorting in Excel and grouping in Access.
Keep learning new techniques. Even if you have no good journalism program at your local
university, check out the sociology and political science departments. You might find a
quantitative data analysis class you can audit or a social stats class. Keep pressing to learn
how to apply your learning.
7. Get to know your graphics artists. Take them to lunch. Let them know that how they
present your analysis means a lot to you and that you appreciate what they do.
8. Bookmark, say, 10 Web sites that you know you can use to find data or techniques or
answers to questions on deadline. Spend time getting familiar with them.
9. Carve out a neglected niche in your newsroom that is CAR intensive. For example, if you
have no one dedicated full-time to the census releases, master them and pitch them at
reporters whose beats overlap the data.
10. Stay passionate and love what you do. Remember, you’re the one on the cutting edge. You’re
the one building skills that will not only safe guard your career, but will also serve your
community by adding more depth and context to your reports.

10 Don’ts for Building CAR in Small to Mid-Sized Newsrooms

Don’t:

1. Take no for an answer for hardware or software. We don’t take no from difficult sources.
We shouldn’t from our editors either. If there is some software you want, be persistent. Ask
when the editors figure out next year’s capital budget. Get added to it.
.
2. Be a recluse. Network with CAR folks here and go to NICAR conferences every year. Find
people who can do what you want to learn and ask if you can contact them for advice. Ask
them how they learned.
3. Let public officials win when they won’t give you data digitally. Learn some good responses
to the hurdles they throw in your face. Know your open records law. Better yet, in this day
of retracting civil liberties, become a champion for open records in your community.
4. Stay in a newsroom that has absolutely NO appreciation for CAR. They’re getting more rare
and more rare, and if you’re building CAR skills on your own, you’ll be marketable. You’re
investing in a career and a passion. You can’t build where there’s no foundation.
5. Forget the IRE Resource Center when trolling for ideas. As of March 11. 2003, if you had
typed “computer-assisted reporting” into the 19,000-plus story database, you would have
gotten 438 hits. Use them to stimulate your imagination.
6. Get caught up with the computer unless you have aspirations of being a database manager.
It’s a tool. You’re really working on a way to approach journalism. It’s been 30 years since
Phil Meyer published the first edition of Precision Journalism. CAR is as much about scientific
method as it is the computer.
7. Be afraid to think big. In Savannah, we’ve accomplished more by NOT reminding ourselves
of our size, but thinking about what we CAN do. We NEVER use our size as an excuse. We
might be the smallest paper in the country in which the newsroom regularly conducts its
own public opinion surveys. We’ve learned how to do it regardless of our size.
8. Fall for Stockholm Syndrome of your newsroom. Be the voice of change if need be.
9. Try to make everyone in your newsroom a CAR believer. Look for converts and work with
those who “get it” or show an interest in learning.
10. Get discouraged. You’re doing the work that is vital to this profession. To paraphrase with
apologies to newspaper editor and sociologist Robert Ezra Park: “Computer-assisted
reporting is, like art to an artist, less a career than a form of excitement and a way of life.”

