Patience
For the rest of humanity, it’s a virtue. For those in computer-resisted reporting, it’s a necessity. Remember – Babe
Ruth struck out nearly twice as many times as he knocked one out of the park.
Internet Navigation
Keep going, portal after portal, site after site, passage after passage. Learn to differentiate quickly between the sites
that will help you, with those that won’t. Treat the Net like a cagey source. Go back again and again as you learn more
and more to fine-tune your search. Many sources don’t realize all they know or what may be important or even vital –
until you ask the right questions. It’s the same with the Net.
True, when you use a site like Google, you get back 10 million pages and it’s impossible to search them all. That’s
when you fine-tune that search and get a better query. But don’t fine-tune it so much that you miss key information you
didn’t even realize was out there.
Just as it could be a scribble, or an odd signature on some obscure page in a set of documents in a dusty vault that
could turn your investigation around, so can some offhand reference to your target in some obscure web site make a
difference.
One thing I do when I have thousands of sites and too little time is that I will look at as many Web sites as I can
from a Google or some other search. Then, I’ll copy and paste the Web page address of the search page I left off at in a
Word document or an e-mail to myself. Later, when I have more time, I can copy and paste it back to the Internet
browser and continue my search.
Dealing with Defense Contractors
You need to become a Web Warrior with some Web Weapons to track down what’s going on in the business world.
While the rest of “normal” society worries mostly about when the bombs are going to drop, the defense executive has
to juggle the concerns of profit margins, stockholders, competitors and so on. And reporters need to keep on top of all
of these matters, too.
Luckily, the business world is full of analysts, government regulators and other folks ready to do the heavy lifting
for us. Luckily, too, most of the information is available with just a few clicks. Here are some neat Web Weapons we
can employ:
www.bloomberg.com (even if you don’t have the Bloomberg terminal, a glance at this site for any of the major
defense contractors every day or so and give a nice snapshot. Simply type in the company’s symbol and navigate to the
latest news.)
www.hoovers.com (This gives a nice snapshot of company profiles, some SEC document filings, news, etc.)
www.finance.yahoo.com (Company news, SEC filings, stock prices, etc. access to message boards, etc.)
www.freeedgar.com (SEC document information)
http://ebird.dtic.mil (You have to sign up for this one, but it gives a great run down of the day’s best story of
anything military.
www.google.com (Ah, you may laugh, but this all-purpose search engine is great for tracking down general things.)
www.accurint.com (Having trouble tracking down that source during the daylight hours and want to reach that
person at home? This is probably the best, most accurate and relatively cheapest (25 cents for the basic person-finder
click, which includes the social security number) on the market. For about $4, you can find out that person’s list of
previous addresses, neighbors, some known associates and so on…)
www.gao.gov (All the reports with a decent search engine to find the right one)
Databases
When putting together your own database from an existing set of documents, make sure you take the time to review
the documents closely, to interview them. See what information they contain. What kinds of questions can you ask?
Can a chronology be built? Tailor your fields to the information you want and the questions you want to ask.
When using an existing database, especially a large one, there are several things to consider:
Find a database manager that works best for you. I prefer the old Fox Pro 2.6, but Access or Visual Fox Pro will do
the job just fine. Find the best for your needs – and find a guru to help you through the very, very frustrating moments
that are bound to happen.
When using multi-year databases – like the federal contractors one – watch out for changes in things like field
names, company names, numeral inputs (for example: whether the figures are written out completely or are in
thousands), etc.
Carry a digital

Just as tape recorders can be great back ups when interviewing sources, digital cameras can be great tools for
capturing event scenes or for jogging the memory. Take some shots, download the images, scan for details and put
them in the story. You can erase and start all over again.

Computer-Assisted Reporting
Remember, computers represent just another tool at out disposal. Too often, though, reporters rely on CAR to try to
do all of the work. They forget that they still need to connect with their readers. They throw out graphs and charts and
numbers to impress everyone with all of the work they’ve done – making the readers perform a mental juggling act to
keep it all straight and to relate to the story the reporters want to tell.
After you’ve found the right Web sites, or squeezed the juice from the right database, you need do find the people
behind the facts. You have to tell readers what it means – and especially what it means to them. Often, the work you do
with the help of the computer is only the jumping off point for the real story.
This is not a new concern, in his 1978 book Investigative Reporting and Editing, Paul N. Williams, quoted CAR
reporters at the time: “As the reporter works more regularly and closely with reporters…he is in danger of losing touch
with the people and reality that the people constitute.”
Often, it can be difficult to find the “people factor” in reporting about defense contractor cover-up or state-of-the-art
weapon. At least, though the reporters can humanize the story, to find metaphors, anecdotes and other means to help
the readers. It is up to us to find and relay the emotion and action to make the readers think and act.

