Simple Access Forms
MaryJo Sylwester
USA TODAY Sports Database Editor
msylwester@usatoday.com or mjsnews@yahoo.com
2003 NICAR Conference -- Charlotte

The Toolbox:
This bar is usually planted along the left side of your screen, but you can pick it up and move it anywhere
you need. It will only appear when the form is in Design View. This allows you to add new items to your
form, ranging from text boxes to pictures and navigation buttons.

From left to right, the buttons on the lower level are:
Label: Use for text that will only appear on your form. It’s not saved into the tables.
Text Box: Displays text that is stored in a field in a table.
Option Group: Establishes a multi-choice answer block. (data entry primarily)
Toggle Button: Use for a yes-no type of response (data entry primarily)
Option Button: Use for a yes-no type of response. (data entry primarily)
Check Box: Use for a yes-no type of response. (data entry primarily)
Combo Box: Allows you to create a pull-down list based on either another table or query or a pre-set value
list. You can display one thing in the form and store another in the table. For example, your form could
show the full name of a state and the table could house either the postal abbreviation or the FIPS code. For
data entry this is your best bet for ensuring standardized data.
List Box: Similar to a combo box, except it’s based on a short list that is not housed in a table or query.
You have to type in the list when it’s created.
Command Button: Use to place navigation or “go” buttons on your form. Can launch queries, open other
forms, make a “find” button, make buttons to go to the next or previous record, button to add a new record.
Image: Add a picture or other image in jpg, tiff, gif, etc.
Unbound Object Frame: Use to insert an object other than an image (Excel worksheet, etc)
Bound Object Frame: Use to insert an item that would be stored into the database (mug photos are a good
example here)
Page Break: Establishes a page break on your form.
Tab Control: If you have a form with multiple pages (for the same record) you can use this to create a
“tab” to easily flip from one page to the other (like the tabs in an Excel workbook).
Subform/SubReport: Subforms are most often used when dealing with one-to-many relational tables. The
subform would allow you to input multiple records into the “many” table and maintain the proper
relationship to the “one” table.
Line: Draw a line on your form.
Rectangle: Draw a rectangle on your form.
More Controls: There’s a long list here of advanced options that you’ll likely never use.

Properties Box:
Every field and label on a form has a properties dialog box behind it that designates everything from color
and size to where it’s contents are stored in the database. This is where you’ll need to go to customize a
form created with a wizard (or to build your own without the wizard). Properties boxes are slightly
different depending on the type of object on your form (for example, properties for a combo box are more
complex than a simple text box). Below we’ll hit the highlights of a text box.

The tabs at the top indicate these deal with the data itself. Here are the key ones you’ll deal with most
often:
• Control Source: from the pull-down list you can pick the field in the underlying table where the
data will be stored.
• Input Mask: Use this to limit the format of the information going into the field. Example: if you
have a text field and you want it to be a telephone number that looks like (555)-555-5555.
• Locked: If you want people to view this field, but not make any changes through the form set this
to Yes.

The Format section is where you can mess with the colors, fonts, sizes, etc. Back color lets you choose
from a color pallette for the background color of the field (the default is usually white). Font size, weight,
name are where you can adjust the font properties. Remember, this particular properties box is just for the
text box for one field. You can change similar formats for the entire form (like the background color for the
whole form) by right-mouse clicking on the background of the form itself and pulling up the dialog box.

Setting up a combo box:
If you’re starting from an existing text box, right-mouse click on the box (in design view) and choose
“Change To……Combo Box”. Then switch into the properties box and you’ll see something like this:

We’re going to assume you have a lookup table with all of the UCR codes and you want the form to display
the words describing the code and the table to house the numeric code. Your table has a field called “UCR”
and it’s set as a numeric field. You also have a separate table, called “UCRCodes” with two columns: the
first is the numeric code, the second is the written description.
Control source: set this to the field in your main table where you want to house the numeric code.
Row Source Type: Your choices are “Table/Query”, “Value List” or “Field List”. To work off an existing
table, you choose “table/query”.
Row Source: Here you choose (from a pull-down) which field from your lookup table has the text you
want to display in the form.
Column Count: here you tell it how many columns are in the “row source” table – in this case the “ucr
codes” table has 2 columns, so we would change it to 2.
Column Widths: this designates the widths of the columns in the “row source” table as they appear in your
pull-down menu on the form. So in this case we only want to the 2nd column to appear.
So we would type: 0”;1”
That means the first column is 0 inches (or not visible) and the second column is 1” wide. You can
make this whatever value you want. If you have long descriptions, you might need to go 2” or more.
Bound column: This is where you designate which column from your “row source” table has the value that
will ultimately be stored in your main table (in the control source field). In this case we would leave it on 1
because the ucr code is in the 1st column in our “ucr codes” table.

