Prescription Painkillers
(And courts that care little about abuse)
Linda J. Johnson, CAR Coordinator
Lexington Herald-Leader
(859) 231-3338
ljohnson1@herald-leader.com

2003 NICAR Conference
Charlotte, North Carolina
“Prescriptions Run Amok”

The drug-related deaths of an Eastern Kentucky sheriff in one county and a sheriff
candidate in another county in 2002 launched an eight-month project by a team of Herald-Leader
reporters into the region's drug problem, resulting in the series Prescription for Pain.
The team interviewed more than 500 people, examined about 900 documents from state
and federal agencies, and analyzed more than 500,000 computerized records, from local court
districts to the federal Drug Enforcement Administration.

Data
Federal:
Drug Enforcement Administration’s ARCOS data. ARCOS stands for Automation of
Reports and Consolidated Orders System. It monitors the flow of controlled substances
by 3-digit zip code from manufacture to sale, whether from retail drug stores, hospitals,
doctors or teaching facilities. We initially requested all narcotics distributed from 1997
through 2000 to look at OxyContin. As the sheriff’s death showed us, we needed to look
at more drugs. So, we fought for months for the 2001 data, which took several months
despite being the identical request.

Stories included:
Day one piece that found Eastern Kentucky leads the nation, per capita, in the
amount of narcotics distributed legally. Where more drugs are available, there’s a
greater chance of abuse. Experts were astounded at the numbers in Kentucky.
By itself, hydrocodone-based drugs like Lorcets, Lortabs and Vicodin, far
surpassed even OxyContin, the drug that gained national attention in 2000.
Hydrocodone is easier to get, it isn’t as tightly regulated as is OxyContin, and it is
comparable to morphine in its intensity when taken inappropriately.

Local/state:
We FOIA’d Kentucky’s Administrative Office of the Courts for all drug charges in every
district and circuit court in the state (120 counties) going back as far as they could, about
six years electronically. Spent time cleaning the Excel files up (each case had one or
multiple charges and each charge was a record). Cases were separated with a series of
asterisks.
County-level Census data for population, adults, poverty, education, etc.
Stories included:
Main story showed that punishments of drug offenders varied widely across
Eastern Kentucky.

Others stories about the problems in specific counties with huge percentages of
dismissal rates; long time for resolution of cases and little to no jail time for those
convicted thanks to exorbitant probation rates.

