Using CAR on the Beat
Charlotte NICAR 2003 conference; "Beginner Track- Weaving CAR In to the
Beat" panel
Ways to get started:
1. Ask for it: Get used to requesting data, and get the people you cover
used to it, too. From school attendance rates to local budgets to
police overtime figures. It'll help you see trends as well as become
more familiar with the data. Remember, if a figure is on a printout,
it came from a computer file somewhere.
2.

Let's get small: Don't try to change the world overnight. Do try
small, manageable tasks, such as comparing the percent change from
last year's budget to the current one, or get census data to compare
community growth rates. It's easy to get discouraged if you jump in
at the deep end. Don't try to force a story just because you have
numbers about something. And look for data about something you're
interested in.

3. Build it yourself: Enter data on your own in Excel to track trends on
your beat. A region in NC I covered had many, many layoffs in the
past year. I created a spreadsheet, and entered info on type of
business, number of jobs lost, where the company was based, reason
for layoffs and date of layoffs. I did this every time we learned of
a layoff. By the end of the year, I had an extensive file, so I could
add context that "this was the eighth furniture company to slash jobs
in the county this year. To date, 100 people have lost their jobs
here because of layoffs or plant closings."
This is great on deadline. A police beat could track certain types of
crimes, accident sites and so on. Government reporters could follow
votes on ordinances or log in every time the school board goes into
executive session, and how long it lasts.
(Hint: you can also use Excel to log in every time you had a story with
a CAR element, so you'll have something later to show the bosses when
you find the inevitable need to ask for more resources. Also, keeping
track of those stories is a good way to quantify how CAR helps the
newsroom.
4. Census says...: Many stories big and small can benefit from census
data. Want to find the neighborhood with the most single moms, the
richest and poorest community in the state, the city whose residents
have the longest commute, the countries where your area's foreign-born
residents call home. Those stories - and a ton more - can be found in
the Census data that's available on the Web.
Tip: You can
download the data to your desktop.
And: Get to know the folks
in your state data center whose job it is to know the numbers inside and
out.They want to help.
5. Data's all around: Look around, and you'll see a lot of data already
is on the Web, courtesy of your local or state government. This could
include: real estate and tax records, corporation filings, inmate data,

criminal records, sex offender registries; day-care ratings; road
closings, schools' SAT scores
6. BACK UP THE DATA; BACK UP THE DATA; BACK UP THE DATA !!!!!!!!!
7. Collaborate: Ask the people on beats in your newsroom what key
databases they use on the job. Get the data. If they don't know, or
don't use data, help them find data they can use to build a story. Build
alliances.
8. Interview the data, then interview the people. Reminder, CAR
techniques are just another reporting tool, like good interviewing or
writing techniques. Once you've gone through the numbers, figure out the
people to talk to that can help bring the stats to life.
Quick-start story ideas:
* Get a spreadsheet list of all county tax
delinquents; see how many are politicians or others who work in
government. Name them.
• Get a list of concealed weapon permits. Are the numbers going up or
down? Compare the gun activity to census data for household income
and poverty in the hot spots for such weapons
• Use the Guidestar database to help identify charities in your area.
Check out who is on their boards, how much their directors get,
whether their donations are going up or down, what amount of their
money is going to overhead.
• Use the SEC's EDGAR database to learn more about local publicly
traded companies. Stories could range from their pending lawsuits to
CEO pay to future business expectations. Also, your state Department
of State likely has some corporate records online.
• Get the local schoolboard or city hall budget, see which departments
were the biggest winners and losers from last year to this one
• Always a popular way to get started: Get a list of all of the names
on dog licenses, see what are the most popular, most obscure and how
many people named pets after themselves.
• Use census data to identify commuting patterns, then see what roads
get the most money for improvement. Do they match up?
• The number of homes in the county worth $1 million or more
• Adopt a highway records: Who covers the most roads, who has the
longest stretch; what type of roads do businesses prefer.
• Back up the data!
Bookmark these Web sites: www.guidestar.org Look up tax returns for
nonprofit organizations
www.npccny.org/Form_990/990.htm Explains in detail how to use those tax
returns, called 990s
http://factfinder.census.gov/ American FactFinder, the way to look up
census data
www.google.com Web search engine
www.fec.gov/finance_reports.html FEC campaign finance site
www.osha.gov/oshstats/index.html OSHA workplace safety data
www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/webusers.htm Search SEC database for
business filings

http://cronkite.pp.asu.edu/census/ ASU Prof. Steve Doig's census page
for reporters
www.fedstats.gov/ Gateway to federal stats for more than 100 agencies
www.landings.com/ Search aviation databases, including aircraft
registration
http://av-info.faa.gov/ FAA databases http://nces.ed.gov/ National
Center for Educational Stats
http://ope.ed.gov/security/ US Education Dept. Campus Crime stats
http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/ US Education Dept. higher ed stats, but note
they are often 2 years old
www.drewsullivan.com/database.html A database of databases
www.epa.gov/enviro/index_java.html EPA stats
Adam Bell
The Charlotte Observer
PO Box 30308
Charlotte, NC 28230-0308
phone 704-358-5696 fax 704-358-5036 e-mail abell@charlotteobserver.com

