DOING CAR IN SMALL- AND MEDIUM-SIZED NEWSROOMS
By Laura Ayo
ayol@knews.com, 865-342-6341
Knoxville News Sentinel
2003 CAR Conference, Charlotte
You don’t have to spend a lot of money to do computer-assisted reporting. You just need
to know how and where to get training, data and software for free or little cost.
WHAT YOU NEED:
Some kind of spreadsheet software is all you really need to do many CAR stories.
- Microsoft Excel, Quattro Pro for Windows or Lotus 1-2-3
Fellow NICARians also use database managers and on-line resources.
- Microsoft Access, Microsoft FoxPro and Paradox for Windows
- MySQL and OpenOffice/StarOffice are highly recommended alternatives to
Microsoft Office Professional (which offers Excel and Access). Both offer
spreadsheet applications and database capabilities for a lot less cost.
If you can afford it, mapping software and statistical software give you the ability to
produce more sophisticated stories using CAR.
- Mapping: ArcView, MapInfo or Maptitude
- Statistics: SPSS and SAS.
Also good to have are:
- Text editors, such as Ultra Edit or Vedit, allow you to clean up and organize
data.
- Text organization/information management software, such as AskSam, allows
you to store, organize and search paper documents or notes.
- Adobe Acrobat Reader, which allows you to view “pdf” files on the Internet.
You can pull text from them with a cut-and-paste-like function. Adobe Aerial also
allows you to convert “pdf” files to text files.
- Some kind of application to unzip compressed files is usually needed to
download data from the Web. Popular programs are WinZip, PKZip and
BitZipper.
HOW TO GET WHAT YOU NEED WHEN MONEY’S TIGHT (SOFTWARE):
Look in-house. People in other departments often use software you can use to do a CAR
project. See if they’ll let you use their computers when they’re in a meeting or before or
after work hours. If permissible, have a copy installed on your terminal.
Who Uses What
Accounting, Circulation, Human Resources – spreadsheets, database managers
Marketing – mapping software
Information Systems/Tech Services – just about any program

Free trials. Take advantage of free trial versions offered by software companies. Thirtyday free trial versions are often long enough to complete a project.
Make the argument. Show your editor how not having the software will cost him/her
more money in the long run than buying the program. In other words, convince the editor
you’ll be more efficient with the software than without it.
Look for “viewer” alternatives. Many programs have “viewer” versions that are free.
While you can’t manipulate data in many of these viewer applications, you don’t always
need to do any number crunching on your own for the story you’re working on.
ESRI makes a free map viewer called ArcExplorer.
http://www.esri.com/software/arcexplorer/index.html
Excel has a free viewer also.
http://office.microsoft.com/downloads/2000/xlviewer.aspx
HOW TO LEARN HOW TO USE THE SOFTWARE WHEN MONEY IS TIGHT:
Again, look in-house. Those same people in other departments that use software you’re
trying to learn obviously know how to use the applications. Ask them to give you a quick
tutorial of the software so you have an idea of what it can do. See if they’ll let you play
with the software when they’re in a meeting or before or after work hours. Keep their
phone numbers handy for help when you get stuck. In addition to the departments
mentioned above, the Online department is proficient at downloading data from the Web
and importing it into spreadsheets or database managers. Have them show you how it’s
done. If they’re not willing to help, consider who taught them. Find out who does inhouse training and sign up for the next course.
Go back to school. Most colleges and universities offer classes that teach basic, and often
advanced, spreadsheet and database skills. You’ll often find these classes in the personal
and professional development programs offered at major universities. Most courses are
one-day deals or a few hours each night over a few days. Some are held online and you
don’t even need to leave your work or home computer. The registration fees are usually
reasonable (<$200), especially if you get a workbook and practice disk to take home.
Find out the instructor’s e-mail address/phone number and you’ll have a local expert to
contact when you need help. Be sure to ask whether your company will foot the bill.
Many will.
Surf the Web. There are many free software primers or tutorials on the Internet. Whether
it’s Excel, Access, SQL or PERL you’re wanting to learn about, a quick search in Google
or similar search engine will yield plenty of places to get the basics.
Seek peer advice. There’s no better source for how to do computer-assisted reporting than
fellow CAR reporters. The best way to link up with them is by joining one of the listservs
offered through IRE. It doesn’t cost anything to subscribe. You can unsubscribe any time
you want. Whether it’s to ask a technical question about software, get advice on how to

obtain data from a stubborn, excuse-filled government flak or find out who did a similar
story you’re working on, the listservs instantly get you in touch with those in the know.
NICAR-L is the listserv dedicated to CAR. Visit
http://www.ire.org/membership/listserv.html to learn more about it or to subscribe.
Take a tip. IRE’s Resource Center is full of tip sheets like this one and links to helpful
resources. More times than not you’ll find the solution to the very problem you’re having.
Visit http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/ for more information.
Read. Head to the library or see if your tech people have user-guide books for the
programs you’re using. At the least, they’ll help you troubleshoot. Here are some
suggestions:
The “Dummies” books are a good place to start for technical help.
“Computer-Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide,” by Brant Houston.
“Precision Journalism: A Reporter’s Introduction to Social Science Methods,” by Philip
Meyer.
“Numbers in the Newsroom: Using Math and Statistics in News,” by Sarah Cohen.
Get formal training. If you can afford it, attend one of the boot camps, training seminars
or conferences offered through IRE.
HOW TO GET DATA WHEN MONEY IS TIGHT:
Use the Web. The Internet has tons of data that can be downloaded for free if you know
where to look.
Know your state law. Know what they can charge you for and what they can’t. To find
out what your state’s law is, visit the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press at
http://www.rcfp.org/tapping/index.cgi?function=browse
Make them justify the cost. Always argue that the data should be provided to you free of
charge. But if they insist on charging you, ask for an itemized invoice showing how they
came up with the final cost. Then haggle.
Go elsewhere. Local data often has to be reported to the state. State data often has to be
reported to the feds. Web sites maintained by the state or federal government often have
features that allow you to download what you’re looking for at no cost.
Share. Consider asking another media outlet to split the cost of the data. Then make a
copy of the data for them when you get it.
See who else already has it. Find out if another media outlet has done a similar or related
story and ask if they’re willing to provide you with a copy of the raw data. Check out the
local university to see if a researcher obtained the data for analysis. Then ask if they’d be
willing to provide a copy of the underlying data.

Use IRE. NICAR maintains several searchable data sets that have already been cleaned
up for you. The costs are based on the size of your organization. For more information
about the available databases, visit http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/
Convince the editor. Convince your editor that the data is worth the cost. Show him what
you can do with it. Be specific and persistent. Give her examples of stories other papers
have done with the same data. Then follow through.
Get other staffers on board. If an editor can see how more than one staffer will benefit
from the data, he/she might be more inclined to allow the purchase.
ACTUALLY DOING CAR:
So you know what you’re doing and you’ve got the equipment to do it. Now what?
Always think CAR. Ask yourself if there’s data available that can make the story you’re
working on even better. Review the daily budgets and planned projects to see how CAR
might enhance the stories already being done.
Educate the staff. Conduct a brown-bag session to explain to the staff what CAR is and,
more importantly, what it isn’t. Offer your assistance in teaching others the skills they
need to do CAR on their own.
Make time for CAR. In today’s day and age, bodies in the newsroom are few and far
between. Editors are seemingly more interested in having meetings covered and daily
deadlines met. But CAR doesn’t have to take a lot of time. It can be done on deadline if
you know where to look and have a database library on hand. Use your down time (I
know, ha ha) to read about CAR, talk with others who do CAR and incorporate CAR into
your everyday routine.

