Local Property Investigations
NICAR Charlotte
3/15/2003

USING CAR TO TRACK PROPERTY TAXES
If you were a reporter covering a major, competitive story, and you
developed a source that provided you with the inside dope time after time, you’d
probably cherish that source.
I’ve come to feel the same way about my property records. No, I don’t take
my database out for a drink or anything like that. But I take care of it – because it
takes care of me.
I’d like to talk about a few of the enterprise stories I’ve broken in the past
year based on a proprietary analysis of land records. But first, let me explain how it
all begins – with some routine, often boring, data harvesting. Here are some of my
database friends:
The Tax Roll: This is the most fundamental of all datasets. In New Jersey, we
can a list of every parcel the state, along with the owner’s name, the assessed value
of the land, the land use (residential, industrial, farm etc.) and a few other key
fields.
Usable Sales: This is a list compiled by the state of all real estate
transactions. It’s better than other sources for compiling stats because the state
notes which sales are based on market conditions and which have extenuating
circumstances – such as an interfamily transfer. The state doesn’t do this because
they want to help me, but because they have an obligation to make sure each town’s
assessments can be equalized to a common scale of “true value” – a task they
accomplish, and which we mimic, by comparing sale prices to assessments and
calculating an assessed-to-market ratio for every community.
Tax Tables: The state also has a statutory obligation to publish an “abstract of
ratables” – a town-by-town summary of various budget and tax data. The most
important of these numbers, of course, is the tax rate by which land taxes are levied
in the community.
By examining these datasets, and by compiling historic data, we’ve been able
to produce a steady stream of enterprise. Such as:
STORY: The Losing Race to Curb Property Taxes
SYNOPSIS: Many towns “chase” ratables, hoping that growth will keep a lid on
taxes by bringing new taxpayers into the fold. But an analysis shows that the towns
that gained the most ratables in the 1990s experienced, on average, the largest
property tax increases.
CAR Component: We married a database of town-by-town equalized values with a
database that contained the average tax bill for each community.
STORY: Industry’s Shift to Suburbia Helps Gut Cities
SYNOPSIS: As the population continued to move away from New Jersey’s urban
centers, so to did the state’s industrial base.
CAR Component: We calculated the value of land by segment for 1990 and 2000.
Then we grouped communities by type – rural, suburban and urban – and looked at
the shifts in valuation by segment.

Robert Gebeloff
The Star-Ledger
Rgebeloff@starledger.com

Local Property Investigations
NICAR Charlotte
3/15/2003

STORY: Jersey Budget Mess Hits Homeowners
SYNOPSIS: 2002 brought the largest average tax increase since the 1980s, an
analysis showed.
CAR Component: While state officials would not release official stats until Feb.
2003, we got a big jump on this story by going to all 21 county tax boards and
collecting the tax rate info ourselves. We then linked this back to our new statewide
taxroll and calculated new average tax bills for every town, which we compared to
historical data.
STORY: Land Taxes on a Grand Scale
SYNOPSIS: A revaluation in exclusive Millburn caused seismic shifts in the tax base.
CAR Component: We compared the new Millburn tax roll with the prior year’s, then
geocoded all the addresses. We then overlaid a neighborhood map – Millburn block
groups carved into neighborhoods with the assistance of a local expert – and
generated neighborhood level stats.
STORY: Property Taxes – Measuring Your Pain
SYNOPSIS: Land owners in towns with the highest tax bills are not the ones who
suffer most under New Jersey’s tax system. A “tax trauma” index shows towns
where taxes really sting the most.
CAR Component: We built an index based on three factors: The average tax bill,
the tax bill in relation to the market value of the property on which that amount is
paid, and the average income of a homeowner in each community.
These were all stories we came up with simply by having data on hand, taking the
time to analyze it, and keeping current with the news – property taxes is a huge
issue in New Jersey.
And best of all: The next Census won’t produce results until 2011 – but you can do
plenty of real estate data stories up until that point. (:

Robert Gebeloff
The Star-Ledger
Rgebeloff@starledger.com

