Internet On The Fly
NICAR 2002
Neil Reisner/Miami Daily Business Review
nr@nreisner.com
“Once in awhile you can get shown the light in the strangest of places if you look at it right.”
Scarlet Begonias
R Hunter/J Garcia

You can’t find everything on the Internet, but you can find a whole lot of it. It’s a matter of knowing how
to look for it. Note…that word how. How, not where. But in a strange kind of cyber-Zen logic, learning
how to search means simultaneously learning where to search and when not to go online at all. Hard copy
dictionaries and telephone books remain useful and my well-thumbed Almanac is a treasure-trove of
useful information.
First things first
Learning to surf is a lot like learning to drive. You start by driving around the block and you practice a lot
before you hit the Interstate. In both cases, it’s a matter of practice.
Here are four keys:
• It’s Playtime!
Spend as much time as you can just clickin’ around. Start from a site you know, one that someone’s
told you is a good place to begin – there are a few listed below – and see where it takes you.
• Bookmark the ones that work for you
When you find something good, make sure you can find it again by bookmarking it. In Internet
Explorer, click on “Favorites” and “Add to Favorites.” In Netscape, click on “Bookmarks” and “Add
Bookmark
•

Treat the `Net like your beat
When you get assigned to a new beat, the first thing you do is make the rounds. You talk to your
predecessor, check clips and “round up the usual suspects” as you get up to speed on sources and
issues. Do the same online.

•

Don’t search blindly, know where you’re going
Take advice from Chris Callahan, author of “A Journalist’s Guide to the Internet”:
When looking for information on the Internet, most of us reach for our favorite search engine. But
for deadline reporting, search engines should be our last resort, not the first.When faced with tight
deadlines, try a more targeted approach.
ü First think through about what kind of specific information you are seeking.
ü Then, ask yourself where that information is most likely to be in its most comprehensive
and reliable form.
ü Finally, make an educated guess at the Web address and go directly to that site.

On the Fly/Reisner/Page 2 of 4

Main Entrances
Here are some good places to start. No one is the best…use the one that works best for you.
•

IRE Beat Page
http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/initial-search-beat.html
Maintained by IRE and NICAR, searchable by beat.

•

A Journalist’s Guide to the Internet
http://reporter.umd.edu/
From Chris Callahan, who’s also assistant dean at the University of Maryland’s journalism school.

•

Reporter’s Desktop
http://www.reporter.org/desktop
By Duff Wilson, renowned investigative reporter for The Seattle Times.

•

Power Reporting
http://powerreporting.com/
From journalist Bill Dedman.

Indices/Search Engines
Know the difference between them. Indices are created by humans; they’re organized but not complete.
(Nothing is really complete, of course, but you know what I mean.) Search Engines are compiled by
software; they’re less organized but more complete.
•

YAHOO
www.yahoo.com
The mother of all indices, it started in a trailer on the campus of Stanford University in February 1994.
Bet you didn’t know that YAHOO stands for “Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle.”

• My Way
www.myway.com
Among the newest indices on the block, it’s like YAHOO but without all the ads. I like it a lot.

• Google
www.google.com
So much the “search engine du jour,” that “to Google” has become a verb. Got its reputation because in
it ranks sites by the number of sites that link to them, figuring that the more popular a site is the better
it is. Learn to use its advanced search screen. And check out the link to “Google Services” to find
specialty Googles that search only university or government sites.
•

Search Engine Watch
www.searchenginewatch.com
Check out the “Search Engine Listings” to learn more than you think there is to know about the
beasts.

On the Fly/Reisner/Page 3 of 4

Utility Sites
Just plain useful places that everyone should know about.

• Search Systems
www.searchsystems.net
A simply amazing compilation of government information categorized by county, state and the
country.

• WHOIS
www.allwhois.com
Find out who owns what domain anywhere in the world.

• U.S. Census Bureau
www.census.gov
An enterprising reporter could go an entire career without leaving this site.

• FedStats
www.fedstats.com
A gateway to most federal statistic-reporting agencies.

• FirstGov
www.firstgov.com
A gateway to the federal government

Do It Yourself
Organize your bookmarks into a personal portal of the sites you use all the time. Spend time surfing
around them…you never know what new jewels you’ll find. Here are a few of mine:
•

Portico
indorgs.virginia.edu/portico/
From the development office at the University of Virginia, the folks who raise money for university
programs. Has an especially good listing of property assessor sites nationwide.

• My Florida
www.myflorida.com
Pretty much every state has it’s own portal site. Find yours and surf around. I find new stuff all the
time on mine.
• Yahoo Finance
finance.yahoo.com
A must if you cover business. Customize so you can track companies on your beat.

• Martindale-Hubbell
www.martindale.com
The best lawyer locator.

On the Fly/Reisner/Page 4 of 4

Learn to Save/Download
“File/Save As” Is Your New Best Friend
It’s not hard – at least most of the time – to save data from the web to your computer. For a good intro,
check out a handout by Debbie Wolfe of the St. Petersburg Times. Find it at canyonwolfephoto.com

You Must Remember This
• Always ask whether the `Net is the bet place to look.
• (learn OR understand) “boolean logic”
• Scan magazine racks. “The 100 Best Web Sites” is standard fare for computer magazines. I found a
neat one yesterday in PC Magazine, www.lii.org, “Librarians’ Index to the Internet,” created by
volunteer librarians and based at the Berkeley Public Library in California.
• Focus, focus, focus!!!
nr@nreisner.com
www.nreisner.com

