CAR and Immigration
NICAR 2003, Charlotte
Sarah Cohen, The Washington Post, cohensh@washpost.com

The Agency Formerly Known as INS and the Student
Visa program
After the first attacks on the World Trade Center in 1993, Congress instructed the
Immigration and Naturalization Service to improve the tracking, enfocement and
issuance of student visas. Nearly a decade later, the mandated new system was
imminent, just when the INS was moved to the new Department of Homeland Security
and split into two major pieces.
In January 2003, The Washington Post ran, “INS Moves to Plug Student Visa Leaks” -a story partly about a group of 23 language schools in the Los Angeles area that
accounted for 1 of every 50 student visas in the U.S. -- 33,000 over five years.
The story was based partly on a series of data files (it’s hard to call them “databases” in
most cases) dribbled out from the Immigration and Naturalization Service’s FOIA office
over nine months.
One set of spreadsheets listed the more than 65,000 schools allowed to issue
documents needed to enter this country and stay for up to five years -- the schools didn’t
have to be accredited and could be on the list of schools banned by Dept. of Education
to take federal funds. INS used its own criteria to approve the schools.
Another listed counts of students by school for each year from 1996 through the middle
of 2002, though the agency declined to provide the school code it uses, only the name in
its database (more on that later).
The last database, which was the only one that actually was provided in pure data form,
listed each student visa that was a “change of status” -- about 7 percent of the total visas
issued over more than five years.
That final database contained many details we doubted we’d get about the I-20s:
nationality, length of stay, date of birth and the name of the school official who signed
the form.
There’s no point in going into much more detail. The database is defuct now, and INS
acknowledged that it was so rife with errors that following individual students was
impossible. (It did not, however, contest the general results we obtained from our
analysis. We were careful not to make it sound more precise than it was.)
Beginning in February, the old INS, which has now been absorbed into the Homeland
Security Department, began insisting that educational institutions use its new Student
Exchange Visitor Information System, or SEVIS. The new, integrated system seeks to to
track more accurately both schools and their students.

SEVIS contains:
“I-20s” - The form issued by schools that a student can convert to a visa at embassies
around the world or at immigration centers here. It contains the code number for the
school (more about that later), the name of the school, information about the student,
and information about the planned “course of study”. A “designated school official,” or
DSO, is required to sign the form. A school can have no more than three DSOs at a time
and must inform INS who they are.
This is the document that effectively lets anyone stay in the country for up to five years.
There are separate rules for “F”, “M”, and “J” visas. The Post only looked at the first two,
which are for academic programs (including language schools), and trade schools (like
flight schools).
“I-17” data -- This is the form that schools fill out, and the supporting information they
provide, to get permission to issue I-20s. The school is required to provide information
on the curriculum, the physical facilities and the officials who work there. There is no
criminal background check, though the former INS says it investigated trade and
language schools more carefully than accredited academic institutions. Accreditation can
allow the school to bypass stringent reviews.
Follow-up data: Schools are required to report when a student arrives for class. They
are supposed to alert the government when a student fails to enroll or switches to parttime, since the visa is supposed to be revoked.
That’s the theory.
In reality, INS has never done any of the required monitoring. I-20s had no unique
number on them, so once they were issued they could be freely copied. A student could
get as many I-20s as he wanted. The State Department officials in embassies and the
Customs Service agents in the airports didn’t even have a list of the schools approved
by the agency to accept students.
Schools were supposed to be visited before obtaining the right to enroll foreign students.
Most never were. Schools were supposed to turn over enrollment records to INS when
asked, but the INS only asked once in the past 15 years. Even then, it had no idea what
to do with the information, so it told schools that were voluntarily reporting no-shows to
stop.
Leading up to the new system, INS never issued guidelines for trade schools, so it
automatically rejected all of their applications at first, but then had to allow them to keep
issuing visas for some period. Contractors visited some language schools, but told them
of the appointments ahead of time and spent only a couple of hours on site reviewing
files selected by school employees. By the time of the switchover to the new system,
only about a quarter of the schools actively enrolling foreign students had been
approved; the agency had denied no applications.
Now that INS has been split in half, with visas “immigrant services” in one agency, and
enforcement in another, the duties of collecting and using the data the government
collects have been split.

Sources for local immigration data
Immigration stores run the gamut from abuses of power by officials who have total
control over the lives of immigrants, to failure to follow laws intended to protect borders,
to the vast demographic changes that a new wave of immigrants has brought to
communities around the country.
In 2002, Washington Post reporter Anne Hull wrote a 4-part series on the vast changes
that the wave had brought to the Atlanta area. Her story, “Rim of the New World”,
focused on four young immigrants who had settled in the Atlanta area and helped
change the historically black and white metropolitan area.
It was reported mainly through in-depth interviews. But Hull’s sources, and her initial
reporting, used a lot of the available local area information on immigration that is
available throughout the U.S.
To make it simple, the Urban Institute will soon publish a report, funded by the Anna E.
Casey Foundation, called The New Neighbors, A Users Guide to Data on Immigrants in
U.S. Communities. Jeff Passel, one of the authors, agreed to share an early release for
our conference. I’ve attached his chart of major sources.
The most important recent change to the standard datasets is the redaction of Zip codes
in the INS Legal Immigration public use file -- the one contained in the NICAR collection
and the source of many local stories on the range of immigration.
However, Passal has said that the statistical chief of the old INS has agreed to consider
creating basic counts of immigration by country of origin, Zip code and year. Although
we know of no one who has requested it formally, there is some hope that the local
nature of this dataset, which includes permanent resident visas issued each year, might
be available again.

Preliminary Draft

Do Not Quote or Cite without Permission

Figure 8: Data Sources on Immigrants for Local Areas
Data source and
availability

Immigrant population
identifiers

Units of
geography

Data on immigrants

Data quality/ other
problems

Census 2000
Summary File 3
(SF 3)

(1) Foreign-born (citizenship,
place of birth, year of entry)
(2) Race and ethnicity
(3) Language spoken at home
(4) English proficiency

National, states, counties,
metropolitan areas, cities,
towns, Census tracts, block
groups

Housing, employment,
education, income,
poverty, family structure

Tabulations
pre-defined by
Census bureau,
topics limited

Census 2000
1 and 5 percent Public
Use Microdata Samples
(PUMS)

Same as Summary File 3

National, states, some
counties and metropolitan
areas, including some
jurisdictions below
metropolitan level.

Same as Summary File 3

Individual records
allow user-defined
tabulations

AVAILABLE SPRING
OR SUMMER 2003

Areas defined:
1% file: 100,000+ pop.
5% file: 500,000+ pop.

Census 2000 and 2001
Supplementary Survey
(C2SS)

Same as Census 2000

National, states, some
metropolitan areas

Same as Census 2000

PUMS have
individual records
that allow
user-defined
tabulations. Profiles
include only
pre-defined
tabulations.

American Community
Survey (ACS) – annual

Same as Census 2000 and
C2SS

Same as C2SS

Same as Census 2000
and C2SS

Same as C2SS.

(1) Foreign-born (citizenship,
place of birth, year of entry)
(2) Race and ethnicity

National, some states,
major metropolitan areas
and large counties (limited
samples)

More workforce and
income measures but
fewer housing measures
than Census 2000

Individual records
allow user-defined
tabulations

SCHEDULED for 2003
Current Population
Survey (CPS) – annual
MARCH 1994-2002

The New Neighbors

— 24 —

January 2003

Preliminary Draft

Do Not Quote or Cite without Permission

Figure 8: Data Sources on Immigrants for Local Areas (continued)
Data source and
availability

Immigrant population
identifiers

Units of
Geography

Data on immigrants

Data quality/ other
problems

INS admissions data –
annual

Legal immigrants:
place of birth,
year of entry,
immigration status at admission

National, states, counties,
ZIP codes (through 1998)
metro areas (1999-2000)

Counts of immigrants
admitted, legal status and
residence only

Only legal
immigrants;
“intended residence”
may be inaccurate;
information on first
U.S. residence only

Immigrant children entering US
in last 3 years, by place of birth

School districts,
possibly individual schools

Counts of foreign-born
students in the U.S. for
3 years or less only

Omits 2 generation
children, not all
districts keep records

Public School
Registration Data

Varies by school district

School districts,
possibly individual schools

Counts of foreign-born
students, possibly by
country of birth or
primary language

Not all districts keep
records, access may
be restricted to
protect privacy

Health Department Vital
Records

Mother’s ethnicity, race, place
of birth;
Father’s race and ethnicity

States, counties, possibly
cities and Census tracts

Mother’s and father’s
age, education and other
demographics;
birth weight of child

Missing values on
place of birth, limited
choices for place of
birth/ ethnicity,
access may be
restricted to protect
privacy

Social Service Agencies
Data

Varies by agency

States, counties, service
areas

Counts of immigrants
receiving benefits and
services

Limited to population
receiving services

FISCAL YEARS
1972-2000
Title III (No Child Left
Behind Act), previously
in Emergency Immigrant
Education Program
(EIEP) – annual

nd

LAST SCHOOL YEAR

The New Neighbors

— 25 —

January 2003

