Building and Analyzing Your Own Database
NICAR Conference, March 2003, Charlotte
David Raynor, Database Manager, The News & Observer - (919)-829-4798 - draynor@newsobserver.com
1. Try to avoid it. Most of what we need already exists in some type of electronic format. But if you have to do it…
A. Will building and analyzing your own database answer your questions? What role will those answers play in
the story or project? Is such a task worth the time and effort?
B. Don’t be afraid to make changes, or even scrap a plan altogether, halfway through the story or project if you
realize it’s not going to work or prove very useful.
C. Quality Control. Know who, if anyone, is going to help you and what their role is.
2. Do some research to make sure no one else has created and/or analyzed such a database. Do you trust their work?
3. A few examples from The News & Observer that yield quick results:
A. Money Machine – A campaign finance database since 1989 of state legislators, the governor and his cabinet,
state judges and, more recently, local offices such as mayor, city council and county commissioner. We acquire the
reports from the State Board of Elections and County Board of Elections (either through printing scanned images online
or by making copies on-site) and key them into a Visual Foxpro database. Key fields include contributor name, address
and occupation/employer, date and amount of contribution.
B. Police Incident Reports – A Visual Foxpro database of incident reports from the 4 major police departments
in the Triangle (Raleigh, Durham, Chapel Hill, Cary). Each department sends weekly or monthly text files or spreadsheets
via email or FTP, which we import into the database. Key fields include incident/case number, location, time, incident
type, responding officer.
C. Triangle in Service – A spreadsheet of military personnel from the Raleigh-Durham MSA who are known to
be serving in some capacity abroad. We receive press releases from the various branches of the military and key the
pertinent data from the release into a spreadsheet that is then put on our intranet. Key fields include name of
serviceman/woman, parents’ names, location of service (if known), base, unit and station.
D. Phone records and Expense accounts – Most of this data you should be able to acquire electronically. But for
one story about a N.C. TDA (Technological Development Authority) lobbyist, we keyed in his phone records and expense
accounts. This allowed us to show how often, and when, he was calling other clients, family members, etc. and how he
was spending big bucks on everything from living expenses to limousines to fancy meals and then charging it to TDA.
TDA is a private, nonprofit that fosters economic development through early investment in small, start-up companies.
They receive 45-70% of their operating revenue from the state.
E. “Case Closed” series
A three-part series we ran in February about a)SIDS deaths in day cares b)illegal day cares c)the lack of
cooperation and enforcement between the state, county social services, law enforcement and the courts regarding deaths
and abuse and neglect in N.C. day cares.
-DCD (Division of Child Development) provided us with a spreadsheet for the 33 day care deaths from 1999 to
2002 showing facility name and id, county of death, death date and cause of death, but no names. We also acquired a copy
of their master database which contained 10 years of information on 9,500 licensed day cares, including violations
(240,000 records), complaints (32,000 records), visits (104,000 records) and actions taken (16,000 records).
-To get the names, we matched their spreadsheet with the NC Death database based on date of death and county
of death and limited the matches to deaths 6 years of age or under. We then confirmed the matches through other sources
such as autopsy reports, the abuse/neglect filings, other parents and daycares and obituaries.
-Combining analysis from the master database with information from the autopsy reports and the abuse/neglect
filings for each of the 33 day cares, we created a master spreadsheet which proved useful in writing the story, developing
graphics and creating short profiles of each of these deaths.
-Finally, we created our own version of DCD’s database and put it online. We showed what they didn’t show:
specific, more descriptive violations and complaints for each day care.
-Links to “Case Closed” series:

http://www.newsobserver.com/daycare/ (our stories and database)
http://www.dhhs.state.nc.us/dcd/ (DCD’s website and day care database)

