Spatial analysis for investigations: What you need to know
By Matthew Waite – NICAR National Conference, Charlotte N.C. – March 14-16, 2003
Here are your warnings about spatial analysis:
1. It’s hard.
2. It’s expensive.
3. It’s hard and it’s expensive.

The Cost Part
Most NICARians are ArcView users, and ESRI has a very powerful extension to
ArcView called Spatial Analyst. It’s more than most newsrooms will never need. It’s also
$2,500 – more than ArcView itself cost. You can get information on Spatial Analyst at
http://www.esri.com/

What can you do with spatial analysis?
The single most editor-friendly use for spatial analysis is density analysis. With density
analysis, you can take a map of thousands of dots (car accidents, car thefts, robberies,
vandalism, you name it) and turn it into a map that looks like TV weather radar. The
darker the blob, the higher the whatever. Anyone, including editors, can understand it.

The downside: Books upon master’s theses upon white papers upon technical articles
have been written on density analysis and what it means. The consensus: There isn’t
one. Each phenomenon is different, and there is no simple formula to determine the
elements of a good density map. A lot of it comes down to what makes sense – how
close would you think is too close to live to a sex offender or sex shop. Nerd box
explanations in the paper are a must to explain what you’ve done and why. A police
chief can use density analysis to make it look like drug dealing is rampant. The mayor,
using the same map, can make it look like drug dealers have disappeared from the city.
Thus, before you embark on doing density analysis, you need to do some research:
n Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science: http://www.csiss.org/index.html
A repository for research on spatial statistics, and a trove of good ideas.
n CrimeStat Spatial Statistics program:
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/crimestat.html The software, free from a
National Institute of Justice grant, is great, but the real resource is the instruction
manual. An excellent tutorial on spatial statistics, density analysis and the
mathematics behind it.

The future

Truthfully, I and other Spatial Analyst users in NICAR-land have yet to really use the
software for all it’s worth. There are hidden stories out there that the software can find –
it’s just a matter of learning how to do them. Spatial analyst deals with data like
elevation models and other elements that can be turned into a grid. It can then integrate
them with point files, like fires or mudslides or whatever. There are stories in how
development has affected the environment. The right story – with the right data – just
hasn’t appeared yet.
From ESRI's product literature:
Cell-based raster data sets, or grids, are especially well suited to represent traditional
geographic phenomena that vary continuously such as elevations, slope, precipitation,
and so on. Raster data sets can also be used to represent less traditional types of
information such as population density, consumer behavior, and other demographic
characteristics. In addition, grids are the ideal data representation for spatial modeling
applications such as hydrologic modeling or evaluating the dynamics of population
change over time.
It's hard, and it's expensive, but density analysis alone is worth the price of admission.
Readers, viewers and even editors can instantly understand a density map.
Good luck.

