Campaigns and politics: Donors, expenditures and lobbyists
2003 Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference, Charlotte, N.C.
Finding stories in local campaign finance data
Dave Gulliver, Virginian-Pilot
Dealing with the data
Odds are you’ll have to type the data into your own database. Plan way, way ahead.
1. Check before you type. Some candidates may keep their reports in Excel. They should be willing
to share—they have to disclose it anyway.
2. Get copies of reports. Get completed ones from the last election, and blank forms from this
election. Last year’s form will alert you to potential problems, like donors with two names (John and
Jane Doe) and/or two addresses (P.O. Box 123 and 456 Main Street).
This year’s forms will show you the categories of information you’ll get – which leads to…
3. Plan on what you need. If you’re not going to analyze contributions by occupation or employer
– a good idea if they’re rarely filled in – don’t waste time typing them. If you want to look at
expenditures – where there are lots of good stories – plan on extra time.
4. Build your database. Lay out your database in the same order as the paper forms – it makes
input much faster. Build in some “flags” – fields containing with one letter – allowing you to pull a
class of donor easily. Example: A “bizflag” field, where “Y” denotes a corporate donor.
5. Consider coding. Sort of an advanced “flag.” You can assign codes to the donors, allowing you
to look at donations from types of employers, etc. Good sources for a coding scheme are available at
www.vpap.org and www.crp.org. But you’ll need to teach people how to use the codes.
6. Think about using a front-end. Front-ends look like the Web pages you use to buy books or
plane tickets. They can minimize typing and mistakes. A good way to learn is an Access tutorial
created by the Baltimore Sun’s Mike Himowitz: www.himowitz.net/html/front_ends.html
One feature Mike doesn’t discuss is the “combo box.” In essence, it’s a little pull-down menu on
your form, which fills a field in the database. It draws from items you put in a lookup table – like
candidate names – so you don’t have to worry about inconsistent typing.
7. Recruit help. We threw six reporters and an editorial assistant at five cities’ data….
8. Expect surprises. … and it almost wasn’t enough. We eventually typed in 2,300 contributions –
60 percent more than in the previous election.
Finding the stories
They’re everywhere, and they’ll vary with your local issues, but some examples:
Interest groups. If you code the donors, you can look for showings by certain groups. We found
development interests giving heavily to a builder running against an environmentalist.
Same-address donors. We found a dozen different small businesses – all with the same address –
all giving to a candidate. Turned out their landlord was a major supporter. And this is a classic way to
look for “directed” giving by a business’s employees.
Same-date donors. Often, it’s a bunch of people at a fund-raiser. Talk to them to find out who
sponsored it. You may find an interest group behind it.
Late n’ large. One of the few good points of Virginia election law is the near-immediate reporting
of large donations close to Election Day. It can signify a candidate in trouble, and point you to the
reliable donors the party taps at the last minute. The second-biggest donor to the Republican
candidate for governor was a Tennessee pharmaceutical CEO.
Airfare. A lot of in-kind gifts are dinners and office space, but free airfare on a company plane can
have a huge monetary value, and it’s crucial in a tight campaign. Look for other oddball stuff.
Street machine. If your expenditure data is detailed enough, you can tell who was paid to “flush,” or
get out the vote. It’s old-time politics and a measure of a candidate’s support and organization. How
big was the staff? Did they deliver their precincts? Who were they? Match against payroll data to find
public employees. Was there pressure?

