Yes, You CAN Get These in Connecticut!
(The law says so!)
Stephanie Reitz
The Hartford Courant
(860) 284-7316 or reitz@courant.com

Motor vehicle grand lists: Held by municipal assessors.
•
•
•
•

Valuable for tracking people, doing trend stories on particular
vehicle types in your community, doing features on unusual
vehicles or neat license plates, etc.
Can be voluminous, depending on municipality size.
For a small town, you might as well get the whole list. If your
computer isn’t powerful enough for the large file from a big city,
strip out the city name (after all, they should be all the same!).
If you’re turned away: Cite the “Brennan case.” (They should
know it, but if they play dumb, here are the basics: the state
Supreme Court ruled in Barbara Brennan’s favor when the
insurance investigator argued that municipalities had illegally
closed off their motor vehicle grand lists).

Records for publicly funded cell phones
•
•
•
•
•

Taxpayers funded the mayor’s or city manager’s cell phone, so they
have the right to obtain records on who was called, when, etc.
Accounts payable usually has these, but don’t be surprised if
you’re sent to the city attorney.
These records look exactly like your own telephone records; don’t
let the municipal officials give you simply payment totals. Demand
the call-by-call statement.
They’re useful for determining who has the mayor’s ear, whether
the privilege of having the cell phone is being abused, etc.
If you’re turned away: Cite precedent. The Courant successfully
received Waterbury Mayor Philip Giordano’s cell phone records
within a day of his arrest, and the FOI Commission has ruled
repeatedly in favor of the Connecticut Post’s quest to get the
records of Mayor Joseph Ganim’s phone.

(more)

CT records
Page 2

Dog Licenses
•
•
•

My favorite! A fantastic people-finder, particularly since it includes
telephone numbers (often unlisted or not found in the voter
registration rolls).
Held by your town clerk. Best time to ask for the list is late
summer, after the renewal deadlines have passed and the list is
freshly updated.
When desperate for a daily local story, you can always do this
time-honored feature: The most popular dog name/breed in town.

City Employees and their Salaries
•
•

•
•
•

Ah, you knew this one already, didn’t you? It’s as obvious as the
voter registration list, right?
Here’s something you probably didn’t know: The list that the
municipal leaders WANT to give you includes the employee, title,
pay rate, etc. The list that YOU want is the same one they use for
W-2 preparation, which includes overtime and perks.
Held by human resources. If they balk, raise hell; they should
expect to be approached for these by now, since it’s been such a
common practice for years.
A side note: Don’t forget that the law also allows you to get
disciplinary records, absence records, and other employee data
(except medical and some other personal data).
If they say no: Cite the Perkins case. That 1993 Supreme Court
case says The rule is that it must be released unless it would be
“highly offensive to a reasonable person, and is not of legitimate
concern to the public.”

Records of Delinquencies
•
•
•

Overdue parking tickets, overdue taxes, even the list of library
book scofflaws – it’s all public, it’s always potentially newsworthy,
and it’s always a tool for your ‘people finder.’
In smaller communities, don’t be surprised if the library
delinquency list isn’t computerized yet. But in most suburban
towns, it is (West Hartford even puts its list on the Web).
If they say no: Again, raise hell and get your editor involved.
(more)

CT records

Page 3

The Municipal and Education Budgets
•
•
•

Another oldie but goodie. Helpful not only at budget season, but
also midyear or on deadline when checking information about a
particular program or department.
Check the math! Did your town or city officials calculate the
percent increases correctly? (Don’t take it for granted).
Compare accounts over several years to determine whether
spending priorities seem a little out of whack (sports teams vs.
textbooks, for instance).

Police Dispatch and Incident Stats
•
•

We still can’t get the actual police reports themselves, but we’re
entitled to press releases (which, unfortunately, often are short on
news) and unfettered access to the incident logs.
And don’t forget: They have to compile statistics every year listing
the number of crimes in each category, their clearance rate (how
many they solved through arrest or other means), etc., for the FBI.
Get that! Great trend stories!

Health Inspection Information
•

•

Some communities do their health inspections in-house; others are
part of regional health districts. They review everything from
restaurant cleanliness to air quality, well water quality and even
landfill gases.
Researching the most “dirty” restaurants is always a potential
story, but be sure to look at more than one inspection. Review
several inspections for the establishments and determine the
average score over time.

Some online FOI resources:
Connecticut Freedom of Information Commission
Provides information on Connecticut open meeting and public records
laws, commission and court decisions, how to appeal an agency’s denial
of a records request, and more.
http://www.state.ct.us/foi/
(more)

CT records
Page 4

Connecticut Foundation for Open Government
A non-profit foundation that sponsors surveys of open record
compliance, organizes an annual conference with other co-sponsors
(including Connecticut SPJ), and helps provide funds to lobby for openrecords legislation
http://www.ctopengovt.org/
Reporters.Net online link to Connecticut resources
http://www.reporters.net/nfoic/web/resource/conn/conn.html
Other Resources:
www.spj.org
www.accessreports.com
www.rcfp.org (The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press)
www.nfoic.org (National Freedom of Information Coalition)
www.foiadvocates.com
http://www.jou.ufl.edu/brechner/ (The Brechner Center for
Freedom of Information)

