Make A Map Your Way
A beginning class with ArcView 3.0
Advanced Bootcamp, University of North Carolina, May 1997
By Andy Lehren, database administrator for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted
Reporting. Phone: 573-882-0684. Email: andy@nicar.org
Ojectives
•
•
•
•
•

Get familiar with the basic concepts in desktop mapping, and start learning some of
the basic buttons for maneuvering through ArcView.
Learn how to bring a map into ArcView.
Learn how the Legend Editor is ArcView’s analysis engine, how it can change a
map’s appearance, and how it can bring meaning to your information.
Learn how attribute tables can be linked with other data.
Map a statistical index to find the levels of segregation in your community.

A Brief Overview
Mapping with a computer is more than eye candy for your story. It can let you probe
information in ways that cannot be done with traditional computer-assisted reporting
tools like spreadsheets and database programs.
A lot of what makes up a mapping program is familiar ground. Mapping programs still
use data stored in tables. They may let you point-and-click your way through a question,
but the language running behind those mouse moves is still SQL. But these programs go
several steps further -- allowing you to link data to maps, and to slice and dice data based
on where it fits on the globe. But you know all this already.
The goal of this class is to show you how you can take easily available maps into
ArcView, join it to a database, and analyze the data for patterns.
Let’s Get Started: Bringing Maps Into ArcView
ArcView lets you set aside a work area for what you want to do. This work space is called
a project. It’s similar to the way a database works in Access and a project works in the
latest versions of FoxPro. You can store tables inside them, and a whole lot more. Open
ArcView and you start with a screen like this:

We’re about to start a brand-new project. This is something you can do in any part of the
country – looking at the ethnic and racial diversity in your community. You can find the
places where people of different backgrounds live together, and where they live apart
from one another.
Let’s begin by bringing a map into ArcView. The one we’re using comes courtesy of the
Missouri Spatial Data Information Service. Start by double-clicking the Views icon. And
then take your mouse to the Add Theme button on the tool bar. It’s the one just below
Edit:

After you click it, your screen will change to something like this:

Double click on stlouis.shp. This is a map that carves St. Louis based on U.S. Census
Bureau tracts. Tracts, by the way, are not the smallest cut done by Census. The smallest is
a block, which is about the size of a city block. About four to six blocks make up a block
group. And then block groups are combined to form tracts.
When you brought in the tracts map, your view changed, listing something called
Stlouis.shp. But still no map. To actually see it, click into the little raised box to the left
of Stlouis.shp. The click will put a little check mark in the box, and you will now see the
city of St. Louis:

Looking Better
This is not bad, but it could be better. The city is all one color. Here at NICAR, people
thought it resembles a medical book’s version of a stomach, or a turtle going uphill. The
census tracts are there – the craggy lines inside. But they could be more distinct. So let’s
improve our map and get more familiar with ArcView. But first, let’s save what we’ve
done so far. Go to File…Save Project… Save the project in a folder designated by your
instructor. Let’s call it diversity.apr. OK, now let’s proceed with improving our map.
Let’s begin by going on the top menu bar to Theme…Edit Legend… ArcView thinks of a
map like this as a theme, and we’re going to alter the looks of this theme. By the way, you
can also bring up the Legend Editor by double clicking the theme name in the view’s
Table of Contents. Inside the Legend Editor box, begin on the line Legend Type: Click
the down arrow and you get a bunch of choices. Pick Unique Value, because we want to
see every tract clearly. The Legend Editor box changes appearance a bit. A line called
Values Field now appears. Click its down arrow and you get more choices. This is your
first peek inside an attributes table for a map. Attributes are data that goes with the map.
You get some standard choices like Area and Perimeter. Let’s scoot down to Polid. This
is actually a field that combines the state, county, and tract codes into a unique identifier.
You’ll understand why we kept this name later. But for now, ignore the left five digits in
this label if you want to know just the tract number. Now, in the line at the bottom for
Color Schemes, let’s pick something dramatic: The High Seas.

Now we get a table showing a smattering of colors that will help us see each tract more
clearly:

But our map has not changed yet. To do that, hit the Apply button in the lower right
corner. Close your Legend Editor box by hitting the X on the upper right corner. Your
map should look like this:

What’s In The Tool Chest
This won’t make it into your newspaper, but at least it’s colorful and you can see every
tract. Let’s take a few moments getting familiar with some tools and buttons that come
with ArcView. Let’s say you’re curious about that northern most tract. Which one is it?
What data do we have on it so far? To do that, make sure your Identify tool is pressed in.
It probably is as a default setting. The Identify tool is just below File:

With that button pressed in, you can now take your mouse and go and click on that tract.
The cursor is no longer an arrow, but a plus sign with the identify circle next to it. Click
on it and you get a pop-up box:

It doesn’t tell us much, but it gives you a glimpse into how a mapping program thinks.
It divides the world into points, lines and polygons. A polygon includes information on
how it looks – its area and perimeter. This is technical information, but you will find this
useful as you get more into mapping. We really don’t learn much else about this tract
except its U.S. Census Bureau tract number (in this case 1084.00). We’ll fetch more data
for all tracts later on. For now, close your identify box and proceed.
Let’s learn some other handy buttons and tools. There are a couple quick ways to zoom in
and out. Here is a list. Play with them a bit to get an idea how they work.
This button lets you zoom in. Each time you click it, your map gets bigger.
This is its doppleganger. Each time you click it, your map gets smaller.

Click this and the mouse cursor changes into a magnifying glass to zoom in. Just
click and drag a box around the area you want to see close up.
This is its contrary sibling, the demagnifying glass. Just click and drag a box around
the area you want to see reduced.
This hand lets us move the map around. Just click and drag the map.
There are three buttons that let you zoom around based on the theme you’ve selected
and what you’ve done with it. The middle one, shown here, lets you go to the active
theme. In other words, St. Louis is our active theme. It’s the only one we’re working on.
Hit this button and the city fills your view screen.
With this, our mouse’s cursor returns back to the normal arrow.

Checking Attributes
OK, so now you’re a bit familiar with bringing a map into ArcView and altering some of
its appearances. It’s time to take this one step further and learn how we can use this to
analyze data. Let’s begin by looking at the attributes database that goes with
computerized map. To do this, click on the Open Theme Table button:

This pulls up the entire database that defines each census tract. Remember when we used
the identify arrow and saw some information about a particular tract? ArcView was
pulling a record from this table. Let’s organize our screen a bit so we can use both the
table and the map. Drag your table below your map so your screen looks something like
this:

Let’s say we were covering city hall and just got an urban renewal plan that called for
work in census tract 1121, and we were unsure about its location. No problem. Take your
arrow and, in the attributes table, click on the column Polid, as shown above. Now go to
your handy tool bar. Pick the Find tool to help us hunt for this tract:

You get a pop up window asking what you want to find. Punch in the tract number. See
what happens to your map? The tract is highlighted in yellow. We can hunt for things.
ArcView offers more advanced ways to ask questions. This is a shortcut for a simple one.
To get rid of the selection and the yellow highlight, go to the Clear Selected Features
button:

Now that we’re familiar with some of the basics, let’s get some census data to start
digging deeper. Go to your projects window – the one you named earlier – and, with the
Table icon highlighted, hit the Add button. You get a menu choice. Pick motract.dbf. This
is raw census data telling us about the demographics in each tract all in a database. Scroll
through it to get a bit familiar with this data. You may notice it begins with a lot of
geographical codes and information. Scroll past that, to the right, and about half-way you
will begin to see demographic information. The column called Total_pop is the total
population in the census tract. To the right after that is a racial breakdown – white, black,
American Indian, Asian, and Hispanic. These columns are the basis for the diversity
analysis we will soon undertake.
Time To Join
Notice that about two-thirds of the way through the table is a column called Polid. And
remember that, in our attributes table for the map, we also have a column called Polid.
Just like in any database manager, we can join tables. All we need is a field to make that
link. We’re going to use the Polid column in both tables. Here’s how we’ll do it:
Step One: In motract.dbf, click on the gray column header for the Polid column. It should
now be highlighted.
Step Two: In the attributes table, click on the gray column header for the Polid column. It,
too, should now be highlighted. ArcView is particular that you do this operation in this
order; first you click the field in the table you’re joining, then you click the field in the
table you want to attach it to. If you have any trouble with this join operation, please
check that you’ve done this correctly.
Your column header for Polid in both tables should look like this:

We’re all set to join the two tables on the Polid column, which consists of a unique
identification number for each census tract. Go to the button bar and click on the join
button. It looks like this:

You’ve just joined the two tables. Take a look at your work. Scroll through your
attributes table. It now includes the demographic information from the census table. Click
on your map. Go to the top and hit the identify button. Go back to that same northern
most track and click on it. You should now be able to scroll down the pop-up window

and see that 1077 people lived there in the 1990 census. And you can see the racial
breakdown.

< INSERT NORMALIZING FUNCTIONS

Analyzing For Racial And Ethnic Diversity
At the end of this lesson is a detailed explanation on the formula developed by Phil
Meyer and Shawn McIntosh for analyzing diversity. It’s a formula that takes several steps
and looks at the probability for finding someone of a particular race or ethnicity. The
resulting index runs on a scale of 0 to 1, with the smaller number signifying greater
segregation.
For doing this analysis, the thing to know is you’re one column calculation shy of being
able to measure diversity. We’ll need to add a column and fill it with data derived from
our population numbers. Here’s how to do it:
Step One: Click on your attributes table. Go up to your menu bar and pick Table…Start
Editing…
Step Two: Now go over to Edit…Add Field. We get a pop-up window that asks us about
the nature of this field. For the name, call it Diversity. The type should be numeric. The
width can remain 16 digits. For decimal, put in 14. Your result should look like this:

Calculating Diversity

Hit OK. You’ve just added the column that will measure diversity. All we need to do is
finish our calculations. What’s missing is the part that tabulates the racial and Hispanic
vs. Non-Hispanic breakdown. We’ll take care of that now.
Step One: On the menu bar, go to Field…Calculate….
Step Two: You get a pop-up window. Now we pick our formula. It knows we want to fill
in the diversity field. The formula is 1 - (Ph*Pr). Ph and Pr are two columns at the end of
the table that calculate the probability of ethnic and racial diversity. Your result should
look like this:

Hit OK. We’ve now created the index for diversity. It’s time to see how this maps out.
Running A Query
There are a couple ways to run a query in ArcView. For this lesson, let’s begin by
clicking on our map. Now go up to our menu bar, and pick Theme…Query….
We get a pop-up window. Let’s pick our criteria so we’re seeing which tracts have a
diversity index below .2. Pick the field, less than symbol and the first value more than .2:

Hit New Set. Not only does the query highlight the rows affected in your table, it also
maps the results. Look at your map. We can now see the places in St. Louis that are not
deeply integrated. We could run more queries like this. But there is a way that will help
us better analyze our diversity index.
But before we do that, hit your clear selection icon. If you forgot what it looks like, check
your Checking Attributes section in this lesson.
Finding The Ranges
Click on your map. We are now going to rearrange it based on its level of integration.
Go to Theme…Edit Legend….
In the pop-up box, pick Graduated Color for the Legend Type.
For the classification type, pick the field Diversity. For color ramps, pick red
monochromatic. Let’s do some more editing.
For the last row, under Value, change the upper end of the range to .99. We’re doing this
because those with values of 1 are places where no one lives. You can check the data to
make sure.
For our range labels, let’s change these to words: Segregated, Less Segregated, Middling,
Less Integrated, Integrated.
Your results should look like this:

Now for one more step. See the + button? Hit it to add a category. For value, type 1. For
Label, type Not Populated.
Hit the Apply button and close out of the Legend Editor box. You now have a map that
lets you see the patterns of integration in St. Louis. The poorly integrated tracts in the
south tend to be white; the ones in the north are black. But you know how to check the
details of those tracts. You could do this analysis for your city, region or state.
ArcView automatically suggests these ranges based on the natural breaks in the numbers.
It’s a complex formula that you don’t need to worry about now. What it’s doing is finding
clusters of numbers, and trying to avoid breaking a cluster into two different groups.
Also, notice that you can normalize your data. That’s a five-dollar word for doing things
like dividing population by area to find the most densely populated regions in your map.
If you still have time in the lesson, you can add the Stlouisco.shp (for St. Louis County)
map to your current project and look at its levels of integration. Notice that the county
map fits snugly around the city. Retrace your steps through the process. The data set –
motract.dbf – includes information for those tracts, too.

