Campaigns and politics:
Donors, expenditures and lobbyists
Derek Willis
The Center for Public Integrity
NICAR 2003
Working with Electronic Filings
Remember what isn't in the electronic files - especially the FEC's unique ID
present in the FTP data. If you're looking to maintain an in-house database of FEC
data, you'll be pleased at the timely availability of electronic filings and the fairly
simple task of importing the data. But beware: the electronic filings (1) have both
more and less than the standard downloads from the FEC's FTP site (2). More in the
sense that you'll often find both employer and occupation information (when it is
filled out) but less in that the familiar FEC Record Number - the unique ID for each
contribution - is not there. Each electronic filing has a unique ID, but that's generated
by the filing software, not the FEC, which has its own generator.
A tip: to avoid confusion, don't mix entire sets of contribution data. If you can,
keep one set of tables for the older FTP files and another for the electronic stuff. If you
want to combine the information, use a temporary table or make sure you add a field
that contains the name of the source file, should you want to replace an electronic file
with the next week's FTP update. This sort of "modular" approach also works well if
you want to analyze state, local and federal data at once.
527 Committees
At least some of the post-BCRA political action will be among section 527
committees, which report to the IRS (3) using forms familiar to most FEC veterans. The
filings going forward should be pretty easy to sift through - most should be filed in
electronic format, although that doesn't mean you'll get into a spreadsheet with much
ease. The Center for Public Integrity is having some key-punched because many are in
PDF format.
The main task in dealing with 527 data is weeding out unneccessary
committees. Hundreds of state and local committees began filing in 2000 and 2001,
mistakenly thinking they were required to do so. They weren't. The upside is that
you'll find electronic or PDF filings from many committees, which can be helpful if
you're researching out of state connections or donations. The big downside is that the
entire collection process is a mess. The IRS at times assigned multiple "unique" IDs to

1

committees and does not collect information in the same way the FEC does. In fact, it
doesn't do much with the data at all, although the agency is working on a revamped
disclosure site to be unveiled later this year.
When using the IRS site, be sure to stick to the basic search page (3) rather than
the advanced search page (4), which only will search electronic filings.
New Forms!
With a new campaign finance law comes new filing forms (5) covering
independent expenditures (Form 5), 24-hour notices (Form 9), candidate's use of
personal funds late in the campaign (Form 10), opponent's use of personal funds late in
the campaign (Form 11) and the suspension of increased contribution limits caused by
the use of personal funds (Form 12). All of them prominently feature the candidate or
committee's ID number at or near the top of the form, and all can be filed
electronically. The data on the FTP site, thankfully, remains the same. Meanwhile, the
new law has standardized the filing schedules so that congressional campaign
committees will file on a quarterly basis in odd-numbered years and monthly during
even-numbered years. National party committees must file monthly and may not
change their filing frequency, while state and local party committees have to file
monthly if they engage in federal election activity as defined by BCRA. Other PACs corporate, labor or independent, are not affected by these changes.
Internet Update
The FEC recently unveiled a new disclosure system on its website (6). This
system provides a more attractive way to get into the data for people unfamiliar with
the raw data, but it may be confusing to those with some experience. That's because
the headings for various "folders" include names like "Index G" and "G Report" which
mean little and aren't fully described. A nice welcome is the "Structure Information"
section which provide a way for users to select certain fields of data and then add
criteria. Unfortunately, the URLs for this new system are unbelievably long and based
on user sessions, so you'll have to start at the same place: the beginning. The FEC has
been upgrading this system and promises big things, including searches across
election cycles (defined by the user). In the meantime, you can still access the scanned
images and query system.
The Senate Office of Public Records now has lobbying filings dating back to
1998 included in its web-based search form (7), which was written by Tony Raymond
of TRKC Inc., publisher of PoliticalMoneyLine.com. That site has an updated list of
lobbying registrations (8) which it plans to sell but is free "for the time being," says
Tony.
2

Web links:
(1) http://herndon2.sdrdc.com/dcdev/
(2) ftp://ftp.fec.gov/
(3) http://eforms.irs.gov/search_result.asp
(4) http://eforms.irs.gov/IRS_Adv_Search_POL.asp
(5) http://www.fec.gov/pages/bcra/bcra_reporting.htm
(6) http://165.193.100.204/Disclosure/
(7) http://sopr.senate.gov/
(8) http://www.politicalmoneyline.com/cgi-win/x_bna.exe

3

