Measuring school performance: Test scores and beyond
Holly Hacker, IRE and NICAR
holly@nicar.org
2003 NICAR Conference, Charlotte

Report cards aren’t just for kids anymore. The federal law called No Child Left Behind
requires states and schools to break down test scores by race, poverty, gender, disability
and language. They also have to publish report cards each year with test scores and other
measures. Most states have tested students and collected other data by school for years,
so it’s possible to look at trends over time.
With all of this data available, don’t just look at schools as a whole. Most schools do a
good job with at least some students. But what about everyone else? Here are some
other areas to break down and examine:
•
•

•

•
•

Gifted and advanced classes. Many states include data on the percent of students
taking gifted, college-prep or Advanced Placement classes. Do those classes
mirror the school as a whole?
Special education placement. Look at the type of disability (learning disabled,
behavior disorder, etc.) and the placement (regular classroom versus separate
one). Do kids who get placed in special education ever leave it, or do they keep
that label through school? How many special ed students graduate with a regular
diploma?
Dropout rates. But don’t take those at face value. Most states report the dropout
rate as a percentage per year. If 6 percent drop out each year, that means close to
24 percent of a class will leave school from ninth grade to graduation. Even then,
dropouts don’t always get counted – they might transfer to an adult school but
then stop coming to class. Try looking at the number of students enrolled in 7th,
8th or 9th grade, then look at the number who graduate. Sometimes that figure is
much less.
Alternative schools. What happens to kids who get put in alternative schools – do
they ever come back to a regular high school? Do they earn a high school diploma
or a GED, which is considered less meaningful?
Limited English proficiency. How long does it take LEP students to move into
all-English classes? Are they as likely to graduate or score well on tests?

When measuring a school’s results, also look at its resources, or lack thereof. For
instance, schools in poor neighborhoods usually don’t do as well -- children from lowincome families simply face more challenges. Look at the racial makeup of the school.
Research shows that highly segregated schools (i.e., 80 percent or more minority) usually
have fewer resources, less qualified teachers and lower expectations for students – and
that affects how well those students perform.

Also consider what other efforts schools are making to help students. Have they applied
for special grants? If so, how did they spend the money, and did it make any difference?
Lots of states require schools to submit plans on how they’ll improve. Are those plans
specific and reasonable, or do they have vague, idealistic goals? Do schools encourage
parents to volunteer in the classroom or sit on committees?

Quantifying results:
•

•

•
•

•

Look at results over time. Any school can have a big decline in the dropout rate,
or an increase in test scores, from one year to the next. Look at results over three
or more years. Sometimes the school that made that big gain one year loses a lot
of ground the next.
Whenever possible, get student-level data. Missouri provided student-level test
scores so it was possible to compare the scores of black students vs. white, boys
vs. girls, special ed vs. non-special ed, etc. The more specific the data, the better
stories you can find.
Get report card data in electronic format. Many states have downloadable files
with test scores, dropout rates, school spending, student demographics and more.
Look at scores by grade or subject. A school might have great scores in science
but lousy ones in reading. Fourth-graders might ace math, but fifth-graders might
bomb it. Those kinds of details can lead to good stories. Is a school focusing on
one subject or grade at the expense of others?
For those comfortable with CAR, try learning regression. It’s a statistical tool that
lets you see the relationship between variables – say, test scores and poverty – and
make predictions based on that relationship. With regression, you can level the
playing field and see how well schools perform after controlling for family
income. To learn more, check out IRE’s online training section at
www.ire.org/training/ and click on “Practice Data Sets” (you must be an IRE
member to access that section). Look at the regression exercise for SPSS.

Web sites to check out
www.ed.gov – U.S. Department of Education
www.nclb.gov – No Child Left Behind (official Dept. of Education Web site)
www.ed.gov/offices/OCR/ – Office for Civil Rights. The OCR collects lots of data
broken down by race, gender, disability and language – such as participation in
gifted & talented programs, discipline rates and test scores.
www.eric.ed.gov -- Educational Resources Information Center. ERIC is the largest
education database in the world, with summaries of more than 1 million journal
articles, studies and other education research.
www.ewa.org -- Education Writers Association. See what other reporters have written on
desegregation, testing, special education, graduation rates and more. The site also
has links to many government and nonprofit sites dealing with education.
www.edweek.org -- Education Week. Check out the annual “Quality Counts”
publication, which includes report cards, data and profiles for each state.

