Getting Electronic Data
Thomas H. Gaumer
Cleveland Plain Dealer
1-800-362-0727, Ext. 4751
tgaumer@plaind.com

1. Try to get as much information about the data as you can with informal methods. It
will help you when you formally request the information because you’ll know what it
is and how it is kept. Be sure to learn how many records the data has so you can be
sure you are getting them all.
2. Know your rights under the law.
3. Take some time to learn basic computer skills. You don’t want to look stupid when a
data person tells you the file is 10 megabytes, for example.
4. Learn how to move files from one program to another. Maybe you want a file in
Access and they say they’ll give it to you only in Excel.
5. Be as helpful as you can. Often a reluctant bureaucrat simply is using that as a cover
for not knowing how to do something. Offer to help them if necessary.
6. Know about how much you should pay for the file. Expect to pay something, but
know your rights under state law. Generally, the law is that a custodian of public
records is already being paid to store records and make them available; you shouldn’t
have to pay again.
7. Be nice. That gets you a lot more than not being nice and forcing the other side to
bristle from the start.
8. Learn who knows data within your company. Often that person can help you find
what you want. For example, when I first got into this years ago, I learned that our
market research department had people who had worked with census data and were
willing to help me.

Excuses You’ll Hear
1. We’ve never done that before. (This will be your first chance)
2. It can’t be done. (Why not?)
3. The data you want is in a special proprietary program. (You want the data, not the
software). Almost every program has a way to export data, probably to a text file.
Offer to find out how their program works. In the worse case scenario, suggest that it
might make a great story and help them by writing a story that they cannot do what
other departments of government can do.
4. It will cost you $100,000 or some such amount. (Ask for a breakdown of costs).
Know the law to know what they can charge you.
5. The information you want contains confidential information such as social security
numbers. (Most programs can redact certain columns).
6. You might misunderstand the data. (Does that mean we should not cover a city
council meeting because we might “misunderstand” legislation being passed?)

Helpful Web Sites
www.rcfp.org -- Reporter’s Committee for Freedom of the Press. Has access laws for
every state.
www.ire.org -- Check out the FOI Center and Resource Center.
www.spj.org -- Check Resources and then FOIA.
These are just a start. There are numerous other journalistic web sites containing
all sorts of information about your rights to information, both on paper and electronically.

