Using census data every day
Paula Lavigne Sullivan
NICAR – Charlotte, N.C.
March 14-16, 2003

Can you outrun a volcano?
Ø More than 48,000 people live within the

mudflow zone, an overall increase of 14
percent.
Ø In the most vulnerable section of the zone,
the population grew by 38 percent from
1990 to 2000.
Ø Students will have 30 minutes to walk 2.3
miles to escape a 30-foot high mudflow
traveling at 50 miles per hour.

How we got the story
Ø Used census block and tract maps with

population data from 1990 and 2000.
Ø Used maps from the U.S. Geological
Survey that outlined the path of the
mudflow.
Ø Used ArcView to put the USGS maps on
top of the census maps to find out how the
population in that area grew over 10 years.

Result
Ø We scared a heck of a lot of people.
Ø County officials passed legislation limiting

development in those zones (i.e. schools).
Ø People became more aware of their
evacuation routes. (We hope.)

Other examples
Ø Courtesy of Ramona Smith, Philadelphia Daily News.

Ø The Denver Post used census data to show how

population had grown within dangerous wildfire
“red zones” marked on the state forester’s map.
Ø (Greensboro) News & Record showed how the
population had doubled in a decade within a
mile of the Piedmont Triad International Airport’s
worst noise zone.
Ø Press-Enterprise in Riverside, Calif., showed
how police deployment had fallen behind a
rapidly growing population while crime grew.

Ø Oregonian explores growth in large families –

building off a 48 percent increase in families with
seven or more people.
Ø Virginian-Pilot finds a census tract with more
children than adults in a public housing complex
and explores the aspirations of parents in
Tidewater Gardens.
Ø Orange County Register discovered a
“transportation gap” between transit available in
white and minority areas.

Yes, more stories
Ø Regions with the highest percentage of people who work

at home were also areas where it was darn cold and/or
rainy.
Ø Despite few improvements to transportation, the
population of the state’s dozens of small islands grew 20
percent.
Ø Local community colleges are flooded with students from
the former Soviet Union, which corresponds with a
growth in Eastern European immigrants.
Ø Children in schools with the worst test scores come from
low-income communities where few people have college
degrees, home values are lower and there are many
more rental homes/apartments.

Ø In a story about a plan to open up more forest

land for loggers, census data confirm the loss of
forest-related jobs, shrinking overall employment
and increasing poverty.
Ø In a school district where 12.3 percent of
students are multiracial, parents and students
are still forced to chose only one race/ethnicity
on enrollment forms.
Ø The city’s most diverse neighborhood is soon to
be the city’s most transformed.
Ø Some of the city’s most low-income
neighborhoods are also the most willing to tax
themselves to build new streets and alleys.

In & Around
Ø We chose about 55 communities within

our circulation area and profiled one each
week.
Ø We selected a few census profile
highlights, including race, ethnicity, income,
home value, etc.
Ø The In & Around feature ran every Monday
on the front of the local section.

Check their facts
Ø Use census data to challenge statistics, surveys

presented by governments and other agencies.
(Do their survey demographics really represent
the demographics of the community?)
Ø Use census data to measure how the diversity of
your city council / police department / school
board compares to your city or county.
Ø Use census poverty data to show which
neighborhoods in your community could qualify
for millions in federal HUD money.

TNT newsroom survey
Ø Half the reporters responded, representing politics,

transportation, business, crime, education, military,
fashion, pop culture, parks, music, family, religion, and
the environment.
Ø Of those who had used census data:

43% used it less than once every 3 months
19% used it once every 3 months
24% used it once a month
14% used it twice a month
no one used it “once a week” or “daily”

Survey (cont.)
Ø Two of 21 people said they used census

data in combination with other data.
Ø How useful was census data?
19% found it extremely useful
43% found it very useful
33% found it somewhat useful
less than 5 percent found it hardly or not at
all useful
Ø About one-third needed data analysis, as
opposed to getting one or two basic facts.

Suggestions: “We need . . .”
Ø More newsroom training on how to crunch

census numbers.
Ø Editors who will point out the use of census
numbers in daily critiques.
Ø A U.S. Census Bureau Web site that is easier to
navigate. (Lots of people asked for this.)
Ø An easier way to compare numbers over time.
Ø More CDPs for unincorporated areas.
Ø More updates about upcoming census data.

Thoughts and your ideas. . .

