Story tip: Biosafety labs
New Threats: Chemical, Biological & Nuclear
IRE Annual Conference, Washington, D.C., June 5-8, 2003
Douglas Pasternak
Senior Editor, Investigative Team
U.S. News & World Report
Telephone: (202) 955-2113
E-mail: dpasternak@usnews.com
Currently there are five BSL-4 or Biosafety Laboratories in the U.S. able to deal with the world’s
most dangerous pathogens, including Ebola, Marburg and Lassa fever. But the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has begun plans for the establishment of a network of new
biodefense labs to conduct research on producing vaccines, diagnostic tests and therapeutic agents that
could help mitigate or prevent the deadly consequences of a biological terrorist attack. The planned
network will consist of two National Biocontainment (BSL-4) Laboratories and ten Regional
Biocontainment (BSL-3) Laboratories that will support Regional Centers of Excellence for Biodefense
and Emerging Infectious Diseases Research.
Scientists at the Nationa l Institutes of Health and U.S. counterterrorism officials believe there is a
dire need for these new labsto develop better defenses against a wide range of deadly biological
organisms. The U.S. plans to spend several billion dollars over the next few years creating new
biosafety labs and updating others. NIH will issue contracts for the construction of these new facilities
later this year. But the proliferation of these new labs also raises a number of security concerns,
including the possible theft of these lethal bio-agents by insiders, the accidental release of these agents
into the local environment and the potential vulnerability of these sites to a terrorist attack.
Sources & Data
•

Centers for Disease Control, Karen Hunter, Senior Press Officer (404) 639-3286; www.cdc.gov
•

•

•

National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health, Ann Oplinger
(301) 402-1663; www.niaid.nih.gov; www.niaid.nih.gov/biodefense

American Biological Safety Association; (847) 949-1517; www.absa.org. Contains links to regional ABSA chapters,
biosafety seminars and conferences, journals and ABSA e-mail discussion groups.
•

Center for Civilian Biodefense Strategies at Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Tara O’Toole, Director; (410) 2231667. www.hopkins-biodefense.org

•

Physicians for Social Responsibility; 1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 1012, Washington DC 20009, Tel:
202-667-4260. Robert K. Musil, Ph.D., M.P.H., Executive Director; Martin Butcher, Director Security Programs;
www.psr.org

The Sunshine Project, Austin, Texas. Edward Hammond, Director (512) 494-0545. The organization’s web-site
contains a detailed listing of existing and planned BSL-3 and BSL-4 facilities with links to non-governmental
organizations opposed to these labs. www.sunshine-project.org/biodefense/lablist.html
•

The Chemical and Biological Defense Information Analysis Cente r. The DOD web-site contains links to the
center’s newsletters, calendar of events regarding chemical and biological related conferences, a bibliography
search section and a resources and products link. www.cbiac.apgea.army.mil

D:\TEMP\IREtipsBIOLABS.doc

