THE HIGH COST OF HARD TIME
Bill Sizemore, The Virginian-Pilot
757-446-2276
bill.sizemore@pilotonline.com
www.pilotonline.com

2003 IRE National Conference
Washington, D.C.
FAST TRACK: Probing prisons

Highlights of a series published in The Virginian-Pilot, 2000
Six years ago, an underdog ex-congressman named George Allen was elected
governor of Virginia in a landslide after riding a campaign that portrayed the
state in the grip of a violent crime wave.
One of his TV ads depicted the sound of gunfire and scenes of gunshot victims
and wailing ambulances. The spot accused Allen's opponent, a former attorney
general, of presiding over ``the largest increase in violent crime in history.''
Overlooked in the rhetorical barrage was a salient fact: Crime in Virginia in
1993, already low by national standards, was on the decline.
On taking office, Allen championed a program to ``halt the reign of terror by
violent career criminals and make Virginia safe again.''
Republicans and Democrats in the General Assembly obliged, passing sweeping
laws that lengthened many criminal sentences, abolished parole and launched
Virginia on a $400 million wave of prison construction.
Today Virginia -- a historically low-crime state -- has a criminal justice
system that stands out as one of the most punitive in the United States and the
world.
It keeps a higher percentage of its residents locked up than 31 other U.S.
states, many of which have significantly higher crime rates. Its incarceration
rate of 640 per 100,000 residents is twice that of South Africa and not far
behind Russia.
It executes more people than any other state except Texas.
And the state keeps a third of its criminals in prison for 20 years to life,
more than 40 other states.
This get-tough policy has diverted hundreds of millions in state funds to
build prisons, constricting the state's ability to reduce traffic gridlock and
move its schoolchildren from trailers to classrooms. Prison spending is growing
twice as fast as spending for colleges and universities. It costs Virginia
taxpayers nearly $22,000 to imprison one inmate for a year -- more than twice
the cost of tuition, room and board at a state university.
It costs up to three times that much to keep the growing number of older
prisoners locked up, further escalating the state's prison bill, which soon will
reach $1 billion a year.
Prisons have become a growth industry in Virginia.
Over the past five years, the state has built six new prisons containing
8,000 cells. It now incarcerates 31,000 Virginians in more than 50 prisons,
detention centers and other lockups from Chesapeake to Big Stone Gap. The
Department of Corrections and related agencies employ nearly 17,000 people -- 15
percent of the state government's work force -- which puts it on a par with
Newport News Shipbuilding, Virginia's largest manufacturer.
Despite Virginia's high incarceration rates, the building boom has far
exceeded the number of state inmates. As a result, the state now imports out-ofstate criminals to fill 4,000 empty prison beds.
And while violent criminals were said to be the target of the state's gettough policy, the swelling of Virginia's prison population has come primarily
from locking up drug offenders, not violent criminals.

Advocates of the policy claim success from the drop in the state's crime
rate, but fail to note that violent crime has dropped even more nationwide.
Fighting crime was a popular political theme in the 1980s and 1990s. Allen
capitalized on that sentiment, and his anti-crime initiatives accelerated a
punitive trend that was already under way in Virginia. Counting out-of-state
inmates, the state's prison population has nearly quadrupled since 1981, placing
Virginia in the forefront of a national movement to put more and more people
behind bars.
``We were coming out of a period of social turbulence -- Vietnam, racial
tension, riots in the streets, drugs,'' said Charles Thomas, a criminologist at
the University of Florida. ``Once they detected that there was this broad fear
of criminal victimization, even though the actual statistical risk of criminal
victimization was declining, the politicians on both sides of the aisle really
began working it. There was competition between Democrats and Republicans, each
claiming to be tougher on crime than the other.''
Crime in Virginia, which already was well below the national average, has
declined 25 percent since 1981.
The rate spiked upward for a few years in the late 1980s, but it never again
reached the 1981 level. It peaked in 1991 and was already on its way back down
when Allen, a Republican, proposed his get-tough policies and the Assembly
enacted them with the support of Democratic majorities in the House and Senate.
Larry Sabato, a government professor at the University of Virginia, said the
overwhelming legislative support for Allen's get-tough program was a matter of
political survival.
``It was the main plank in the campaign, and he was elected in one of the
largest landslides in modern Virginia history,'' Sabato said. ``The Democrats,
who already had been reduced to a small majority, were in no position to oppose
him. ... To vote against that was potentially political suicide.”
Allen, who is preparing a run for the U.S. Senate, staunchly defends his
program. ``It has actually worked very, very well and as we predicted,'' Allen
said.
As a result of his initiatives, Allen said, ``Virginia is much safer for
people to live or to work or to raise their families.''
Many Allen supporters in the legislature echo that view.
``Virginia is the model for the nation when it comes to criminal justice
reform now,'' said Sen. Kenneth W. Stolle, R-Virginia Beach, chairman of the
Virginia State Crime Commission.
An Allen-appointed commission in 1994 found ``no unequivocal evidence that
prevention programs had a crime-reduction effect,'' said Richard P. Kern,
director of the Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission.
Sentences for violent crimes in Virginia today are probably the toughest in
the country, Kern said, and sentences for drug offenses are among the toughest.
The tougher sentences sprang from Allen's 1994 ``truth in sentencing''
initiative, which lengthened sentences for some offenses up to six times what
they were before.
Despite the falling crime rate, the number of Virginians in prison increased
5.9 percent from 1998 to 1999, reflecting the lengthened sentences and the
virtual disappearance of parole.
The Allen program abolished parole for all new sentencings after Jan. 1,
1995. Prisoners now must serve at least 85 percent of the sentence imposed; the
average is more than 90 percent.
In addition, the percentage of prisoners paroled has plummeted from 41
percent a decade ago to 6.5 percent today.
That was by design, Allen said. Since parole couldn't be abolished
retroactively, he said, ``I appointed people to the parole board who shared our
philosophy.'' The result: The board cracked down on the earlier offenders.

Allen and his supporters say there is a cause-and-effect relationship between
his initiatives and the decline in crime since 1994.
``It's just logic,” Allen said. “You have these people in prison; they're not
out committing crimes. It's just common sense.''
But crime has dropped across the country -- in states that kept parole as
well as those that didn't. In fact, the decline in violent crime from 1994 to
1998 was steeper nationwide (21 percent) than in Virginia (13 percent).
There is ample research suggesting that a strong economy and low unemployment
rate may do more to cut crime than denying parole or sending increasing numbers
of people to jail.
Even a scholar cited by Allen's supporters as providing philosophical backing
for Virginia's get-tough program is having second thoughts.
Princeton professor John J. DiIulio Jr., who argued for years that increasing
incarceration cuts crime, wrote last spring in The Wall Street Journal that
``the nation has `maxed out' on the public-safety value of incarceration.''
``Until recently, increased incarceration has improved public safety,'' he
wrote. ``But as America's incarcerated population approaches 2 million, the
value of imprisonment is a portrait in the law of rapidly diminishing returns.''
For the get-tough program to work, Allen and his supporters say the state had
to shift its priority from nonviolent to violent lawbreakers. And they say they
are well down the road to success.
But fewer than three in 10 people locked up in Virginia prisons from July
1997 through June 1998, the last year for which there are Department of
Corrections records, were incarcerated for violent crimes. The proportion was
exactly the same as in 1993, five years before.
Nearly one in four was imprisoned for using or selling drugs, the 1998
records showed.
``Nonviolent drug offenders are driving the increase in the prison
population,'' said Monica Pratt, a spokeswoman for Families Against Mandatory
Minimums, a Washington-based drug-law reform group.
Critics say Virginia's anti-crime policies have been off target, unnecessary
and a colossal waste of money. Funding that could have gone toward improving
Virginia schools and roads has been poured into unneeded prisons, they say.
Even some who supported Allen's plan, like Del. Clifton Woodrum, D-Roanoke,
are troubled by misgivings five years later.
``It's ironic,'' Woodrum said. ``We're now in the position where we have an
excess of prison cells but a deficit of classroom space. We have people being
educated in trailers. I think somehow we've had our priorities get out of
whack.''
The drug war isn’t working
National surveys suggest that the war on drugs, the principal factor behind
the prison boom, isn't working.
In 1998, according to the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse produced
annually by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 10.6 percent of
Americans reported using an illicit drug in the past year. That number has
hovered steadily between 10 and 11 percent since 1991.
State-by-state estimates produced by HHS indicate that drug use in Virginia
mirrors the national pattern.
``There's no indication that our policy of incarceration for drug offenders
has had the desired effect,'' said Kevin Wright, a criminologist at the State
University of New York at Binghamton.
A far cheaper and better-working method, research shows, is therapeutic
treatment.

Research by Rand, a Washington think tank, has found that $1 million spent on
drug treatment would reduce serious crime 15 times more than the same amount of
money spent on expanding mandatory prison terms.
Arizona, the first state to begin treating all its nonviolent drug offenders
rather than locking them up, reported last spring that the new approach saved
more than $2.5 million in the first year and is likely to reap greater savings
in the future. Of 2,622 drug users diverted into probation and treatment, the
report said, 77.5 percent subsequently tested free of drugs.
But there is little emphasis on drug treatment in Virginia prisons. It has
been estimated that as many as 80 percent of state prisoners are drug abusers,
but only 8 percent of Virginia inmates are in drug treatment programs, according
to the 1998 Corrections Yearbook.
Stories of Virginia's imprisoned drug offenders are suffused with seething
resentment, cynicism and despair.
Russell Stone, 37, is serving 15 years for the sale of marijuana and cocaine
and possession of LSD.
Stone says drugs were an escape from pain. He spent much of his childhood in
a series of orphanages and foster homes, a victim of physical, emotional and
sexual abuse.
He has been turned down for parole seven times. He will be due for mandatory
release in April after having spent more than nine years behind bars.
It has been largely wasted time, in Stone's view. He has little to show for
it beyond a G.E.D. and a basic life-skills class. He has had virtually no drug
treatment.
``For somebody who's got a drug problem, locking 'em up and keeping 'em
locked up for years and years doesn't help much,'' he said in an interview.
``The system has failed so many. The politicians all say, `I'm going to lock
'em all up.' They're not telling people about all the guys they're going to let
go who will be more hostile, more bitter, more aggressive and will commit more
serious crimes when they get out because of the way they were treated in here.''
African-Americans bear the brunt
The chances of being swept up by the war on drugs, the principal factor
behind Virginia's prison boom, have a lot to do with skin color.
It is a national phenomenon for which there is no universally accepted
explanation. Theories range from the relative ease of apprehension to outright
racism.
But the statistics are undeniable: African-Americans are arrested,
prosecuted, convicted and imprisoned on drug charges in numbers vastly out of
proportion to their use of illegal drugs.
Although Virginia's population is three-quarters white, its prison population
is two-thirds black. Black Virginians are seven times more likely to be locked
up than whites, according to U.S. Justice Department data.
The disparity is particularly noticeable when it comes to drugs.
Drug offenses, especially those involving cocaine, have accounted for far and
away the fastest-growing share of prison admissions in recent decades.
National drug use surveys show that far more whites than blacks use illicit
drugs.
Six times as many whites as blacks, for instance, reported using cocaine
during the past year in the 1998 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse
conducted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
State-by-state estimates produced by HHS indicate that drug use in Virginia
mirrors the national pattern. Yet, 60 to 65 percent of cocaine felons in
Virginia prisons are black.
A Virginian-Pilot analysis of court records in South Hampton Roads over an
18-month period, from July 1, 1997, to Dec. 31, 1998, found that 71 percent of

drug cases were brought against black defendants. The region's population is 30
percent black.
Black politicians and academics decry the disparity.
``A policy decision has been made by someone that this is the way the law
enforcement community will expend its resources and its manpower,'' said Del.
William P. Robinson Jr., D-Norfolk. ``It's part and parcel of the racial
profiling issue.''
Some critics have raised the alarming prospect that the war on drugs has had
the perverse effect of worsening, not alleviating, crime in the minority
community.
The National Criminal Justice Commission, a group that advocates alternatives
to incarceration, warned in 1996: ``In some urban areas, so many young men are
removed by the criminal justice system that it is increasingly difficult to
maintain the two-parent family as a bulwark against crime.''
The graying of the cellblocks
Virginia prisons are looking more and more like nursing homes.
At Deerfield Correctional Center in Southampton County, old men maneuver the
wide aisles between their cots in wheelchairs. Nurses, not armed guards, keep
watch over the inmates from a glassed-in office and make regular rounds to
dispense their medicine.
This is the new face of corrections in Virginia. The Deerfield prison, with
its gray concrete walls and green roof, resembles a warehouse in an industrial
park. But it is becoming a warehouse of a different kind: one in which to keep
convicts locked up into their 60s, 70s and 80s.
The number of elderly inmates -- those 55 and older -- in state and federal
prisons has more than doubled in the past decade and is expected to keep
climbing in the years ahead. This is especially true in states such as Virginia,
which lengthened many criminal sentences and abolished parole five years ago.
One-third of Virginia prisoners are now serving 20 years to life, making the
state No. 11 in the nation for long sentences.
Already in Virginia, 3 percent of state inmates are 55 and older.
As prisoners age, critics say, the cost-benefit ratio of incarcerating them
grows ever more wildly out of whack.
The National Center on Institutions and Alternatives, an Alexandria-based
organization that advocates alternatives to incarceration, estimates the average
yearly cost of confining an elderly prisoner at $69,000 -- more than three times
the $22,000 spent on ordinary inmates.
At that rate, the cost of keeping a convict behind bars for 20-plus years
could range into the millions.
Robert Lee Taylor is a case in point.
Taylor, 58, is doing a 119-year sentence at Powhatan Correctional Center for
two armed robberies in Portsmouth.
``I'm fortunate,'' Taylor said in a recent interview. ``I'm still in pretty
good health.'' His only medical problem in recent years was a cholesterol
blockage that was corrected by minor surgery.
He has served 25 years and, because his crimes predated the 1995 abolition of
parole, is eligible for release. But parole is increasingly rare for Virginia
prisoners in this get-tough era. Taylor has been turned down eight times -- the
last time despite a glowing report from a counselor concluding that parole
``would be compatible with the best interests of all concerned including those
of society.''
His mandatory release date is 2033 -- ``but I won't make it,'' Taylor said.
He would have served 58 years and would be 91 years old.

By then, based on the $69,000 annual cost estimate for inmates past the age
of 55, Virginia taxpayers would have spent a staggering $3 million on Taylor's
confinement.
Meanwhile, taxpayers who look to prisons as a crime-prevention measure are
getting rapidly diminishing returns on their investment because of the
``burnout'' phenomenon: the tendency for criminal offenders to turn away from
crime as they pass through middle age.
A 1995 federal study of state recidivism statistics found that only 1.4
percent of parolees and probationers returned to prison for re-offending were 55
or older.
Prisons as economic salvation
Increasingly, Virginia's prison system has become a state jobs program for
economically distressed communities.
Most crime occurs where most of the people are: the thickly settled ``urban
crescent'' that extends from Hampton Roads through Richmond to Northern
Virginia.
Yet most of the prisons where criminal offenders do their time are far
removed from the cities, tucked away in hamlets with names like Capron,
Burkeville, Jarratt and Pound. In many cases, the population of the prison is
bigger than that of the town.
Why don't they put prisons where the criminals are?
To find out, follow the money.
To induce a community to accept a prison in its midst, an economic incentive
can go a long way. Many prisons in Virginia have been built in places that
actively lobbied for them because they needed the jobs.
Places like faraway Wise County in the rugged Cumberland Mountains, an eighthour drive from Hampton Roads, where the unemployment rate is three to four
times the state average.
Reeling from cutbacks in the coal industry that was its economic backbone for
100 years, Wise County landed not one but two plums from the wave of prison
building launched by Gov. George Allen in the mid-1990s: Red Onion and Wallens
Ridge, the state's two new ``supermax'' prisons.
``The unemployment situation was so bad, we were almost desperate,'' said
Scott Davis, the county administrator.
As the state began planning its new prisons, local leaders mounted an
aggressive campaign to woo them and came up with some juicy inducements.
In the case of Red Onion, Pittston Coal Co. donated the land for the prison
to the county, which in turn gave it to the state.
The Wallens Ridge prison is owned by the Big Stone Gap Redevelopment and
Housing Authority, which financed the project with tax-exempt bonds and leased
it to the state. Construction was a mammoth undertaking: The builders literally
flattened a mountaintop, scraping off 3.2 million cubic yards of rock and soil
and clearing more than 6,000 trees.
It was all worth it, said Chuck Miller, executive director of the Big Stone
Gap redevelopment authority.
``I know prisons sometimes have a negative connotation, but we're proud of
our prison,'' Miller said. ``When people are hungry and need jobs, things look
different than if we had a robust economy.''
The local prison boosters and the state are all pleased with the outcome,
Miller said.
``They're happy, we're happy,'' he said. ``The people inside are the only
ones who are unhappy.''

SOME REPORTER’S NOTES…
Many of the numbers I used in this project came from sources other than the
state Department of Corrections, which was singularly unhelpful.
I attempted to obtain the department's inmate database -- a detailed snapshot
of the inmate population including names, gender, race, offenses and sentences.
In some states, these databases are now available online. But not in Virginia.
After lengthy negotiations, the department denied my request, employing a broad
disclosure exemption under the state Freedom of Information Act.
Besides complicating the number-crunching job, that setback deprived me of
easy access to inmates -- the human faces I needed to bring the story home to
readers. So I had to use a more laborious route to find them.
I knew from the numbers that the prisons were packed with nonviolent drug
offenders. But how to identify them? I needed names.
I started contacting every advocacy group I could find -- prison reform
organizations, inmate support groups, drug-law reform lobbies. Gradually, names
started trickling in.
I hit a mother lode with The November Coalition, a drug-law reform group that
keeps a national database of drug prisoners. They were able to slice out and
send me a list of those doing time in Virginia.
I also culled some names from a sentencing database the newspaper had
purchased from the state Supreme Court.
I compiled a master list, drafted a form letter and mass-mailed it. Many of
the prisoners wrote back, agreeing to be interviewed. The interviews provided
the humanity I needed.
Pursuing leads that emerged during this project, I subsequently reported on
allegations of abuse by guards at the state's two new supermaximum-security
prisons, where many nonviolent and out-of-state inmates have been housed in
cells ostensibly designed for the ``worst of the worst'' -- violent, disruptive,
escape-prone prisoners. Those allegations have prompted a civil rights
investigation by the Justice Department and a lawsuit by the ACLU.
I also did a follow-up story on pervasive drug trafficking inside prison
walls -- with guards sometimes supplying the drugs.
A postscript: The state legislature passed a bill in 2001 expanding the early
release program for geriatric inmates. Now all inmates are eligible for release
when they turn 60 with at least 10 years served, or 65 with 5 years served.
KEY SOURCES
- U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs): The Justice
Department's statistical arm. Compiles incarceration rates.
- FBI Uniform Crime Reporting Program (www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm): Compiles crime
rates.
- The Sentencing Project (www.sentencingproject.org): Criminal justice think
tank that promotes alternatives to incarceration.
- The Corrections Yearbook (www.cji-inc.com): Annual compilation of data on
jails, prisons and the incarcerated population.
- Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (www.samhsa.gov):
Publishes annual National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
- The November Coalition (www.november.org): Drug-law reform group that keeps a
national database of drug prisoners.
-- Bill Sizemore

