David Knox
Computer-assisted reporting manager
Akron Beacon Journal
Phone: 330-996-3532
E-mail: dknox@thebeaconjournal.com

IRE Better Watchdog Workshop
Cleveland: April 5, 2003

Tips For Investigating State And Local Government:
Know what you want and how to get it
Know what’s in the records – the rules can change.
Three years ago a young reporter pitched a story about racial profiling in Canton, as gauged by
traffic tickets. Several old hands told him it couldn’t be done because race isn’t identified on the
citations. Despite that, he checked and learned that police began noting race on traffic tickets in
1998. The resulting examination of nearly 30,000 cases in 1999 found that Canton police were
ticketing black adults at four times the rate of non-blacks.

Know what you have a right to know – sometimes you’ll be surprised.
In 2000, the Beacon Journal wanted to know why one cluster of Akron public schools was
performing so poorly. One focus of the investigation was the effect of the district’s openenrollment policy, which allowed students to transfer to any school in the district. School officials
couldn’t provide numbers, but we found we could crunch the data ourselves. While Ohio law
prohibits the release of “personally identifiable information” concerning students, there is an
exception for “directory information,” which includes students’ home addresses and phone
numbers. Geocoding the addresses revealed a fifth of the students living in the problem cluster
had transferred to other schools. Furthermore, the students leaving came from census block
groups that were more affluent than those that stayed – an indication that potentially better
performing students were fleeing.

When you can’t get the records, ask for numbers.
Some documents – such as medical records – are specifically exempted from Ohio’s openrecords law. But if what you need are numbers, ask the agency to crunch the records. Be polite
and earnest. When that doesn’t work, grovel.
Last year the Beacon Journal investigated a possible link between the disproportionate number
of black men sent to prison and the upsurge in HIV infections among black women. Data about
how many men entering prison tested positive for the virus existed only in scattered paper
records. It took the prison medical staff five months to compile counts and put the numbers into a
database, using a blind coding system developed by the newspaper to meet confidentiality
requirements. The resulting analysis found the HIV virus was at least nine times more prevalent
in Ohio prisons than in the general population.

Redacted records can be revealing.
Police investigatory records usually are public, but the identity of an uncharged suspect is
blocked out. In many cases, the individual will acknowledge he was the target. There's an
alternative: If the file contains public documents, go to the agency that keeps them and request
unredacted copies. That’s what we did earlier this year to obtain a building permit and other
public documents concerning a home allegedly built for Akron Service Director Joseph Kidder by
a contractor who won an $1 million unbid contract for a city project.

Citations:
ORC §3319.321 Confidentiality of student information:
No person shall release, or permit access to, personally identifiable information other than directory
information concerning any student attending a public school, for purposes other than those identified in
division (C), (E), (G), or (H) of this section, without the written consent of the parent, guardian, or
custodian of each such student who is less than eighteen years of age, or without the written consent of
each such student who is eighteen years of age or older.
1) For purposes of this section, "directory information" includes a student's name, address, telephone
listing, date and place of birth, major field of study, participation in officially recognized activities and
sports, weight and height of members of athletic teams, dates of attendance, date of graduation, and awards
received.
Ohio Attorney General’s Office Sunshine Laws Update (August 2002):
“Information that presents a high probability of disclosing the identity of an uncharged suspect, a person
who has not been charged with the offense to which the record pertains, may be redacted from a record that
may otherwise be released. In the criminal context, a person is uncharged until arrest or indictment. The
suspect need not be a current suspect, which means that an uncharged suspect’s name may be redacted
from the record no matter how much time has passed.”

Essential links:
Ohio Revised Code: http://onlinedocs.andersonpublishing.com
Note: Not all exemptions are contained within the state’s open-records statute itself. The
ORC contains more than 400 separate provisions addressing public records, many of
them defining exemptions.
Ohio Attorney General’s open-record guide:
http://www.ag.state.oh.us/online_publications/2002YellowBookno.pdf

Student Press Law Center state open records request letter generator:
http://www.splc.org/foiletter.asp

Reporters Committee For Freedom of the Press FOIA letter generator:
http://www.rcfp.org/foi_lett.html

RCFP’s Tapping Officials’ Secrets: http://www.rcfp.org/tapping/index.cgi?key=OH
National Freedom of Information Coalition:
http://www.nfoic.org/web/resource/ohio/ohio.htm

