EDUCATION GONE WRONG:
Investigating school systems
How to find the red flags
Jane Elizabeth, Education Editor...............2003 IRE Annual Conference
Pittsburgh (PA) Post-Gazette......................Washington, D.C.
jelizabeth@post-gazette.com
412-263-1510
www.post-gazette.com
Just about every good investigation into schools and education begins with a reporter or an
editor questioning an odd statistic, an unusual practice, an out-of-the-ordinary item on a budget,
an anonymous complaint, or any number of “red flags.”
Here’s what education reporters should check – not just once in a while, but regularly – to find
ideas for stories and issues that need to be investigated.
⊕ Trade publications. Education Week or the Chronicle of Higher Education are obvious. But
find out what the business manager, school psychologist, special education director and
transportation director are reading too, and get on the mailing list.
⊕ Minutes. If you can’t attend a meeting, get the minutes — not just from the big voting
meeting but from committee and subcommittee meetings.
⊕ Budgets. If the “public version” of your school district or college budget isn’t detailed, go to
each individual department and ask for the line-item version.
⊕ PTA and booster organizations. Sometimes these meetings are so small that a reporter’s
presence might be disruptive or resented. In that case, find a parent who will give you meeting
updates or minutes.
⊕ Kids. You don’t have to have any of your own. Talk to them, observe them every chance
you get. On the subway, in line at the mall, at Starbucks, the library, the gym. If your paper
doesn’t have a teen section, think about proposing one or at least holding regular group
sessions with kids in your circulation area.
⊕ List-serves. Education Writers Association has a great list-serve but it shouldn’t be your
only one. There are list-serves for special education, language teachers, science teachers,
substitute teachers, etc.
⊕ Candidates forums. During school board elections, you may not want to write about every

candidates forum, but drop in for a few minutes and see what parents and community members
are griping about.
⊕ State disciplinary boards. Usually, the actions taken against teachers by the state are
public record. But you have to ask. See if you can get on a periodic mailing list of decisions.
⊕ E-mail. Is your e-mail address readily available to readers? If not, ask your editors about
making it more accessible. The best tips often come from parents or school employees.
⊕ Education web sites. Some are more obvious: the National Center for Education Statistics,
the National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers, the U.S.
Department of Education’s No Child Left Behind web site, American Association of School
Administrators. But check out the possibly lesser-known sites: Columbia Teachers College’s
research and service page, National Conference of State Legislators’ education finance
database, Stateline.org’s education page, the Journalist’s Toolbox education page.
⊕ “Clip” services. Education Commission of the States, Eisenhower National Clearinghouse
and Education Week offer either daily or weekly e-mail “clip” services that give you some of the
top education stories published around the state.
⊕ School nurses. Include them in your routine calls to sources.
⊕ School public relations personnel. Is there a local chapter of the National School Public
Relations Association in your area? If so, make yourself available to be a guest speaker at their
luncheon or dinner meetings.
⊕ Food service, clerical and maintenance staff, crossing guards. Get to know them. If
they’re organized, make contact with their union leaders.
⊕ Teachers unions. Keep an updated list of district, local and state leaders. Include them in
your routine calls to sources.
⊕ Your colleagues and neighbors. Be accessible and welcoming to their story ideas, gripes,
rumors. Even a seemingly trivial complaint could indicate a trend.

