Data for the Military Beat
Investigative Reporters and Editors
Washington, DC
June 5-8, 2003

1. The 2000 Census has a variety of useful military data. Probably one of the biggest
crowd-pleasers was Table P40 from the Summary File 3 release, showing the
number of veterans who served in 21 separate periods, ranging from World War II
to August 1990, or later.

Several other Census tables are worth looking at. Table PCT68 in Summary File 4
– currently being released by the Census Bureau – shows the same thing, except
for more than 330 racial, ethnic and/or ancestral groups, ranging from white alone
or in combination with other races to Ghanaian and Lithuanian.

Another potentially useful question from the Census, shown in Table P37, gives
you the number of people living in military quarters in a given area.

The Census Bureau is also in the midst of releasing data from its 1 percent Public
Use Microdata Sample (PUMS), which can be extraordinarily useful – with
caveats – for looking at characteristics of veterans. For example, reporters can use
a very simple SAS script:
data fbass007;
infile 'c:\fbass007.dat';
input
yr
1- 2
hhwt
3- 6
stateicp
7- 8
perwt
9- 12
bpld
13- 17
vetstat
18- 18
;
label
yr="Census year"
hhwt="Household weight"
stateicp="State (ICPSR code)"
perwt="Person weight"
bpld="Birthplace -- Detailed"
vetstat="Veteran status"
;
…

run;
data fbass007a;
set fbass007;
where vetstat=1 and bpld>=15000;
format yr yr.
bpld bpld.
stateicp stateicp.
vetstat vetstat.
;
run;
proc freq data=fbass007a order=freq;
tables bpld * stateicp /missing nocum nopercent norow nocol
out=fbass007freq;
weight perwt;
run;

to generate a table showing the percentage of veterans born overseas and their current
states of residence:
bpld
Mexico
Mexico
Cuba
Philippines
Mexico
Vietnam
Dominican Republic
Mexico
El Salvador
China

stateicp COUNT PERCENT
California
3399829 12.90581
Texas
1632004 6.195118
Florida
604826 2.295931
California
589374 2.237275
Illinois
534492 2.028942
California
376083 1.427618
New York
364963 1.385406
Arizona
364367 1.383144
California
345980 1.313347
California
288846 1.096465

Please be advised, though: The PUMS data can be extremely tricky, and you must pay
attention to the error margins since it’s a sample.
2. The National Archives and Records Administration’s National Personnel Records
Center keeps a computerized Military Personnel Registry to facilitate tracking
down service records for veterans. The registry contains roughly 110 million
entries and takes up 7 gigabytes; Randy Herschaft, an investigative researcher
with The AP, has spent more than a year waging a protracted battle for access to
the entries. So far, NARA has released about 75 million entries, without the
unique identifiers. Still, it’s a start. The database allows NARA, which receives
about 12,000 requests daily, to track down records in storage areas that are the
size of 22 football fields.
This can be useful in speeding the return of service records, but be warned, it’s expensive
and the database is quite incomplete.

3. In preparing for the war with Iraq, The AP’s Josh Romonek and Jesse Garnier
compiled an online casualty database allowing members and AP staffers to keep
track of service people killed in action. The database, which was maintained by
Norm Goldstein, also allowed reporters to analyze various aspects of the KIAs,
such as branch of service, rank, age and incident location. You can also download
the database in text, Access or XML formats.
For more information, go to http://datacenter.ap.org/car/casualtyquery/
The user name is “casualty,” and the password is “iraq2003.”

4. The Department of Veterans Affairs’ National Cemetery Administration is in the
process of verifying all people buried in national cemeteries. They have two
databases; one for verified burials, the other for unverified.
The VA is responsible for 120 cemeteries in 39 states – that is, nearly all except
Arlington, which is administered by the Department of the Army. The database
eventually will include records for more than 2 million veterans buried at the VA
cemeteries.
Here’s an excerpt from the verified database, which is available via FOIA:

5. The Pentagon maintains a list of reserve units called for service in Iraq at
http://www.defenselink.mil. The database is updated weekly, on Wednesdays.
Unfortunately, it’s in PDF format:

The AP’s Josh Romonek has taken the PDF files and converted them into an online
searchable database at:
http://datacenter.ap.org/car/reserves
The user name is “apreserves” and password is “reserves2003.” The reports go back to
Jan. 15 and continue through this week.

6. NICAR will soon begin selling data from the Air Force Safety Center, which
keeps track of all accidents, or “mishaps,” as they’re called. The data is extremely
good for looking at flight accidents that originated at one Air Force Base but that
might have been missed. It lacks a few categories, though; the most important one
is the number of flight hours logged by the pilot.
For a sample of what’s available, you can look at the safety center’s web site:
http://afsafety.af.mil/AFSC/RDBMS/Flight/SEF%20files/FY02_Mishap_Summary.ppt
You can use the database to FOIA for more detail on individual accidents. Be advised,
though, the FOIA office at Kirtland AFB would appear to be fond of black highlighters.
7. It’s always useful to have a copy of a contracts database on hand from NICAR.
The database can help you figure out who builds what, and how much they’re
paid for it. We used the database during the Iraqi war to check on manufacturers
of individual components. Here’s a simple lookup table for part of the database:

8. Finally, an issue worth keeping an eye on. The FAA asks pilots to keep track of
all birds that are struck by aircraft. Sometimes, this has fairly horrific
consequences; in September 1995, several Canada geese were sucked into the
engine of an AWACS plane, killing all 24 people aboard.
That wasn’t the last time it occurred, either. Here’s an AP dispatch from June 2, 2003:
W1264‡asian
r ibx
222 08 intjw romp rom mlnj
^BC-EU-GEN--Italy-Plane Crash, 4th Ld-Writethru<
^Small plane crashes near cycling race on Milan's
outskirts<
^EDS: SUBS grafs 2-3, The two, with victims identified as
Italian<
%photo(^With AP Photos<%)
¶
+MILAN+, Italy (AP) _ A small +plane+ which ran into a
flock of +birds+ at takeoff crashed into a warehouse Sunday
near a road on the outskirts of +Milan+ where scores of
riders were racing in Italy's most famous cycling
competition, killing the two pilots aboard, authorities
said.
¶
Giuliano Semeraro, a police officer in Peschiera
Borromeo, a town near crash, said no other crew or

passengers were aboard the aircraft and that no one was in
the two-story warehouse, which was gutted by fire.
¶
Italian state TV said the victims were Italian.
¶
Hundreds of cycling fans, lining the race route,
watched in horror and fear as the +plane+ went down, a few
hundred meters (yards) away from them.
¶
Italy's national agency for flight safety said in a
statement that the Lear jet had radioed shortly before the
crash that it had run into +birds+ after takeoff from
+Milan+'s Linate airport on a flight to Genoa.
¶
The agency said the +plane+ went down three minutes
after takeoff.
¶
"Right after the takeoff it declared an emergency and
the desire to get into position for landing," the flight
safety agency said. "It appears from the last communication
from the pilot that the emergency was caused by impact with
some flying +birds+."
¶
"It looked like it (the +plane+) couldn't gain
altitude," Wladimir Belli, one of the cyclists in the Giro
d'Italia race, said in an interview on RAI state TV. "It
tried two times to try to straighten itself out and then it
came down. I heard a big boom and then there was smoke."
¶
A policeman, Carlo Colombo, was quoted by ANSA as
saying "the engine was making a strange noise, right from
takeoff."
¶
Firefighters quickly extinguished the thick black smoke
which poured from the warehouse.
¶
RAI state TV was providing live coverage of the final
stage of the Giro, Italy's most prestigious cycling race,
when the +plane+ crashed.
¶
The +plane+ crashed a few kilometers (miles) south of
Linate, one of +Milan+'s two main airports.
¶
(fd)

For more information on bird strikes and other animal hazards, go to:
http://wildlife-mitigation.tc.faa.gov/public_html/index.html
Happily, the FAA keeps track of more than just birds:

