RANDOM OBSERVATIONS ON NON-PROFITS
Marcus S. Owens
Caplin & Drysdale
One Thomas Circle, NW
Washington, DC 20005
202-862-5020/mso@capdale.com
•

Copies of Form 990 (publicly supported organizations) and Form 990-PF (private
foundations) are found at www.guidestar.org

•

The IRS website, www.irs.gov, “charities and nonprofits” homepage, has the annual
workplan (“Implementing Guidelines”) reflecting the issues of concern to the IRS in
the nonprofit arena. Released at the beginning of each fiscal year, usually in late
September or early October. Other plain language publications are also available,
including training materials for revenue agents.

•

When analyzing a private foundation, get IRS Publication 578, “Tax Information
for Private Foundations and Foundation Managers,” from the IRS website.

•

Some state regulators maintain websites that list enforcement actions against
charities, other nonprofits, and fundraisers (e.g. California Attorney General’s
Office, Charities Bureau (part of the Secretary of the Commonwealth’s Office) in
Pennsylvania. Some AG websites list ongoing investigations (Florida).

•

In certain states, Pennsylvania, for example, charities must file certified financial
statements with the regulators, as well as the federal Form 990. The two documents
report data from different perspectives and under different standards (GAAP v. tax
reporting rules) which can produce interesting insights. For example, the GAAP
rules for consolidating related organizations often identify related entities that are
not reflected on the Form 990.

•

Don’t forget to compare a charity’s website information with its Form 990 from the
same time period – it can produce interesting contrasts.

•

When reviewing a Form 990 or Form 990-PF, watch for contractors and other
outsourced activities as they can be conduits for extra compensation to key officials.

•

When comparing/analyzing compensation figures, always ask/check if deferred
compensation and fringe benefits, such as low or no-interest loans, are included and
whether the deferred compensation is spread out over several years for reporting
purposes.

