Story tip: “Orphaned” Radioactive Sources
New Threats: Chemical, Biological & Nuclear
IRE Annual Conference, Washington, D.C., June 5-8, 2003
Douglas Pasternak
Senior Editor, Investigative Team
U.S. News & World Report
Telephone: (202) 955-2113
E-mail: dpasternak@usnews.com
There are an estimated two million radioactive sources spread across the U.S. in hospitals, industrial
sites and at universities. These sources have become an essential part of our lives. Physicians use them
to provide medical treatments to their patients and construction workers use them to measure the
thickness of pipes or walls. Yet, an estimated 500,000 of these sources are no longer needed or wanted
by their owners. Lost, stolen or discarded radioactive sources are dubbed “orphans” and hundreds of
them turn up on the street every year. Some of them end up in junkyards, often causing millions of
dollars in economic damage as a result of extensive clean-up efforts that follow their discovery. The
situation has become so widespread that many scrap yards have installed radiation detectors at their
front gates. But what worries many security officials most is that some of these potentially lethal
“orphaned” sources will turn up in the hands of terrorists. Below is a list of organizations involved in
following or attempting to curtail this potential threat.
•

Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors; www.crcpd.org. Based in Frankfort, Kentucky, the
organization is concerned with the proper management and control of radioactive sources. It provides reviews of
state radiation control programs, hosts’ seminars and conferences and publishes several publications, including a
Directory of State and Federal Agencies Involved With the Transportation of Radioactive Material. This is a 65
page list that is a great resource for locating local, state and federal officials involved in radiation emergencies or
management in your city. The publication can be downloaded here: http://www.crcpd.org/Publications/DIR-022.pdf. The web page also contains links to state radiation control programs; http://www.crcpd.org/links.asp. (502)
227-4543.

•

The Off-Site Source Recovery Project at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (http://osrp.lanl.gov) attempts to
safely recover the 18,000 “sealed sources” of radioactive material from industry and state agencies that it
estimates will become unwanted or discarded over the next decade. Last year the project recovered 1,956 sealed
sources. Because of fears terrorists may use these radioactive sources to build dirty radioactive devices the
Department of Energy has pledged to recover the remainder of known unwanted sealed sources by April 2004.
Shelby Leonard, Los Alamos Lab (505) 667-6701 or Joel Grimm, DOE Albuquerque Operations (505) 845-5463.

•

Stanford University’s Institute for International Studies, Center for International Security and Cooperation. In
2002 the institute created a Database on Nuclear Smuggling, Theft and Orphan Radiation Sources (DSTO).
The database project is being run by Fritz Steinhausler, Visiting Professor; fjs@stanford.edu and Lyudmila
Zaitseva, Visiting Fellow; fjs@stanford.edu. They can both be reached at (650) 725-0936.
http://cisac.stanford.edu/nuclearterrorism

•

Institute of Nuclear Materials Management, Northbrook, Illinois (847) 480-9573; www.inmm.org. Publishes
Journal of Nuclear Materials Management as well as monographs on related issues, hosts annual conference and
has links to its various committees, divisions and chapters, including its International Safeguards Division and
Physical Protection Division, with a good contact list of its members, primarily from the nuclear industry and U.S.
nuclear weapons labs. The 44th INMM Annual Meeting is coming up July 13-17, 2003 in Phoenix.

D:\TEMP\IREtipsRADSOURCES.doc

