COVERING INSTITUTIONS AND ASSISTED LIVING
2003 IRE ANNUAL CONFERENCE TIP SHEET
"DEATHS, DYING AND FULL DISCLOSURE"
State laws can be designed to thwart inquiries about
suspicious deaths in vulnerable populations. The more
official roadblocks, the more aggressive a news
organization should be in investigating fatalities and
seeking genuine legislative reform. Hints that
something is amiss in your state can be found on
paperwork as seemingly routine as a police accident
report.
Steve Bennish, assistant regional editor, Dayton (Ohio)
Daily News. (937)225-7407 or sbennish@coxohio.com
See the series Deadly Consequences at
daytondailynews.com/project/content/project/mrdd/mrdd_index
.html
STATE LAW
Make a one-stop check of the health of your state's
disclosure policies on deaths among the mentally ill,
retarded and elderly. Challenge official secrecy laws.
State agencies that operate with transparency deserve a
measure of trust. Those that don't should be
aggressively explored and reviewed. It's important that
before any major review begins, you examine your
state's law regarding the release of state agency
investigative records compiled following a sudden,
unpredicted or suspicious death.
If deaths are not investigated in any formal way to
assess quality of care, that's fodder for one kind of
story. If they are, your state agency for mental
illness, mental retardation or aging should generate at
least one investigative report per unexpected death.
The document could be key in reconstructing what went
wrong. The report or review is supposed to synthesize
police, direct care worker, and other observations and
come to some conclusion regarding neglect/abuse
culpability.
In Ohio, they are euphemistically called Major Unusual
Incident reports. The law on distribution of this

document and other patient records will vary from state
to state. In Ohio, a secrecy law (ORC 5123-) was in
effect for ten years until 2000. It restricted access
of the report to state bureaucrats, the person being
written about and the person's attorney. Even family
members were excluded and the right of a
court-appointed legal guardian to view the document was
omitted from the law's language. This law was changed
to allow access to family members following a series of
Dayton Daily News stories.
Laws that shield investigative reports on the
suspicious deaths of the institutionalized or those
under state care are typically rationalized by some as
being in the interests of "privacy." Such laws actually
keep families in the dark about the fate of loved ones,
undermine serious reform, eliminate checks and balances
and should be rewritten by the legislature.

TRIGGERS
Trigger local events that could spark an investigation
by your newspaper or broadcast outlet:
•
Seemingly isolated "accidental" fatalities among
the
mentally ill, mentally retarded or aged that are
brushed off and rationalized by authorities. These can
include pedestrian/vehicle accidents, drownings,
scaldings, chokings on food, slip and falls, heat
deaths, etc. There could be supervisory neglect in the
death or even a pattern of neglect that is being
ignored. Check police reports for deaths at the same
address if an institution or group home, prior news
articles through LexisNexis, or the memories of police
and front-line care workers to find fatality patterns.
Note: A favorite and common tact among "advocates" and
authorities is to stress the appealing notion of making
the at-risk population more "independent," a useful
excuse for the deceased being placed in a dangerous and
unmonitored situation.
•
Common neuroleptic medicines taken for
illness
can make some particularly susceptible to death from
overheating. Be vigilant during heat waves and check

mental

with coroners to determine whether heat death victims
were taking any of these medications. Those on such
medicines should be protected in housing with air
conditioning during long heat spells. Many who died
during the 1999 Midwestern heat wave took neuroleptic
medicines. The danger of these medicines is not widely
known. Professionals often don’t read the fine print on
prescription circulars.
•
A streak of fatalities
(usually a
group home) in a short span of time.

at

a

given

address

•
A tipster who complains about conditions at a
given
location. The tipster might be unaware of previous
fatalities or has bits and pieces of information about
them.
•
A review of the state's inspection file on a
nursing
home reveals notes of disturbing incidents.

CAUSES
Common causes of death on death certificates that
suggest neglect/abuse: Many preventable health
conditions can show as a primary or secondary death
cause on a death certificate. Deaths of younger people
who were by all accounts in good health until their
death merit close review.
Be especially alert to bowel impactions, drug
reactions, chokings among those with chewing problems,
drownings among those with seizure disorders, injuries,
falls, seizure disorders that lead to any fatal
accident, malnutrition, starvation, dehydration,
freezing to death or overheating. Not noting a death
cause is another sign worth examining, or when the
cause of death is simply listed as "mental retardation"
or "mental illness." Bowel impactions/obstructions, if
untreated, can cause death. They can be detected with
an X-ray. Often the patient is unable to articulate
"where it hurts."
Note: Don't overlook the fatal consequences of gross

obesity among the institutionalized. Gallbladder, heart
and other problems can be a consequence of morbid
obesity. By all care standards, the institutionalized
are supposed to receive a monitored and healthy diet.

RECORDS
A central document for examining suspicious deaths:
State agency chief's monthly summary of "bad"
incidents. Typically, the boss of your state's
department of aging, mental retardation or mental
illness will have a monthly summary generated that
details fatalities and injuries among the population.
This should be released to you under state open records
and meetings law, with some deletions. Examine this for
particular incidents or patterns statewide. You'll need
at least three years to five years of this report to
provide meaningful information.
Obituaries from funeral homes, nursing home inspection
reports, death certificates, computerized state vital
statistics compilations of deaths, state compilations
of addresses of institutions and homes, medical
examiner, coroner reports and autopsies, police and
news reports.
Police: Law enforcement reports are a gold mine of
information on a fatality. Police are often the only
independent and objective sources of information on a
death. They are public safety minded and usually don't
hesitate to provide blunt assessments. Compilations of
police/emergency calls to particular addresses can
pinpoint problems.
Funeral Homes: As a resource for tracking down
relatives of the deceased, the original obits are
invaluable. Funeral homes often keep obits and photos
for many years.
News: Online LexisNexis gives you the ability to search
by and link key words or phrases to find fatality
patterns, terms such as "retarded" and "drowning."
Beware that some newspapers avoid clinical terms and
might employ very different terms for a given at-risk
population, such as "mentally challenged." Very
often, a news article will omit the victim's diagnosis

altogether for the sake of "sensitivity" or just
because it is not known. Also, some large news outlets
and many small newspapers do not contribute to
LexisNexis.
Coroner: Autopsies can provide insight into how a fatal
accident or illness unfolded and whether it could have
been anticipated or foreseen by caregivers. It is often
important to ask an objective physician to interpret
the language for you.
Vital Statistics: A death certificate is always a
public record and can be the most informative document
in your file.

Websites: New York State Commission on Quality of Care for
the Mentally Disabled, Could this Happen? An extensive and
detailed true case history file of
quality of care disasters at
www.cqc.state.ny.us/homepage.htm
American Association on Mental Retardation, includes
extensive searchable compilations of news reports from
states: www.aamr.org/index.shtml
Voice of the Retarded: Watchdog group with strong
emphasis on quality of care, family involvement
legislative and citizen concerns at www.vor.net

and

