Insiders’ Guide to Washington
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
950 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, D.C. 20530
202-514-2007 (press office)
By Tom Brune, Newsday (202-626-8473)
The Justice Department is the federal government’s defense attorney and prosecutor of
crimes and civil violations. It also includes nearly every federal law enforcement agency the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the recently added Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms; the Drug Enforcement Administration; and the U.S. Marshals Service – and the
fast expanding Bureau of Prisons. In all, Justice has 39 separate component agencies.
As Congress has federalized crime and waged a war on drugs, Justice has become one of
the fastest growing departments in the federal government, with 107,000 employees and a
budget that more than doubled in the past decade to about $23 billion.
Presidents have long used Justice to advance their policies or agendas. Every major issue
passes through Justice – like the Iran-Contra scandal of the Reagan administration or the
scandals of the Clinton years. The Sept. 11 attacks prompted profound shifts in priorities
for Justice, from prosecution of past crimes to prevention of future terrorist acts, as well
as the moving of the troubled immigration administration to Homeland Security.
Main Justice, as the Washington headquarters is known, has two major divisions – civil
and criminal – as well as offices that develop legal policy and issue legal opinions. It also
includes the solicitor general, who presents the government’s views to the U.S. Supreme
Court, and the executive office that oversees the 94 U.S. attorneys across the country.
Attorney General John Ashcroft heads the department, assisted by his top two aides,
David Ayers and David Israelite. Deputy Assistant Attorney General Larry Thompson
directs day-to-day operations. The top Justice public affairs officer is Barbara Comstock,
and her deputy is Mark Corallo (both reached through 514-2007).
Across the street is the headquarters is the FBI, which also is divided into four main
divisions – administration, counterterrorism/counterintelligence, criminal investigations
and law enforcement services. It also operates 56 field offices across the United States
and 45 legal attaches, or legats in FBI parlance, in other countries.
Robert Mueller has a ten-year appointment as the FBI director. The top antiterrorism
official is Pat D’Amuro. At the FBI, the press office phone number is 202-324-3691.
The FBI headquarters is named after J. Edgar Hoover, the first and megalomaniac
director. The Justice building recently was named after Robert F. Kennedy, who as his
brother’s attorney general in the early 1960s often clashed with Hoover. That same
tension between FBI and its supervisors at Justice remains today.

Insiders’ Guide to the Department of Justice
FOIA:
For specific Justice agencies, check the FOIA web page. Most can go to:
Melanie Ann Pustay, Deputy Director
Office of Information and Privacy
Department of Justice
Suite 570, Flag Building
Washington, DC 20530-0001
(202) 514-FOIA
Databases
The FBI’s Uniform Crime Report, the annual report on street crime, is on the FBI website and
available from IRE. The DOJ Bureau of Justice Statistics (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/) has
hundreds of databases and studies. Data on referrals, prosecutions and convictions can also be
found at TRAC (www.tracfed.syr.edu) and the Urban Institute (http://fjsrc.urban.org/).
Useful Websites
The FOIA page
Lists FOIA officers for Justice and all federal agencies. Also includes FOIA handbook.
http://www.usdoj.gov/04foia/index.html
The DOJ Phone Book
A searchable phone book. But you must first have a name.
http://www.usdoj.gov/cgi-bin/phonebook/db.cgi?db=default&uid=&view_search=1
The US Attorney's Manual
A searchable “quick and ready reference” on policies and procedures like wiretaps.
http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/eousa/foia_reading_room/usam/
The Office of the Inspector General
Find reports critical of Justice and FBI performance.
http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/ighp01.htm
The FBI Reading Room
You can access thousands of pages of historical cases.
http://foia.fbi.gov/room.htm
PACER
You can look up dockets and sometimes briefs for nearly all federal cases.
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/
Congressional Committees
Senate Judiciary Committee, 224 Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, DC 20510
(202) 224-5225. Key players: Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-Vt.) and Sen. Charles Grassley (R-Iowa).
House Judiciary Committee, 2138 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington DC 20515, 202225-3951. Key players: Rep. James Sensenbrenner (R-Wis.) and Rep. John Conyers (D-Mich.)
Outside Groups
There are too many to list. But a few suggestions: the American Bar Association for legal experts
(202-662-1091) or National Criminal Defense Lawyers (202-872-8600); International
Association of the Chiefs of Police (703-836-6767); criminologists like Alfred Blumstein at
Carnegie Mellon University in Pennsylvania, and former FBI and Justice officials.

