Karen Masterson, Congressional Correspondent
Houston Chronicle Washington Bureau
karen.masterson@chron.com (202) 263-6500
http://www.chron.com

2003 IRE National Conference
Washington, DC
Insider’s Guide: Congress
JW Marriot Salon III

TIP SHEET: Measuring Whether Lawmakers are Doing Their Job, Places to Gather Data
* Federal agencies charged with responding to casework. Congressional caseworkers, who
typically work in lawmakers’ home district offices, write to federal agencies on behalf of
constituents needing everything from Social Security checks and veterans’ benefits to lowincome housing loans and green cards. These caseworkers cut through red tape and produce
results far faster than the average citizen can on his or her own. The volume of casework
performed is a good measure of a congressional office’s efficiency. You can FOIA federal
agencies for the number of cases opened by lawmakers. FOIA each agency separately.
* Legislative Resource Center (202-226-5200), basement of the Cannon House Office
Building. This office has quarterly disbursement reports that are invaluable. They give names of
all staff members, their salaries and how lawmakers use their budgets. The reports are particularly
useful for measuring staff turnover. When turnover is high, there’s a good chance constituents
aren’t being taken care of. The center also keeps records of lawmakers’ personal finances.
* Legislative Counsel (202-225-6060). This nonpartisan office rewrites legislative proposals into
legal code – a process that takes place before a bill or amendment can be formally introduced.
The lawyers in this office know a great deal about the competency of high-profile lawmakers.
And while these lawyers don’t talk to the press, they do talk with other congressional staffers,
who are willing to pass information to reporters…
* Congressional Management Foundation (202-546-0100, www.cmfweb.org). This nonprofit,
nonpartisan group produces useful reports that identify trends in congressional staffing and other
areas. The reports provide a benchmark for measuring an individual lawmaker’s performance.
* Former staffers (names can be found in disbursement books mentioned above). Those who
used to work for a lawmaker you’re writing about make great sources, especially if they’ve left
the business. Staffers who have merely moved to another congressional office will be shy about
providing negative information and are unlikely to let you use their names.
* Current staffers who handle day-to-day constituent services. Get past the flak! Most offices
prefer to have all press calls go through these seasoned spin doctors. Ask to talk to the chief of
staff, who, in most offices, works directly with groups in the home district and often handles the
highest profile or most difficult constituent cases. Don’t take no for an answer…
* Community activists and neighborhood associations. They tend to be results oriented. These
individuals will complain if a lawmaker has fails to do his or her job, particularly when it comes
to getting funding for community projects.
* Editors of local newspapers and community newsletters. Be careful here because often these
smaller publications are pushing an agenda. But these local editors can also be very valuable.
They keep up with community gossip and may be able to direct you to real constituents with real
problems not being taken care of by their elected officials.

