USING THE FOIA TO GET THE DOCUMENTS
By James V. Grimaldi
IRE Board Member; The Washington Post
BEFORE YOU START
Do your homework.
Have a general idea of what you are looking for. That is, find out from the Internet or sources or
the PIO how documents are kept, where they are kept and why they are kept. Get blank copies of forms that
are regularly filled out. If you are asking for a police report, get a blank copy of the police report so that
you know what they look like. If you are looking for an "unusual incident report" from the Nuclear
Regulatory Agency, get a copy of that. Make sure you have exhausted other avenues to obtain records.
Check web sites. Don’t FOIA something you can get by making a phone call or that is already online.
Ask for it.
Sometimes, the quickest way to get something is just to ask for it -- without filing a FOIA.
THREE STRATEGIES FOR YOUR FOIAS
Ask for exactly what you want
Through reading the law, policies, web sites and interviews, you find out exactly how the system
works. What forms do they keep? What reports do they regularly file? Sources can guide you to the reports
to request. Key advantage: Reduces turn-around time.
Ask for everything
If you make a very broad request, you can then negotiate to scale it back. After all, if you knew
what document you wanted and what it said, then why would you have to file a FOIA? You would have it
already. Be sure to ask for records as they become available. Then, ask the FOIA officer to deliver the
records in bundles. IE, “Provide XYZ documents first, then I’ll see if I need more.”
Make regular requests.
If you are a beat reporter, you should regularly file FOIA requests on your beat. Ask for
key documents, calendars, e-mails, correspondence, inspection reports, audits, budgets, etc.
WRITING THE FOIA
The easiest way is to use one of many standard forms found on FOIA sites listed below. But the
most basic says, "Under FOIA, I am seeking....." and then ask for what documents you seek, being as
specific as you possibly can.
Bells and whistles to include in the letter (optional)
A) Ask the agency not to redact. If the agency regards any of the records you seek as exempt from
disclosure under FOIA, request that it exercise its discretion and go ahead and disclose them. Further, if the
request is denied in whole or in part, ask that the officials justify all deletions by reference to specific
exemptions of FOIA, and that you provide all non-exempt portions that are reasonably segregable.
B) Ask that the request be expedited. Note that you are a journalist who disseminates information
and then explain why the public has an urgent need for the information. For example, the need may involve
an impending decision to which informed members of the public might contribute through contacts with
public officials and in these instances delay would deprive the public of its ability to make known its
informed views in a timely manner. Another need could be that possible questions exist about the
government’s integrity which could affect public confidence.
C) Ask for a fee waiver. Describe your media organization and say that the records disclosed will
be used in the preparation of news articles for dissemination to the public. Point out that the furnishing of
information sought by the request is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the
operations or activities of government and is not primarily in your commercial interest.
D) Set a time limit. FOIA requires a response within the twenty (20) working days. Don’t hold
your breath, but it doesn’t hurt to mention it.
E) Include your contact information and how you want to be contacted.
Send the FOIA.
Use email or fax, if possible. In the post-anthrax attack world, electronic means are more reliable.
Call and make sure it got there. Follow up.

AFTER YOU FILE THE FOIA
Always call the FOIA officer.
If you know exactly what you want, the FOIA officer might provide some guidance (how long it
will take; how to modify the request; whether it is online) to get it faster. They might know if someone has
previously made a similar request. This can reduce turn-around time.
After you have made your request, contact the FOIA officer to discuss it. If it is limited in nature,
point out that fulfilling it will not take much time. Call at least weekly and ask how the request is going.
Be reasonable.
Consider the point of view of FOIA officers. They want to follow the law, but find the most
expedient way to dispose of your request. If they say “you can find that online,” ask them to show you.
They will -- because it means saving them time. Congress requires reports on the number of requests and
how many are filled each year. So if you show them they can quickly dispose of your request, you might
get bumped to the head of the line. Know the law and cite it.
Don’t back down.
Be cordial with FOIA officers – they are just doing a job. But do not back down. Be reasonable
and make strategic concessions (especially things you don’t really need), but don’t allow them to exclude
what you really want. Make them justify denials. Always appeal -- whenever appropriate under the
circumstances. (Don't appeal if you have no merit, otherwise it would harm your organization's long-term
credibility.) Watch for tricks. One agency has asked Post reporters for extraordinary proof to grant fee
waivers commonly given to media. Challenge those fee requests vigorously. Ask to review – and not copy
– records.
SELECTED LINKS: FOIA RESOURCES ONLINE
After Sept. 11, IRE gathered stories and links about government attempts to restrict access to
public information. http://www.ire.org/related/records.html
University of Missouri Freedom of Information Center offers forms, laws, tips, and a wealth of
resources http://www.missouri.edu/~foiwww/
Reporter’s Committee on Freedom of the Press is a rich legal resource on free speech issues,
trends, developments in the law. http://www.rcfp.org/
American Civil Liberties Union’s “USING THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT” is a
handy step-by-step guide to the FOIA process. http://www.aclu.org/library/foia.html
Society of Professional Journalists’ FOI site includes an overview to FOI concepts and laws and a
handy A-to-Z list on getting records. http://www.spj.org/foia.asp
Public Citizen’s FOIA page http://www.citizen.org/litigation/briefs/FOIAGovtSec/
National Security Archives at George Washington University collects and publishes declassified
documents acquired through the Freedom of Information Acthttp://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/
The Right-to-Know Network is part of OMB Watch and provides access to databases. RTKnet has
executive summaries of chemical plant risk-management plans filed with the EPA. http://www.rtk.net/
SELECTED GOVERNMENT WEB SITES
Almost every government agency posts online its FOIA handbook, which is a valuable resource
for negotiating with FOIA officers. “Your own handbook says... ’’ Here are a few:
Department of Justice list of principal FOIA contacts across agencies http://www.usdoj.gov/04foia/
Defense Department’s FOIA site, including the DOD FOIA handbook and list of the different
contacts within DOD (Army, Navy, etc.) http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs/foi/
Department of State
http://foia.state.gov/
Department of Treasury http://www.ustreas.gov/foia/
Department of Interior
http://www.doi.gov/foia/
Department of Commerce http://www.osec.doc.gov/oebam/FOIAWebsite.htm
Department of Agriculture http://www.usda.gov/news/foia/main.htm
FOIA ELECTRONIC READING ROOMS
After the Columbia shuttle disaster, NASA created a consolidated FOIA web page and posted all
documents online. http://www.nasa.gov/columbia/foia/index.html
The Commerce Department’s FOIA electronic reading room on Enron:
http://www.ustreas.gov/foia/reading-room/docs/enron-index.html

