Covering Government Corruption
IRE Annual Conference
June 7, 2003
Phil Williams, WTVF-Nashville
Amie Streater, Pensacola News Journal
Ronnie Greene, The Miami Herald
Joe Mozingo, The Miami Herald
Develop corruption "fishing holes."
It's tough to beat a good tip where a whistleblower lays out the entire corrupt scheme for you. But if you depend solely
on tips, you are likely missing important stories. Many great corruption investigations are the result of dogged
document research. That's why it's important to go fishing in areas where corruption is commonly found:
a. No bid, or non-compete, contracts.
b. Emergency,'' or rushed, contracts.
c. Bidding with only one bidder.
d. Deals where winning bidders lack experience, but not connections.
e. Land deals
f. Add-on items to public meeting agendas, late-night votes
Know your turf.
Understand the process. Most corruption happens through abuse of a process. Either certain rules weren't followed,
the rules were changed, or different people were brought in. You must understand the governmental body you are
investigating to know whether something is amiss. Among the questions to ask yourself:
a. How is this process (contract, land deal, etc.) supposed to be handled? Get a copy of the ordinances, laws or
official procedures that govern the process. Most procedures are established by law and any deviation from the law
might be very apparent.
b. Who would normally handle such matters? Find out who does what, and ask them what's going on. Have there
been any changes? Have they been pulled off the project or reassigned with no real reason or explanation? Have
they been ordered by their superiors not to discuss the project? Were they ordered to rush things through?
c. Build a step-by-step chronology that the process should follow. Were there any missteps?
d. How do other states, counties, or cities handle the same kind of thing? You may be dealing with a system that is
set up to foster skimming or other corruption. A side-by-side comparison may make holes in local laws or weak
procedures more apparent.
e. What documents are required to be submitted in such situations?
f. What public records might exist other than documents (computer records, audio recordings, videotapes, etc.)
g. What other, independent agency might have relevant documents?
Look for buried treasures.
Clues to potential corruption are sometimes buried deep within the documents or revealed by what isn't in the
documents. A sampling of possible clues:
a. Dates that don't add up. Organizing known facts into a timeline may yield interesting patterns.
b. Relationships between seemingly unrelated entities, such as businesses that share a common mailing address or
documents notarized by the same person.
c. Attempts to move projects from one department to another (for example, moving a certain group of road paving
projects from the engineering department to the public works department, with no apparent cause for the changes).
d. A noticeable lack of staff enthusiasm for certain "pet projects" by elected officials
e. Insufficient explanations from officials about why a certain project or project is needed
f. Spending a lot of money in one area when other areas are being cut back
Test your vision.
Are you really seeing what you think you see? Before you go too far down the path of a potential corruption
investigation, stop and analyze what you think you have. Perhaps, run it by a trusted source with expertise in the
subject. Among the questions to ask yourself:
a. Is there a perfectly innocent explanation for what I'm seeing?
b. What am I missing? Are there questions that I should be asking?
c. Have all key players been given a chance to explain?

Covering Government Corruption, page 2

Keep the faith.
Sometimes the story isn't within easy reach. Whatever launched you into a story -- whether it's a tip or something that
you spotted that just looks funny -- there are bound to be huge ups and downs. You may be buried in paperwork and
haven't found what you suspected. Don't let self-doubt cripple you. In that case, keep the file open until you're
absolutely convinced that your tip/hunch was wrong. You may not work on it every day, but keep it open. Keep
making phone calls. Keep asking to see more documents.
Then, sometimes, you just can't answer the question "What happened here?" And that's okay. If there has been an
obvious abuse of the process and after weeks or even months of work you still can't find the smoking gun, the
questions you've uncovered are often enough to take to your readers. Lay out what happened: the late-night votes,
the uncharacteristic expenditure of large sums of cash in a time of budget cutbacks, the refusal of key officials to
explain their actions. Often, public momentum will take over and you'll get your answer. Maybe eventually they'll have
to explain it to a jury.
Cover your bases.
Be prepared to document your efforts, whether in a court of law or the court of public opinion. The worst thing for your
investigation is to make even the smallest mistake that your subject can use against you. For example, if a key
subject is not responding to requests for interviews, consider sending a letter with detailed questions. Such a letter
would lay out the issues that you are exploring. Many times, the person agrees to an interview or replies in writing.
Either way, the story becomes more complete.
Go into the final interview fully armed.
Know your subject better than your subject knows himself/herself. How that person responds to your known facts may
tell you more than the facts themselves. Among the useful techniques:
a. Begin with open-ended questions. Let your subject lie, if that's his/her inclination.
b. Be well-equipped for the follow-up. Show up with copies of the documentation that you have to prove your story.
That virtually eliminates an all-out dodge by the subject.
c. Tape record key interviews.
To view Phil Williams' work, go to: http://newschannel5.com/news/investigates/friends/
To view Amie Streater's work, go to www.pensacolanewsjournal.com/commission
To view work by Ronnie Greene and Joe Mozingo, please check IRE reprints.

