9
Scott Zamost
Investigative Producer
WTVJ-TV/NBC 6
scott.zamost@nbc.com
GRAPHICS
A. Use creative graphics to advance the main thesis. In our investigation of
unsafe dump trucks, we created a three-dimensional graphic to illustrate
how these trucks were being converted from tractor-trailers. A strong
rendering not only simplifies key information, but also immediately helps
the viewer understand your point.
B. Other graphics can help with story pacing. An investigation into the abuse of
Miami city cars sounded good, but dry, on paper. We used a car graphic to
move the story along. It’s better than repeating car video.
PROMO SHARING
C. One technique we like is sharing elements from the promo. The promo is
often highly stylized so the graphics can really punctuate the story. The
promo element could also be used in transitions or as a pre-produced
background.
ATTENTION GRABBERS
D. The open is critical to any story. The first 15 seconds can be the difference to
whether viewers will stick around. We produced multi-layered opens in an
investigation of illegal silicone injections and in a recent story about a talent
agency. Since both involved how people look, we took B-roll from one and
used it again for the other story.
VISUAL REMINDERS
E. Visual reminders help link the main characters. Something as simple as
putting up video from earlier in the story as a picture in picture is a good way
to tie elements together.

STILL IMAGES
F. Photos, websites and other still images can easily slow down a story.
Techniques such as layering those images enhance the pacing. Moving
backgrounds are also subtle touches to pre-produced graphics.
CREATIVE STAND-UPS
G. A strong stand-up obviously fits in a complicated investigation with limited
video. The challenge is to think out of the box in the way it’s shot. We used a
combination of aerials and ground shots to make the point in a story about
the alleged improper use of police radar guns in different locations.
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
H. Sometimes the sound is so compelling that you could start the story with an
interview. We used this successfully in a profile about an alcoholic judge. In
this case, two cameras are essential. In fact, we frequently use two or three
cameras for key shoots. The story also had a consistent look and
incorporated newspaper stories in a visual way. In our investigations, we use
the same photographer from start to finish. Decide early in the process the
direction you want your interview subjects to face. That will make editing
much easier.
I. An investigation into the online child modeling industry zeroed in on the
South Florida children we found. We used the photos and videos from the
Internet to advance the issue throughout the story. This is more
effective than starting with a generic overview of the problem.

