TERRORISM AND THE MEDIA
DISPATCHES FROM THE FRONTLINES
A presentation by
Iqbal Athas
Consultant Editor – Defence Correspondent
The Sunday Times
Colombo
SRI LANKA
AT THE 2003 ANNUAL INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS AND EDITORS (IRE)
CONFERENCE – WASHINGTON D.C. SESSIONS HELD AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB BALLROOM ON
FRIDAY 5T H JUNE 2003

Sri Lanka, long known for its physical beauty
and smiling faces, in recent times, has provided the stage
for brutal and bloody conflict in which over 65,000 people,
mostly civilians, have perished. Long before 9/11,
Afghanistan or Iraq, this island nation of 25,000 square
miles on the southern tip of India, was being tortured by
the agonies of a bloody ethnic war.
Yet, the world knows little about this conflict. It is
a forgotten war, an ignored war. Why was this? Some of
us reported on it as best as we could. Many, especially in
the international media, did not.
Majority Sinhalese constitute 74 per cent of Sri
Lanka’s 18.5 million population. Indigenous Tamils form
12.5 per cent.
Over the years, a nation known world-wide for
her tea, Buddhism, languid beaches and tranquillity, which
the Arabs called Serendib, was transformed into one of
Asia’s major killing fields. Sri Lanka became known for

1

assassinations and suicide bombings that indiscriminately
showered death and destruction.
For the past 16 months, however, there has
been a lull of sorts – the result of Norwegian brokered
peace talks between the ruling right wing United National
Front (UNF) Government and the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
Better known as Tigers, the LTTE stands out in
many respects from other contemporary guerrilla groups.
Long before 9/11 shattered America’s complacency, Sri
Lanka was being blasted by Tiger suicide bombers.
In fact, it is the only group in the world to have
assassinated two heads of Government – former Prime
Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India and Sri Lankan President
Ranasinghe Premadasa. Many other Sri Lankan leaders
were felled by their suicide bombers while the current
President, Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga,
escaped with one lost eye. Tigers succeeded in terrorising
the Sri Lankan ruling classes.
The Tiger rebels have a state-of-the-art
international network of arms procurement and shipping.
They are perhaps the only guerrilla group in the world to
own and manage a complex shipping fleet.
I wish to make a few general observations to
place the Sri Lankan conflict in the global context.
Firstly, Sri Lanka is a multi-ethnic and multireligious country. It is a matter of historical record that its
colonial masters (from 1505 –1948), caused and exploited
the fissures in this national fabric for colonial ends. When
independence was achieved, through a non-violent
struggle in 1948, little was done to forge national unity and

2

a sense of modern nationhood. Indeed, it has been
argued that Sinhala-Buddhist dominated Governments
alienated the minorities by some of their actions.
Secondly, Sri Lanka has been a viable
democracy enjoying universal adult suffrage since 1931,
even while being a British colony. Since independence, it
has changed governments regularly through the ballot.
Despite attempted coups and bloody insurgencies, elected
Parliamentary rule has continued unbroken for over five
decades since independence.
What has distinguished the Tiger rebel
insurrection from the other threats to constitutional
democracy is its secessionist objective – establishing a
mono-ethnic Sri Lankan Tamil State known as EELAM,
the name by which Sri Lanka was referred to in Tamil
epics.
I watched the transformation of the Tamil Tiger
rebels from a rag-tag outfit into a sophisticated group with
regular uniforms, boots, Rocket Propelled Grenades,
Stalin organs and Surface to Air Missiles. Within a
decade, they were more than a guerrilla group. More of a
regular army and a self styled national liberation
organisation.
Government and regional initiatives to make
peace with the Tigers failed in 1987, 1990 and 1994.
During this period the Tiger rebels ruthlessly eliminated
other Tamil groups, including most of the moderates.
The two hallmarks of Sri Lanka’s 20 year long
war are that it has been conducted almost entirely under a
State of Emergency. That meant the normal laws of the
land did not apply in most circumstances. The other is the
heavy control imposed on the media.

3

For seven long years, until the People’s Alliance
of President Kumaratunga was ousted at Parliamentary
General Elections in 2001, the media was banned from
the battle areas. A tight censorship was also in place
every now and then.
The result – both Sri Lankans and the outside
world were informed of developments concerning the war
only through sketchy and often unprofessional news
releases issued by the Ministry of Defence. The casualty
figures of the rebels were heavily exaggerated. So much
so, a joke doing the rounds in Colombo suggested that if
one were to add up the enemy casualty figures, they
would exceed the population in rebel held areas twice
over.
The poor dissemination of information relating to
the war, not only created a crisis of credibility for
successive governments locally, but also failed to inform
the world of what was really going on. Against this
background, Tiger propaganda achieved a much higher
degree of credibility.
Please permit me to strike a personal note to
illustrate the complexities of the protracted war in Sri
Lanka.
In 1993, I criticised a major military offensive in
the north where Army suffered heavy losses, both in men
and material. Subsequently, armed men raided my house.
There were threats to kidnap my only daughter, four years
old then. A funeral wreath was delivered to my home.
Apparently, it came from the Army unit that suffered the
reversals. Pressure was brought to bear on the Publisher
and the Editor of my newspaper to force me out of my job.
To their credit, they did not yield. I continued to write.

4

Subsequently, the then Commander of the Army
was asked to step down. I was vindicated. I was further
encouraged when I learnt, with great relief, that there were
those in the international community who not only cared
but showed great concern. I was bestowed the
International Press Freedom Award by the Committee
to Protect Journalists in New York.
Many other similar encounters have occurred in
recent years. Please permit me to briefly outline just one
or two cases to give you an idea of the many difficulties
faced by the media. If it is dangerous enough for the
civilians who are trapped in the middle, it is much more
dangerous for the handful of media personnel.
Since 1994, after the People’s Alliance of
President Kumaratunga was voted to power, I wrote
extensively on mass scale corruption in military
procurements. Millionaires, both in uniform and outside,
were made every week as the security forces ended up
with worthless, dud equipment.
Mortar Locating Devices, purchased for millions
of dollars did not function. Helicopter gunships that arrived
were not airworthy. Vintage Naval craft purchased at the
cost of millions of dollars were non-operational and lay idle
at the docks. Thousands of mortar rounds procured
overseas ended up in Tiger rebel ships and were used to
fire at government positions.
On the night of February 12, 1998, my wife,
daughter and I were watching television. Suddenly a
group of men, all armed with automatic pistols, broke in.
One cocked his pistol and held it on my temple. Another
thrust one at my back. They pushed me out of the
bedroom. My daughter, seven years then, who had gone

5

to her room moments earlier, found two other armed men
rushing to lock her up with her maid. She ran towards me,
hugged me and raised cries.
Fearing that those passing on the road outside
would hear cries, the men withdrew. The wheels of justice
did not move that fast over the incident. Not until Bill
Richardson, the then US Ambassador to United Nations,
came to Sri Lanka as President Bill Clinton’s special
envoy. He raised the issue with the Government.
Criminal Investigation Department (CID)
detectives who were called in, arrested two persons. One
turned out to be the chief bodyguard of the former
Commander of the Air Force. The other was the head of a
unit that had acquired a dubious reputation – the Special
Airborne Force (SABF). The two officers were indicted in
Courts. Four years after the incident, they were sentenced
to nine years rigorous imprisonment. The case is now in
appeal.
Although peace talks have been going on since
the guns fell silent 16 months ago, the challenges
confronting the media have not come to an end.
The media still remains accused, this time as the
main stumbling block to peace. If the then Government
was the strongest critic of the ruthless villainy of a
shadowy rebel group during the war, the new Government
has become the staunchest defender of the same group in
a desperate search for “peace at any cost” and to sell that
“peace” to the world. That is the strangest outcome of the
change of government in Sri Lanka in 2002.
It is the media that has highlighted the
strengthened position of the Tiger rebels since the peace
initiatives. One would have expected such exposures to

6

be used as a bargaining chip by the Government’s peace
negotiators, to use them as levers to secure concessions
or justify its stance on some issues. Sadly, that was not
the case.
The Government, either due to blind faith, total
naivety or unfamiliarity with international negotiating
processes failed to do so. They also seem to be totally
oblivious to tactics used by other rebel groups in recent
history. It now accuses the media of trying to undermine
the peace talks.
I reported in graphic detail that Tiger rebels were
smuggling weapons across the high seas, recruiting new
cadres, including children, eliminating rivals, equipping
themselves with more sophisticated weapons and
expanding their military units. Once again, the
Government accused me of trying to disrupt the peace
process.
Recently, I reported that the Scandinavian Peace
Monitors, tasked with the responsibility of oveseeing the
ongoing ceasefire had made some highly controversial
recommendations.
They asked the Government to recognise the
Sea Tigers, the naval arm of the Tiger rebels, as a “de
facto” naval unit and demarcate “training and live firing
areas” for them in Sri Lanka’s territorial waters. They had
in fact marked out the areas in a map of Sri Lanka. These
recommendations had remained secret until I exposed
them in my newspaper. This created a political storm.
Acutely embarrassed by the exposure, the
equivalent of extending formal recognition to an Al Qaida
air unit, the State controlled national television network
Rupavahini branded me a saboteur of the peace process.

7

The controversy rages with opposition groups
demanding the expulsion of the Chief Monitor. They
contend that his recommendations are a violation of Sri
Lanka’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and had come
even before core issues have been discussed at the
peace talks.
This time, if not through violence, threats to
destroy journalists who “do not toe the line” are equally
frightening. It is for the media to highlight the issues, the
tensions, the contradictions and the facts, but this is not
always easy in a climate of intimidation and almost total
sycophancy.
Sri Lanka faces a major problem with the Tiger
rebels who are banned in the United States as a terrorist
group. If they succeed in an armed struggle, it could set a
destabilising precedent for the Asian region and beyond.
Over eagerness to accommodate this group in
the naïve expectation that the Tiger has changed stripes
may cause further problems for the international
community. They may also be naïve in thinking that
appeasement may work in the case of the Tigers as other
groups around the world are watching developments in Sri
Lanka and appropriate conclusions are being drawn.
The horrendous events of September 11 only
illustrate the risks of not dealing with terrorist threats in
good time and with appropriate measures. Lessons that
are there to be learned should not be ignored. Sri Lanka’s
case needs careful analysis in the global context.

8

