Buyers Up • Congress Watch • Critical Mass • Global Trade Watch • Health Research Group • Litigation Group
Joan Claybrook, President
www.citizen.org

June 6, 2003

Public Citizen Tip Sheet: Ideas and Resources for Investigative Stories
Medical Malpractice (see attached sheet)
•

Story ideas: How many doctors in your state have multiple payouts but have never been
disciplined? Who in your state is lobbying for caps on non-economic damages – and how are
they paying for it? What impact would caps have on lawyers’ ability to take malpractice cases?
What impact would caps have on the number of lawsuits and insurance rates for doctors?

•

Resources: Public Citizen’s medical malpractice reports and other information are online at
http://www.citizen.org/congress/civjus/medmal/index.cfm. In addition to a national briefing
book and materials, Public Citizen has produced reports and fact sheets on malpractice
situations in Arkansas, the District of Columbia, Florida, New Jersey, New York, North
Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, Washington and West Virginia.

•

Contact: Neal Pattison (202) 454-5139; Frank Clemente (202) 454-5190; Joan Claybrook (202)
588-1000

Health
•

Story ideas: Who are the doctors in your state who have been disciplined for serious offenses
but are still practicing? How effective is your state medical board? How are drug companies
promoting their products to doctors and patients in your area? What dangerous drugs are still on
the market? How can people in your area get affordable prescriptions? What is the federal
government doing on these issues and how will it impact people in your area?

•

Resources:
• www.worstpills.org This site includes online version of long-running monthly newsletter
Worst Pills, Best Pills News, which contains extensive and vital information on drug safety
and effectiveness, dangerous dietary supplements, drug-induced symptoms and drug
interactions. New articles as well as an archive of articles from the past two years are
searchable by drug name, symptom or drug-induced adverse reactions. Complimentary
accounts for reporters are available by calling Public Citizen’s press office. The site also has
free information on drug safety and Food and Drug Administration regulations.
•

www.questionabledoctors.org Since 1990, Public Citizen has published information on
doctors who have been disciplined by state medical boards and federal agencies for
incompetence, misprescribing drugs, sexual misconduct, criminal convictions, ethical lapses

and other offenses. We are in the process of posting updated information online. Currently
the database has information on doctors in 30 states and the District of Columbia and many
of the doctors may still be practicing in your state. Complimentary accounts for the database
are available to reporters by calling the press office.
•

•

Drug companies start reaching out to future doctors when they are still in medical school. If
you have a medical school or teaching hospital in your area, the chances are good that many
of the students have already been approached by drug company representatives offering to
“wine and dine” them in hopes that the future doctors will prescribe their products. Dr. Peter
Lurie, deputy director of the Public Citizen Health Research Group, is available to talk about
the ethics involved in these efforts.

Contact: Sidney Wolfe, M.D. (202) 588-1000, Peter Lurie, M.D. (202) 588-7781, Larry Sasich
(202) 588-7782. Press office contacts are Shannon Little (202) 588-7742, Angela Bradbery
(202) 588-7741 and LuAnn Canipe (202) 588-7759

Electricity Deregulation Energy Issues (see attached sheet)
•

Story ideas: What deregulation schemes are under consideration in your area? What type of
corporate citizens are your local utilities?

•

Resources: Public Citizen’s research and reports are online at
http://www.citizen.org/cmep/energy_enviro_nuclear/electricity/Enron/. This includes the reports
mentioned in the accompanying fact sheet, congressional testimony and numerous fact sheets
and analysis.

•

Contact: Tyson Slocum (202) 454-5191

Auto Safety (see attached sheet)
•

Story ideas: See attached

•

Resources: Public Citizen’s auto safety Web site, http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/, contains
extensive research and analysis on safety hazards, auto industry lobbying, fuel economy (and
the relationship to safety) and federal action. The majority of the research was drawn from
public records. The 2001 reports, The Real Root Cause of the Ford-Firestone Tragedy, posted at
http://www.citizen.org/documents/rootcause.pdf, and Spinning Their Wheels, posted at
http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/firestone/articles.cfm?ID=6072, were produced following the
Ford Explorer rollover tragedies. Other recent investigative reports on auto safety issues include
The Forgotten Child, at http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/booster_seat/ and The Dual Wheel
Solution, at http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/passengervan/. Information on the TREAD Act
and Early Warning database is at http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/tread/. Information on sport
utility vehicle safety and fuel economy is at http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/suvsafety/.

•

Contact: Joan Claybrook (202) 588-1000

Food

www.citizen.org

2

•

Story ideas: The U.S. Department of Agriculture recently okayed the purchase of irradiated
meat for school lunch programs across the country. Now, individual school districts must
decide whether to purchase the potentially harmful food that is severely understudied. Public
Citizen’s experts say it’s a bad idea to serve irradiated beef to school children. Ask local school
administrators and boards if they will choose the beef for school lunches, and talk to parents
who are often ill-informed about what their children will be eating at school.

•

Public Citizen’s research on food irradiation is available at
http://www.citizen.org/cmep/foodsafety/.

•

Contact: Patty Lovera (202) 454-5132

Global Trade
•

Story ideas: What impacts are global and regional trade agreements having on your local laws?
On your local economy? Why are local groups objecting to globalization?

•

Resources: The U.S. Labor Department created the Trade Adjustment Assistance program for
unemployed U.S. workers who lost their jobs due to NAFTA, and Public Citizen maintains a
searchable database of those job losses, broken down geographically, at
http://www.citizen.org/trade/forms/search_taa.cfm. A provision of NAFTA allows corporations
to sue local governments over health, safety and environmental laws if they believe the laws
violate their rights to do business. Information on local laws that have been challenged is at
http://www.citizen.org/trade/nafta/CH__11/. Other information on NAFTA, the World Trade
Organization and other trade issues is at http://www.citizen.org/trade/index.cfm.

•

Contact: Lori Wallach (202) 546-4996 or Mary Bottari (608) 255-4566

Campaign Finance (see attached sheet)
•

Story Ideas: Shadowy “527” groups (named for their IRS code) are non-profit political
organizations that can accept unlimited “soft money” contributions from unions, corporations
and wealthy individuals for federal campaigning activities, including running “issue ads.” These
groups must register with the IRS, not the more transparent Federal Election Commission. They
are becoming the latest loophole for donors to exploit under the new McCain-Feingold
campaign finance reform law, and are a way for political organizations to conceal their financial
activity. Because disclosure rules are complex, many 527s are shrouded in secrecy.

•

What are the 527s in your area? Who is giving to your elected representatives? What influence
is that having on policies?

•

Resources: To demystify these groups, Public Citizen has built a searchable, online database of
527 groups at http://www.citizen.org/congress/articles.cfm?ID=8495. We have also compiled
numerous reports on various groups, available at
http://www.citizen.org/congress/campaign/legislation/section527/.

•

Contact: Craig Holman (202) 454-5182 or Neal Pattison (202) 454-5139

www.citizen.org

3

www.citizen.org

4

Buyers Up • Congress Watch • Critical Mass • Global Trade Watch • Health Research Group • Litigation Group
Joan Claybrook, President
www.citizen.org

June 6, 2003

Ideas for Investigative Reporters: Auto and Truck Safety
•

The National Center for Statistics and Analysis –
/www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/departments/nrd-30/ncsa/
The NCSA, a division of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),
compiles and analyzes statistics from state and federal sources on motor vehicle crashes, injuries
and fatalities, and safety systems. It produces annual reports and fact sheets on specific crash
types, effectiveness of restraint systems and more. Reporters can also request data directly from
the NCSA for statistical analysis or to place local stories in a broader context.

•

Story Ideas: What types of crashes are most common in your state? Does your state have a
primary enforcement safety belt law? Are red light-running cameras used? What types of
vehicles are involved in crashes – and why? Is there a death trap intersection where numerous
people have been killed? What more could your state do to protect motorists, pedestrians and
bicyclists? If you get a phone call about a problem vehicle, data from the NCSA can help you
put the story into a larger context.

•

The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration - www.fmcsa.dot.gov/
The FMCSA, which focuses on large truck and bus safety, also maintains an online database of
crash statistics, ratings of specific commercial passenger and freight carriers, and fatality rates.

•

Story Ideas: What are the safety performance records of local carriers – both for cargo and for
passengers? What types of crashes occur on roads in your area? New truck safety and licensing
regulations will be going into effect soon regarding hazardous materials transport, hours-ofservice and more. How effective are the rules? How will they affect safety and security in your
area? What hazardous materials are carried in your state? Are hazardous or nuclear materials
permitted to be transported through densely populated areas? Have there been major crashes or
spills? How prepared are local emergency responders?

•

NHTSA Rulemaking documents – http://dms.dot.gov/
The Department of Transportation accepts comments on its rules and regulations as they are
developed, which can be a rich source for stories on contentious and too often overlooked
issues. Auto manufacturers, consumer groups, local governments, individuals and others submit

www.citizen.org

5

comments, often giving unique insights into the arguments around different rules. The database
is searchable by docket number, which is published in the federal register.
•

Story Ideas: How is the government responding to major crashes? What new safety rules are
coming down the pike? Who is fighting against changes, and why? How are local businesses
and individuals getting involved in the process? Are any of your local auto dealers involved
trying to influence federal regulations?

•

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s Early Warning Database (New)
Following the Ford Explorer/Firestone tire disaster, Congress passed a vital auto safety law, the
Transportation, Recall Enhancement, Accountability and Documentation (TREAD) Act. The
law required that NHTSA create an early warning electronic database with up-to-date potential
defect-related information submitted by auto manufacturers on a quarterly basis. In the past,
automakers could choose to report defects to the agency only once they had concluded a recall
was necessary, but weren’t required to alert the agency about potential defects. NHTSA’s new
early warning authority requires the disclosure of information relating to possible defects and
will be a valuable resource for reporters to research potential safety defects and auto safety
issues.
Lawmakers intended for this database to be open to the public, but since the TREAD Act’s
passage in October 2000, automakers have fought such disclosure. NHTSA is still debating
whether to make the database available to the public. The agency has, however, issued a final
rule about the composition and procedures for submission of information to the database. If it is
made public, the information could be available as soon as this summer.

•

Story Ideas: Will the database be publicly available? If it is made available, the database will
be a rich source of data for reporters, particularly when looking into a particular crash
investigation. What cars are causing the most deaths and injuries? How popular are those cars in
your area? Are crashes caused by vehicle defects? What do the automakers know about the
dangers of their cars?

•

Public Citizen’s SUV page: http://www.citizen.org/autosafety/suvsafety/
With SUVs, safety and fuel economy work together. The Firestone/Ford Explorer debacle
educated the public about the dangers of SUVs, which are also gas guzzlers. New fuel economy
standards for light trucks, including SUVs, were stalled for years. Recent rules for model year
2005-07 were de minimus. The auto companies that argue strong fuel economy standards would
lower occupants’ safety. The opposite is true. The real issue for occupant safety is not weight,
but design. Of course, very large SUVs pose serious dangers for occupants of other vehicles,
which is unethical and must be changed. Fuel economy standards would result in huge vehicles
being lighter but also would afford the opportunity to make needed safety improvements –
particularly to prevent rollover and improve crash protection when rollovers occur.

•

Story ideas: When investigating crashes, check the make and model analysis on our Web site
and with NCSA data.

www.citizen.org

6

Buyers Up • Congress Watch • Critical Mass • Global Trade Watch • Health Research Group • Litigation Group
Joan Claybrook, President
www.citizen.org

June 6, 2003

Ideas for Investigative Reporters: Find the facts
about malpractice in your state
Public Citizen believes that laws and policies regarding consumer issues should be guided by solid
facts – not by rhetoric or an artificial sense of crisis stirred up to serve narrow financial interests.
Perhaps no question illustrates this better than the current debate over medical malpractice and the
cost of liability insurance.
This year, Public Citizen has issued more than 10 reports on medical malpractice, most of them
focused on specific states where lawmakers have been under pressure to change laws and limit
compensation to injured patients. Copies of those reports are online at:
www.publiccitizen.org/congress/civjus/medmal/.
Enterprising reporters, however, could report many of these same findings for their own newspapers
or broadcast stations. Here is a sampling of questions reporters could be asking – and sources of
information that provide reliable answers:

• How widespread are malpractice payouts in your state? What portion of the
physician population is responsible for the bulk of payouts?
• Has the number of malpractice payouts in your state really been skyrocketing
(it generally hasn’t)? Has your state medical board investigated the doctors
who have paid out multiple claims? If it hasn’t, why not?
• What are the trends for malpractice payments over the past 10 or 12 years?
Are they increasing steadily, or rising and falling? How do increases in the
amounts of payouts compare with medical inflation?
These questions and others can be answered with statistics from the federal government’s National
Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB), which keeps records of health care providers, their malpractice
payouts and other disciplinary data.
In examining the trends, Public Citizen learned that the number and the amount of malpractice
payouts seem to rise and fall in cyclical patterns – and recent spikes already have begun abating.
And a very small percentage of doctors seem to cause a surprisingly large portion of all the payouts
– with about 5 percent of the physicians being responsible for about 50 percent of the payouts.
www.citizen.org

7

The NPDB codes its data with random numbers, so the public and the press cannot link the
information to specific physicians. But the data is broken down state-by-state and year-by-year.
The NPDB charges for its databases, but those charges are scheduled to be reduced in July 2003.
The NPDB posts recent annual reports online, and these contain summary tables on a number of
topics, including mean/median malpractice payouts by state and the frequency of malpractice
payouts. Information on the NPDB can be found at:
www.npdb-hipdb.com/.
In compiling its reports, Public Citizen has found that some state court systems can provide a yearby-year breakdown of malpractice lawsuits filed. This information is rarely online, and it usually
must be requested in person or over the phone from the administrator of courts (whose title may
vary state-to-state). These statistics may be supplied by fax, e-mail or hard copy, but you may be
forced to file a FOIA request. And remember that while the number of lawsuits is useful in tracking
long-term trends, only a small portion of injured patients – about one-in-eight – ever files a lawsuit.

• How much do doctors in your state actually pay in malpractice insurance
premiums?
• How does this compare to what they paid 10 years ago?
A key dispute in the malpractice debate concerns the reason that malpractice insurance costs in
some states rose during 2001 and 2002. Was this caused by lawsuits and jury awards? Or was it part
of an economic cycle that affects insurance rates and insurance company profits?
Public Citizen found valuable information in a report, Medical Malpractice Net Premium and
Incurred Loss Summary, that is compiled each year by the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC). This led our researchers to the realization that insurance carriers had
not responded to rising and falling levels of malpractice payouts during the 1990s but had kept rates
relatively flat so they could compete for marketshare. When some physicians encountered
substantial rate increases in 2001 and 2002, it was the first they had seen in years. The NAIC
reports are available online at: www.naic.org/research/.
As you track increases in the costs of malpractice insurance premiums, you will want to compare
them with increases in the overall costs of medical services (since most malpractice payouts go
toward covering medical treatment). The Bureau of Labor Statistics puts cost indexes on-line:
http://stats.bls.gov/.

• Is your state really in danger of losing its doctors?
• How does the availability of doctors in your state compare to other states?
• Has the number of doctors in your state increased or decreased in recent
years?
In state after state, Public Citizen’s researchers encountered the claim (often made by the state
medical association or an affiliated lobbying group) that the cost of malpractice premiums was
www.citizen.org

8

driving physicians out of state or into retirement. The supporting evidence, however, was usually
anecdotal. Hard numbers told another story: that the number of practicing doctors, and the ratio of
doctors-to-residents, has been growing steadily.
The best source for the number of practicing doctors usually is the state board of medicine or the
state board of professional licensure (whose official name varies from state-to-state). It usually
takes several phone calls to get the statistics that you’re seeking.
A couple of caveats: Remember, get your statistics from the medical licensing board run by the
state, not the medical society, which is a membership group that lobbies on behalf of physicians.
And be specific with your request: You want the number of actively practicing doctors whose
business addresses are in-state. Some doctors are retired or no longer active. And many doctors hold
licenses in states where they don’t regularly practice.
One source for the ratio of doctors-to-residents is an almanac published by the American Medical
Society, Physician Characteristics and Distribution in the US, 2002-2003 Edition. You can order
this book for $180 online at:
www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/2672.html#statistical.
If you don’t want to pay for an expensive book, many of the statistics also are available from the
Kaiser Family Foundation’s “State Health Facts” website:
www.statehealthfacts.kff.org/cgi-bin/healthfacts.cgi?

• How well does your state monitor and discipline doctors who endanger
patients?
One pro-consumer proposal for reducing the costs associated with medical malpractice is to
improve the policing of the small portion of doctors who are responsible for a large percentage of
malpractice payouts. On Public Citizen’s website, you will find a ranking of state medical boards
that measures their diligence in taking disciplinary actions:
www.citizen.org/hrg/healthcare/articles.cfm?ID=7383 .
Thousands of doctors across the country have been disciplined for negligence, incompetence,
criminal convictions, sexual misconduct and other serious offenses. But most continue to practice,
and no one tells their patients about their offenses. Public Citizen also has developed a
“Questionable Doctors” data bank that has information about disciplined doctors in 30 states and
the District of Columbia. You can find information on the methodology used to develop the data
bank and instructions on how to use it at: www.questionabledoctors.org.

www.citizen.org

9

REPRINT:

Tort Reform's Massive War Chest
BY SHAWN ZELLER
Copyright 2003 / National Journal

(March 29, 2003) – For nearly a century, no business-lobbying group has had a higher profile in
Washington than the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. But lately, the chamber has been making its
presence felt in some unexpected places. Last year, it was Jackson, Miss. In February, it was
Charleston, W.Va. Later this year, according to chamber President Tom Donohue, it'll likely be
places as far afield as Texas and Illinois.
The chamber has been straying beyond its traditional Beltway confines-and pouring millions of
dollars into lobbying and electoral campaigns-in a massive effort led by its Institute for Legal
Reform. An arm of the chamber, the institute is working to pressure lawmakers and persuade voters
to revamp tort laws throughout the country, and it has been raising and spending almost
unprecedented sums of money in the process.
In its latest lobbying disclosure, just filed with Congress, the institute reported spending more than
$22 million on lobbying in 2002, one of the highest annual totals ever reported by an organization
since Congress began requiring such disclosures in 1996. For 2003, the institute's budget is almost
twice that amount: $40 million.
In Washington, the institute has a new president: Lisa Rickard, a former partner at the law and
lobbying firm Akin Gump Strauss, Hauer & Feld.She succeeded James Wootton, the institute's
founding president, earlier this month. And overseeing all chamber legal activities is Stanton
Anderson, a partner at McDermott, Will & Emery who served as an adviser to President Reagan.
Anderson remains active in the Republican Party, while Rickard, a political independent, enjoys
good relations with Democrats.
One of those Democrats is eminence grise Robert Strauss, a colleague of Rickard's at Akin Gump.
Strauss calls Rickard an expert coalition builder who "has an uncanny ability to work with people.
She knows when she needs an iron fist and when she needs a velvet glove."
Rickard will need to summon all of her persuasive powers as the institute, along with other
corporate interests, works to move bills on Capitol Hill dealing with asbestos litigation and classaction lawsuit reform. Come Election Day, the U.S. chamber will spend generously on advertising
aimed at influencing races around the country for state Supreme Court and attorney general.
Rickard says she is optimistic: "I have been here in Washington a long time, and I see a very unique
window of opportunity."
Crucial to the chamber's ability to spend so freely was an agreement it reached in 2001 with the
Business Roundtable, a trade group that represents top corporate CEOs. The roundtable's members
were frustrated by Washington's failure to enact legal reforms, and they believed that their own
lobbying efforts were at least partly to blame.
There were "too many efforts" that were "too diffuse, too reactive, and underfunded," explained
roundtable President John Castellani. His group, he said, decided to look for an organization that
could lead "a cohesive, coordinated campaign under a single umbrella with enough money to be
effective." The answer was the Institute for Legal Reform.
The institute has been hitting close to its fundraising targets. A year ago, National Journal learned
that the aim was to bring in up to $25 million in corporate contributions, a goal that apparently was

www.citizen.org

10

largely achieved. This year's $40 million budget indicates that Big Business sees the institute as the
lead organization that the roundtable envisioned.
Large contributions-in some cases as much as $1 million-have come from such companies and trade
groups as Aegon USA, the American Council of Life Insurers, DaimlerChrysler, General Motors,
Home Depot, Household Financial Group, Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance, Morgan Stanley,
and State Farm Insurance, according to sources. The chamber declined to provide a full list of its
donors.
But Donohue isn't reticent when it comes to talking about the opposition. "When I came to the
chamber in 1997, I decided it was time for the business community to put its assets together and
challenge what was becoming an awesome political force: the class-action lawyers," he said. The
institute is just one part of "an extraordinary “infrastructure" that he has had to build to take on
lawyers representing plaintiffs, Donohue added.
Indeed, the Association of Trial Lawyers of America is paying attention. Carlton Carl, director of
media relations for ATLA, said the institute's dramatic budget increase indicates that "Tom
Donohue has put the chamber's resources up for sale." The chamber, he added, wants to "take away
the legal rights of American families in order to enhance the legal rights of corporate special
interests." He challenged Donohue to reveal the corporations backing the effort.
Those who are open about their support have praise for the institute.
"I think there are a lot of different legal reform groups in Washington, and they fill a lot of niche
roles," said Jeanne de Cervens, director of government relations of Aegon USA, an insurance
company. "The chamber has the overall focus that's very helpful to
the effort."
That overall focus includes high-profile efforts in the states.
Speaking at the West Virginia state Capitol last month, Donohue said his appearance marked only
"the second time in our 90-year history that we have gone into a state and told them how to run their
business."
The first was Mississippi nine months before. These unprecedented moves were necessary,
Donohue said, because court systems in Mississippi and West Virginia were so unsympathetic to
businesses that they were allowing "frivolous" class-action suits to move forward. "This may be a
local problem," he said in Charleston, "but it has national and even international consequences."
The primary focus on Capitol Hill, meanwhile, is the class-action legislation sponsored by Sen.
Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, and Rep. Bob Goodlatte, R-Va. The bills would allow many class-action
suits to be moved to federal courts, which are viewed as more sympathetic to businesses than many
state courts.
Rep. Rick Boucher, D-Va., one of the House sponsors of the legislation, said, "The chamber has
been doing an outstanding job in communicating on a bipartisan basis" on the bill. Boucher argues
that the bill would not limit plaintiffs' rights and would be "a very modest reform."
But the bill faces a hurdle in the Senate, where it must win the 60 votes needed to overcome any
Democratic-led filibuster. Mark Gitenstein, a partner with the law firm Mayer, Brown, Rowe &
Maw, which the institute hired to lobby Democratic senators, said he is working with a group of 10
to 15 Democrats that may be persuaded to vote for the bill.
"If class action can't pass this year, then none [of the tort-reform bills] can pass," said Gitenstein.
The chamber paid Mayer, Brown nearly $3 million for lobbying assistance between January 1,
2001, and June 30, 2002, according to the firm's lobbying reports.

www.citizen.org

11

In a sign of which Democratic senators are being targeted, the institute recently released polling
data indicating that at least 90 percent of Californians, Nev-adans, and North Dakotans support
some type of legal reform. Those states are home to Democratic Sens. Kent Conrad (N.D.), Byron
Dorgan (N.D.), Dianne Feinstein (Calif.), and Harry Reid (Nev.), all of whom are viewed as
potential swing votes. Penn, Schoen and Berland Associates conducted the polls.
Jeff Peck, a partner with lobbying firm Griffin, Johnson, Madigan, Peck, Boland, Dover & Stewart,
is also working the Democratic side for the institute. Peck noted that the Democratic Leadership
Council and the New Democrat Network-both organizations of moderate Democrats-have stated
support for the bill. Three Democratic senators-Thomas R. Carper of Delaware, Herb Kohl of
Wisconsin, and Zell Miller of Georgia-are co-sponsors.
The institute's class-action lobbying team also includes the Washington lobbying firm Quinn
Gillespie & Associates, and the grassroots-lobbying firm the Dewey Square Group. PR and
advertising firm Goddard Claussen Porter Novelli is handling communications strategy.
Meanwhile, the institute is also serving as a facilitator in corporate America's effort to get asbestosreform legislation approved. Businesses, led by insurers and companies that once produced or used
asbestos, contend that courts are clogged with suits brought by individuals who have not developed
a serious asbestos-related disease but who claim to have been exposed to the deadly fiber. The
business groups want Congress to step in and end the backlog by setting new rules for who will be
compensated and when. Rickard is familiar with the issue from her work at Dow Chemical, where
she directed government relations before joining the chamber. Dow Chemical is one of many
companies that have suffered huge losses from asbestos litigation.
Still, the business community is divided between two rival approaches.
One, spearheaded by the National Association of Manufacturers and the American Insurance
Association, would establish medical criteria that plaintiffs would have to meet before moving
forward with litigation. The other approach, developed by companies with only limited asbestos
liability, would establish a trust fund to pay future victims. The institute, which hasn't endorsed
either approach, helped facilitate a meeting on March 26 between company CEOs and Senate
Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin G. Hatch to discuss the legislation.
Meanwhile, Rickard said that the institute would continue to focus much of its resources on
challenging state legislators to reform state laws. In a few days, the chamber will release a new
report on state judicial systems, which she says will spark another round of advertising. And come
November, the institute will renew its campaign to elect business-friendly judges and attorneys
general. Since it began running ads in state elections in 2000, the institute has claimed victory in 32
of 36 races over the past three years. This year, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Wisconsin
will hold judicial races where the institute figures to play a role.
Back in Washington, with Republicans ascendant, Rickard said that the institute is "making some
substantial headway." But she admitted that the highly political nature of tort reform makes 2003 a
crucial year.
In 2004, the politics of a presidential election year will make winning legislative compromises all
the more difficult. "The clock is ticking, and we need to move forward," she said.

www.citizen.org

12

Buyers Up • Congress Watch • Critical Mass • Global Trade Watch • Health Research Group • Litigation Group
Joan Claybrook, President
www.citizen.org

June 6, 2003

Ideas for Investigative Reporters: Campaign Finance
Here are two stories that are important to consumer safety and well-being. Public Citizen’s
researchers have been tracking these stories in Washington, D.C., but there are regional threads and
state angles that investigative reporters around the country could be following:
1. Electioneering by non-profit groups. Even before enactment of the McCain-Feingold
campaign finance law, a growing trend was the funding of section 527 and 501(c) non-profit
groups to engage in electioneering. If the U.S. Supreme Court upholds the McCain-Feingold
ban on soft money, this loophole will be transformed into a floodgate.
Many of these non-profit groups – some that are recent creations of political parties and others
that are special-interest advocacy groups – engage in a variety of partisan political activities that
include running electioneering issue ads intended to hurt or help specific candidates. As a
journalist, you can expand your understanding of the regulations governing these organizations
and track their influence in federal elections and in your state’s elections.
Whether the Supreme Court upholds the entire McCain-Feingold law or accepts modifications
recently put forward by a federal appeals panel, it will not make the expanding political
activities of non-profits any less significant.
•

Section 527 groups, and more so, 501(c) non-profits, mushroomed in number and prominence
as key political players in federal (and state) elections before the McCain-Feingold law was
passed. Public Citizen research has found that the top 25 527 groups spent $115 million last
election cycle – about 25 percent of what was spent by the national political parties in soft
money. That amount will increase substantially because these special interest groups have the
advantage of being immune from many of the contribution limits and disclosure requirements
applicable to political parties.
For example, the United Seniors Association (USA), a 501(c)(4) group, spent nearly $12 million
on issue advertising in 2001 and 2002 – much of it designed to help members of Congress who
were drug industry allies and who faced tough re-election campaigns. The brand-name drug
industry’s trade group, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA),
admitted giving USA at least $4.6 million, but USA has not disclosed the source of the
remaining $7.4 million in funding.

www.citizen.org

13

•

Under the McCain-Feingold law, soft money gifts to political parties are prohibited. This means
large donors who want to influence elections will be likely to rely more heavily on non-profit
groups for electioneering issue advertising, direct-mail campaigns and get-out-the-vote efforts.

•

Journalists interested in tracking non-profit groups involved in electioneering can:
… Check the IRS registry of 527 groups, which contains 8871 and 8872 filings. The 8871 form
records the creation of a section 527 organization, and the 8872 form reports contributions and
expenditures. (The IRS collected records for all 527 groups through 2002, but now is required
only to track 527 groups involved in federal electioneering. For those 527s involved in state
politics, journalists need to check state election disclosure records.) The IRS search engine for
527 groups is on-line at:
http://eforms.irs.gov/search_result.asp
… Read the Public Citizen analysis, “Permissible Political Activities of PACs and Non-Profit
Organizations Under Federal Campaign Finance and Tax Laws.” It is online at:
www.citizen.org/congress/campaign/issues/nonprofit/articles.cfm?ID=8931
… Consult the Public Citizen website for its continuing oversight of the activities of these nonprofits, especially the section 527 organizations, sometimes known as “stealth PACs.” The 527
search engine is online at:
www.citizen.org/congress/forms/527search.cfm.
… And read Public Citizen’s investigative report on 527 organizations on-line at:
www.citizen.org/congress/campaign/special_interest/#General

2. Big-money “tort reform” crusade targets states. In a recent article in the National
Journal [attached], the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and its Institute for Legal Reform boasted
that it has budgeted $40 million for its national efforts to pass laws that make it harder for
consumers to seek compensation from corporations and others who have harmed them. Their
efforts cover everything from class action and product liability laws to medical malpractice
awards.
Although some of this lobbying money is being spent in Washington, D.C., the institute’s
director says it plans “to focus much of its resources on challenging state legislators to reform
state laws.” And the Chamber has announced its intention to campaign for business-friendly
judges and attorneys general.
Reporters can tell voters in their states how much money is being spent to influence their local
elections and where the money is coming from. The interview with the director of the
Chamber’s Institute for Legal Reform appears in the National Journal on March 29, 2003. A
Public Citizen background report on the Chamber of Commerce’s electioneering activities can
be found online at: www.citizen.org/congress/civjus/chamber/.

www.citizen.org

14

Buyers Up • Congress Watch • Critical Mass • Global Trade Watch • Health Research Group • Litigation Group
Joan Claybrook, President
www.citizen.org

June 6, 2003

Ideas for Investigative Reporters: Medicare
Medicare proposals affect patients’ choices in your state. The administration’s plans to
privatize Medicare would encourage beneficiaries to enroll in private insurance plans to receive
drug coverage. Public Citizen research has found that this would greatly reduce the choice of
doctors for Medicare beneficiaries in at least six states.
In May, Public Citizen studied the state of Iowa and compared the number of doctors in 23
counties participating in the Medicare program with the number of doctors participating in
seven preferred provider organizations (PPO) that participate in the Federal Employees Health
Benefits Program (FEHBP), which the Bush administration frequently refers to as its model for
reforming Medicare. The report found that in nearly every county, with respect to all categories
of physicians studied, the total number of doctors participating in Medicare is much greater than
the number participating in any of the private plan PPOs in FEHBP.
This week, Public Citizen released a similar report encompassing the states of Maine, Oregon,
Utah, Vermont and West Virginia.
Patients who receive Medicare benefits are extremely interested in this issue. And the sort of
comparison that Public Citizen did in these states could be done by journalists working in any
state.
These Public Citizen reports on Medicare privatization and doctor choice can be found on-line
at:
www.publiccitizen.org/hot_issues/issue.cfm?ID=553

www.citizen.org

15

www.citizen.org

16

Buyers Up • Congress Watch • Critical Mass • Global Trade Watch • Health Research Group • Litigation Group
Joan Claybrook, President
www.citizen.org

June 6, 2003

Ideas for Investigative Reporters: Energy Profits and Lobbying Power
Public Citizen’s Critical Mass Energy and Environment Program has produced several reports
documenting how Enron manipulated the West Coast energy market from 2000-01 and how
government action (and inaction) facilitated the fraud. Our February 2001 report Got Juice? Bush’s
Refusal to End California Electricity Price Gouging Enriches Texas Friends and Big Contributors
described how energy companies were rigging the market at the same time they exerted wide
influence over elected officials. Our follow-up report, Blind Faith: How Deregulation and Enron’s
Influence Over Government Looted Billions from Americans, was the first to methodically detail
how Enron’s rise to power was only achieved through unprecedented influence over government.
We were also the first organization to call for the resignation of President Bush’s Army Secretary
Thomas White, a former top Enron executive who finally did resign in April 2003.
Public Citizen has used only publicly available information to compile its research. As the recent
accounting scandals illustrate, much of the information implicating corporations can all be found in
their filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission or with the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission. In addition, examination of a company’s lobbying records filed with the U.S.
Congress provide a researcher information on the types of issues a company is seeking to influence.
When researchers are able to quantify the amount of resources a company is providing for a
particular topic, one is able to determine how important that policy is to a corporation’s business
plan.
Public Citizen focused on Enron early on because the company’s highly aggressive lobbying
activities made it a leading player in pushing for deregulation. Identification of key lobbyists is a
first step in assessing political power. When the company’s lobbying efforts were compared to its
high-flying balance sheet, it was clear to Public Citizen staff that Enron was both the trend setter
and bellwether of the industry.
Public Citizen used several different data sources in compiling this information:
§
§
§
§
§
§

Company filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission
www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html
Power Marketer Quarterly Reports filed with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission:
www.ferc.gov/Ferris.htm
Company lobbying disclosure reports filed with Congress: http://sopr.senate.gov
Searches of news reports through Lexis-Nexis and Westlaw
Extensive use of the Freedom of Information Act.
Data from the Energy Information Administration: www.eia.doe.gov

www.citizen.org

17

§
§
•

Federal Election Commission data compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics:
www.opensecrets.org
Federal legislation information: http://thomas.loc.gov
Story Ideas: How have utility company mergers in your state impacted consumers’ access to
services? How have they impacted rates? How are electricity and natural gas companies
working to influence state policies?

www.citizen.org

18

