Late at night, and without permission, the Appropriations
Committee….
--David Rogers WSJ
OVERVIEW—Funding to operate the government is broken into 13 annual
appropriations bills. These are all must-pass bills, either individually or lumped
together, and each is its own world of different interests. Some of the titles are
self-explanatory: Pentagon, military construction, energy and water. Some are
less obvious. The Food and Drug Administration is funded with the Agriculture
Department; the FCC and SEC with the State and Commerce Departments, EPA
and Veterans Administration are in the same bill.
In addition Congress typically has at least one government wide
supplemental spending bill in the springtime. And in the fall there are stopgap
“continuing resolutions” to keep agencies operating until their bills are passed.
Each of these are also must pass and can be vehicles for unrelated riders or
special spending.
DOCUMENTS: Each bill has a corresponding report, but the numbers
aren’t the same. For example S1216 one year had a report 107-43. The 107 does
tell you something—the 107th Congress. But you need to be sure you have the
numbers when asking for copies in House or Senate Document Rooms. House
Document Room is located in B-18 Ford Office Building. Senate Document Room
B04 Hart Office Building.
The Internet is a big help here and apart from searching Thomas, the two
committees
have
websites.
www.house.gov/appropriations
and
www.senate.gov/~appropriations . Another useful site is www.house.gov/rules
This belongs to the House Rules Committee and is one of the quickest ways to
check on conference reports and statement or managers after a final bill is
negotiated by House and Senate.
BILLS vs REPORTS: Reports have tables and details about earmarks that
you won’t find in the bills. But a lot of reporters now don’t read the bills at all,
which is a mistake. If a member of Congress wants to change law, he needs to be
in the bill and may not want to highlight or even mention what he did in the
accompanying report. Read the bills.
CLERKS—Clerks are most informed people on each bill. Be nice to clerks
who take a lot of pride in their bills and always protect their anonymity. You
should be able to find enough of a paper trail where you never need hurt a clerk.
HEARINGS: Each of the 13 subcommittees publishes a hearings record
that can be very useful looking back at issues. During the hearings, many
questions are submitted for the record, and the published records include often
useful answers from agencies.
PRESS CONTACTS: John Scofield, 226-5828 (House Appropriations GOP)
Tom Gavin 224-3904 (Senate App Dem) Tim Boulay 224-0992 (Senate App. GOP).

