BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SOURCES
for "Disaster Before the Flood"
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
November 1993
Victims of the disastrous Midwestern floods of 1993 lived in peril long before the rivers rose,
put at risk by the failure of the government program that was supposed to protect them.
By the end of 1993, that failure had cost taxpayers more than $140 million for the
Midwestern floods alone. That doesn't count the human toll &om lost homes and lost Livelihoods.
And this story isn't over.
Congress continues to dither over proposed reforms to the 26-year-old National Flood
Insurance Program. As a result, participation nationwide continues to hover around 20 percent,
which means that only one in five Americans most at risk of losing a home to high water is
protected. In the Midwest, participation rates are even lower, despite the lessons &om last year's
catastrophic flooding.
Meauwhile, development goes on along &agilebeaches and shore lines and on flood plains
across the couutry -- development subsidized by federal flood insurance and, ultimately, by
taxpayers. And thousands of your readers live in peril -- some unknowingly, because their
government has failed to warn them, and some who have learned to manipulate the system to turn
flood insurance into an extra source of income.
A three-month look at the National Flood Insurance Program by the St. Louis Post-Dispatch
last year found that:
- The federal flood insurance h d is broke.
- The Federal Insurance Administration, a part of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, cannot enforce the flood insurance program it is charged with overseeing.
- Lenders flout the law that requires them to make customers buy and keep flood insurance
when they get mortgages on flood-prone homes. Yet no lender has ever been penalized for failing
to follow federal regulations.
- Local officials fail to enforce zoning and other building requirements because they are
unpopular with voters and with developers.
- Private insurance agents refuse to actively market federal flood insurance, complaining that
there is too much red tape in the program and too small a payback for them.
- Many of those who do buy flood insurance collect on it over and over again without doing
anything to flood-proof their home and without any government agency requiring them to move
to safer areas.
Here are some of the sources we found helpll in putting together our special section on the
flood insurance program.
GOVERNMENT SOURCES

- Congress. Copies of testimony, hearing transcripts and reports fiom Congressional
committees are a goldmine of background information. The key Congressional committees that
have been looking at flood and other forms of disaster insurance are:

Senate Bankig, Housing and Urban Affairs, which has held extensive hearings on a flood
insurance reform plan sponsored by Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass. Jonathan Winer, a Kerry aide, is
particularly knowledgeable. He can be reached at 202/224-2742.
Senate Commerce, which is considering legislation to set up an "all hazards" insurance plan
which would be backed by the federal government and would cover floods, volcanoes, hurricanes
and earthquakes.
House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Mairs. The Subcommittee on Consumer
Credit and Insurance, chaired by Rep. Joseph Kennedy, D-Mass., has handled flood insurance
refonn legislation. Barry Scanlon, Kennedy's aide on the subcommittee, knows the topic and
history well. His number is 202/225-8872.
Aides to Sens. Alfonse D'Amato of New York, Connie Mack of Florida, Daniel Inouye of
Hawaii and Christopher Bond of Missouri and Rep. Doug Bereuter of Nebraska also may be
worth a a l l .
- Federal Insurance Administration. The FIA is a part of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. FIA is the repository of statistics on policies sold, losses encountered, repeat claims on
the same policy, lapsed insurance coverage and similar data that will allow you to determine
whether those most at risk iu your area are covered. FIA also issues maps covering most of the
count~ythat show areas most at risk of flooding. Unfortunately, the vast majority of those maps
are on paper and they don't allow you to match up flood hazard lines with census data.
The maiu number for FIA is 202/646-2781.
The FEMA press office handles most calls placed. That number is 2021646-4600.
- The General Accounting Office. The GAO has taken several looks at the flood insurance
program though the years. Back issues of reports can be obtained by calling 202/646-3911.
- FEMA Insl~ectorGeneral's office. The IG has issued reports critical of some facets of the
insurance program. Those reports may be obtained by calling 202/646-3910.
- FEMA Regional Offices. Each FEMA regional office has specialists in flood insurance who
work with local communities and police the system to make sure cities and counties enforce the
flood-plain building restrictions that they adopt. They have the power to kick local govenments
out of the federal flood iusurauce program if, for example, they grant too many exemptions to
building and zoning codes in flood plains.
- State Agencies. Each state has a designated flood plain manager, paid for in part with
federal government fiulds. In many states, such as Missouri, they have virtually no authority. But
in states such as Illiuois, which have adopted stricter flood-plain standards than required by the
federal goveniment, the offices have some clout. Both are good sources of information.
- Local building and zoning agencies. These are the folks who know where the problems are
and who face the toughest political pressure to bend the rules on development.
NON-GOVERNMENT SOURCES
- Insurance companies and agents.
- Lenders.
- The Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center at the University of
Colorado at Boulder. The center has a library that houses both scholarly reviews and more
popular press clips on all kinds of disasters, dating back scores of years. The people there are
fiieudly, Ilelpfd and digital, which means they can provide you with a computerized bibliography

of articles and books on your area of interest. The center's number is 3031492-6818. The fax is
3031492-215 1. And you can reach them on the Internet at hazards@spot.Colorado.EDU.
The Association of State Floodplain Managers. The association's legislative director is
Rebecca Quiun, floodplain manager for Maryland. She can be reached at 4101974-3825.
The National Wildlife Federation. David Conrad is a water resources specialist.

-

2021797-6697.

- American Rivers, an environmental group that monitors, among other things, pollution and
development along the nation's rivers and streams. Scott Faber is the resident flooding expert.
2021547-6900.

- Former FIA administrators. C.M. "Bud" Schauerte, FIA administrator under Bush, is now a

lobbyist for coastal communities seeking to limit flood insurance restrictions on building near
beaches. He can be reached in Austin, Texas, at 5 121472- 1278. Robert Hunter, FIA administrator
under Catter, is now the Texas Insurance Commissioner. Both think the program is a disaster, but
for radically different reasons.
- The Coast Alliance. A consortium of environmental groups seeking to limit development of
the nation's shorelhe. Beth Milleman, 2021546-9554.
- The National Association of Realtors and the National Association of Homebuilders. Both
object to proposals to deny flood insurance on new construction in areas that will erode into the
ocean or lake within 30 years.

