IRE Annual Conference, June 7, 2003, Washington, D.C.
Holly Stepp
Education Editor
The State (Columbia, S.C.)
(803) 771-8456
hstepp@thestate.com

Eric Eyre
Education Reporter
Charleston Gazette
(304) 348-4869
ericeyre@wvgazette.com

Andy Hall
Investigative Reporter
Wisconsin State Journal
(608) 252-6136
ahall@madison.com

First Day on the Education Beat
Who to See, What to Do, What to Ask
If You’re Covering K-12
1. Who are the players? Get to know students, parents, school district lawyers, teachers, union leaders, office workers, state
school board association director, treasurer, information systems people (techies with no ax to grind), service workers and their union
heads, bus drivers, higher ed folks (who will tell you what’s wrong with K-12), school architects, board office secretaries, legislators
on education committees, PTO or PTA, researchers within the school district and at the local university.
Avoid PR flaks as much as possible. Very important: Get current and old directories of all school district employees, including
home numbers. Valuable for checking names and finding sources on deadline, and indispensable for locating former employees who
often are willing to help you set the record straight.
2. What are the laws and policies? No need to memorize state school law, but have a copy of school laws handy. Also get the
state and local school district policy manual (or know how to access on-line). Also know ethics laws. If you know the rules, you’ll
know when people break them.
3. Where do I go? You’ll spend a lot of time in the school board auditorium. But there are other places to go, and not just into
schools. Hang out at the school district office. Talk to people coming and going. Be the first to arrive at school board meeting and last
to leave (provided you don’t miss deadline). Usually, the best stuff happens before and after a meeting. Work on a story that puts you
into classrooms, cafeterias or school hallways.
4. Where are the numbers and records? Keep at your fingertips administrative salaries, teacher salaries, enrollment data, cost
per pupil data, trend data, test scores. Among useful records: Cell phone and calling card records; travel reimbursement forms, per
diem forms, appointment calendars. You’ll know where officials are going and who they are talking to.
5. Where are the mistakes, problems and complaints recorded? Upset teachers and bus drivers file grievances; security guards
file incident reports; students file citizens complaints. Find out what state or local agency monitors schools. Get those reports.
6. Who benefits? Keep an eye on contracts and bid documents and purchase orders. Who supplies the desks and chairs for
schools and gas for buses? Which architect gets all the design jobs? Who builds the school? Who provides the software? How were
the textbooks selected? Are there conflicts of interest among top school officials or school board members?
Millions and millions of dollars go through schools each year. It’s a ripe area for abuse. Also don’t forget possibility of nepotism.
Have job opening ads been tailored for one candidate?
7. What’s a matter of public record, and how do I get it? State and federal public-records laws entitle you to large amounts of
data and records regarding achievement, discipline, budgets, teachers, buses and drivers, food, vendors, students’ and parents’
socioeconomic characteristics and much more. When filing requests, remember that information often is much more useful in
electronic form than on paper. Learn the basics of public records laws and how they affect your access to records. If parents sign a
waiver, you may obtain confidential student records. Tip: Keep a template in your computer; it’ll take just a few minutes to type up
the public-records request.

If You’re Covering Higher Education
1.Cheat Sheets. For each of the colleges and universities you will cover, make a cheat sheet that includes facts about the school.

Include: Founding date, affiliation, a brief history, enrollment, degrees offered, graduate programs, leadership (president and trustees’
contact info, secretaries’ names), organizational chart with VPs and deans, public relations people and their duties. This will help you
respond to emergencies and help you organize your beat as you prioritize your interests.
2. Say Hello. When covering a university, you’ll often find that public relations people are a good first stop. They will probably
have all the information you need for your cheat sheets and they are often the gatekeepers. So you’d might as well become acquainted.
There are at least two levels of PR people you should meet:
--VP for university relations: This person reports to the president and handles major communication for the university. He or she
advises the president what to say, when, and will want to meet you before you meet the president or chancellor.
--Media relations director: This person reports to the VP of university relations and is in charge of the staff that sends the press
releases about what professors and students are doing. When you are looking for a source and expert, this is a good person to call.
Once you have made the courtesy calls to the VP, the president or chancellor will be your next stop. Also arrange to meet with the
provost or the other top academic officer. Then work your way to the rest of the university.
Don’t skip meeting the other VPs. The vice presidents for budget and management and for advancement are often the most useful.
While CFO or VP finance will tell you the university is healthy financially, the budget guy will know where the weak spots are. And
because the VP for advancement works with the alumni and other supporters, he or she will often know the best inside dirt.
Make sure throughout your first months you make time to meet the deans of the big sexy schools as well as the small cash cows.
They will know how the school is really doing and how the new policies play out. The same goes for faculty and staff leaders.
And don’t forget to make time to meet the student leaders. Get to know the student government types, but also meet the heads of
major student groups – the Inter-Fraternity Council and the Pan-Hellenic Council, the student activists.
While the president and PR staff should be the top of your list, mix the rest of the visits up. Head to the staff union heads – they will
be able to tell you if the line the president has spun holds water – and go to the lowly institutional research person – he can mash the
numbers any way you want.
Finally, you’ll want to become acquainted with the appointed people on the university's or college’s governing board. They spout
the party line most of the time, but there's always an oddball or two the others don't like who is probably a good source, and even the
most loyal ones can be put to good use by playing off their egos.
3. Documents, Documents, Documents. There is one document you must have for all the universities you cover – the most current
990 tax form. The IRS requires it of non-profit institutions, and the three most recent must be made available on demand.
It contains tons of information on the leadership of the university, what they earn, and its general financial health. (The salary
information always makes for a great story.) You should also ask for the 990s of any quasi-private university foundations.
You should also have a copy of the university’s budget document. It will tell you plenty about the school’s priorities and its
deficiencies. Get a copy of the employee handbook and the bylaws of the university. While they are boring reads, they are invaluable
when the university fires or hires someone illegally, which they all eventually do.
Also get a university phonebook – and copies of old ones. Then lock up them up, if you work for a newspaper in a college town.
4. Other Folks. If your job is statewide in focus, make sure you go through the above with the people in the statewide higher
education agency. They will be able to give you the data they collect on the universities, often the stuff the schools don’t want to give
up. Also make sure you meet the business leaders who are engaged in higher education policy and the governor’s point person on
education.

Overcoming Obstacles
You’ll face many difficulties on the education beat. Here are ways to overcome them.
K-12
1. You’re buried in jargon. Don’t be afraid of asking “dumb” questions, such as, “What does that word mean?” Write for parents
of kids in school and the taxpayers who want to know how their money is being spent. Use computer-assisted reporting to create your
own reports and answer questions you or others may have. Find out what you want to know.

2. You’re stuck in meetings all the time. After organizing your beat, ask yourself whether all those meetings really are necessary.
If they are, find ways to use the meetings as a catalyst for in-depth coverage. Apply investigative interviewing and document
techniques on quick-hit advances and follow-ups. Conduct a “rolling investigation,” publishing each piece when it’s ready.
3. You’re too tied to the school calendar and don’t have time to do enterprise stories. These predictable events offer a window
to investigative journalism. For example, a back-to-school report is a perfect time to examine bus routes – who’s riding longest, and
what are the costs? When enrollment data are released, probe which neighborhoods are changing fastest, and examine the
demographics. When valedictorians are named, examine grade inflation or the racial achievement gap.
4. Your editor’s expectations don’t match yours. For most newspapers, education is a premier beat – one in which editors –
yours and those above her – and readers are keenly interested.
For the education reporter, both K-12 and higher ed – that is best and worst of things. It means that your stories have high impact
and played well, but it means that there will be many, and often conflicting, views how you should do your job. After all, your coworkers have had an education and that make them experts on doing your job.
That is why it is critical that you have good conversations with your boss about what he or she expects of you. It’s a talk to have
whether you have been on the beat for five months or five years.

Here’s what Holly Stepp, education editor of
The State, expects of her reporters:
I want my reporters to be curious and question everything –
what they know and what they don’t know. I want them to
chase the news with urgency.
I want my reporters to know their school districts and
universities. I want them to know the lay of the land – how it’s
organized, where the high spots are and where are the ruts in
the road, who are the movers and shakers and who are
disenfranchised.
I want them to feel as at ease in a school board chamber or
trustee boardroom as they are in pre-K classroom or a dorm
room. I want them to cultivate sources at every level.
Whether it is the policy story or the cool classroom story, I
want them to remember for whom we are writing. It is not for
the educators or the academics or the business community or
the booster. It is for the parent with a child and the retiree with
no children at home. It is for the general public and any Joe
who plunks down 50 cents for the newspaper.

Here’s what Holly’s staff can expect from
her as an education editor (and what you
should expect from yours):
I will know and understand that education is more complicated
than it appears. I won’t oversimplify.
I will give them time to do the homework – to learn all the
things I expect them to know. I will help them plan for their
best work.
I will educate myself about their jobs and beats. I will be a
student, too.
I will do my best to filter the “My son came home from school
and said…” story ideas they will get from their peers and other
editors.
And I promise that if I ask them to do a “my kid story,” it will
be because I truly believe there is something to it.
And if their reporting proves me wrong, I will walk away from
the story.

Higher Education
The biggest obstacle in higher education is the sheer scope of the beat. Your average university or college will encompass
everything from the education of students to new research to employment hundreds of people to the major landowner in town to the
introduction of teens to adulthood.
Your challenge will be to figure out how you will cover that diversity. One way for you and your editor to start the discussion is to
divide the beat into topics. For example:
Academics -- This is what goes on in the lecture hall, what is being taught and who is teaching it.
Research – This is the sex appeal in universities -- what goes on in the labs and libraries. It is, of late, what legislators and business
types are most interested in.
Policy and Politics – These are the upper-level decisions made around the above topics. Harry Truman once said “the politics of
academe are so nasty because the stakes are so low.” That’s not entirely untrue.

Student Life – Only about half the learning in college goes on in the lecture hall. What goes on everywhere else is one of the
hardest things to write about.
Operations – This includes the consumer stories about tuition increases and the town-gown stories about the new dorm being built
in the heart of a historic neighborhood.
Athletics – Your sports staff may cover the teams but don’t assume that absolves you of any responsibility.
Try to figure out with your editor how your coverage in these categories will break down. You may end up with 70 percent of your
time spent on Policy, Research and Operations and 28 percent on Academics and 2 percent on Student Life. That’s fine if it’s what
you have agreed to.
But try to make sure that all the topics are represented to some degree in your coverage.

Story Ideas
Here are some favorite story ideas that will provide a very good introduction into the world of education.

K-12
Before the Meeting. No need to wait until a meeting to cover a controversial issue. Just comb through the agenda, check to see
which items will be hotly debated, then publish stories before the meeting. This also frees you up to focus on one thing on the meeting
night.
Testing. Be careful about reporting about schools that overcome long odds, etc. They may be excluding large numbers of their
lowest performing students. Nearly every student takes the standardized test, but some take it with "accommodations" or under "nonstandard conditions." Those students' scores aren't counted in the overall results, inflating a school's or district's scores. Find out the
exclusion rate.
Racial Achievement Gap. Is it narrowing in your community? Almost certainly not. Use state standardized tests, high school gradepoint averages, individual pupil records, district proficiency tests, graduation data, student diaries, national research to examine trends.
Examine influence of parents’ educational attainment, household income, single-parent household and high mobility.
The Longest, Oldest Whatever. Find the longest bus route in your district and ride it. It’s a great way to get into a growth story or a
budget story. Find the oldest school or teacher and see what the education is like from that viewpoint.
Teacher Quality. Follow a teacher through the National Board for Teaching Standards certification process and see what it is really
like.
Reading. Who’s not learning to read by the end of third grade, a crucial indicator of a student’s chances for success throughout life?
When you get to the high school level, do phonics and whole language still work? How do you teach a 17-year-old how to read?
Truancy. It’s not as simple as bad-ass kids who won’t go to school. It is more often a complex web of social issues that keep kids
from going to school. Use security guard reports, police incident data, district and teachers union reports of incidents, district “climate
survey” data, national research.

Higher Education
Technology Transfer. Everybody wants to find the invention in the lab that will reap millions. How do universities encourage
research without sacrificing teaching or selling their souls to the corporate world?
Vocational vs. Experimental. With the cost of a college education rising faster than inflation, more students are taking a vocational
approach to college. They take only the classes that will help them get a job and try to get out in a hurry. Does this mean the death of a
liberal arts education?
Luxury Campuses. Every college is on the way to fully wired dorms and top-notch student recreation centers. Take a look at the
pressure to keep up with the academic Joneses.
Teaching Loads. The conventional wisdom is that the best faculty don’t teach. Look at the catalogs for the past couple of years and
find out if it’s true.
Higher Ed State Financing. In many areas of the nation, the biggest continuing story in higher ed financing has to do with the
gradual slide away from state financing of universities and toward higher tuition. This bothers national higher ed leaders (and local

ones) in large part because it has happened almost by accident, as state budgets get tighter, and not by any design with input from the
public. We've just gone from states supplying 50 percent or more of university budgets in the 70s, to now supplying a third or less.
You could get with the numbers people and see how the source of your college's funding has changed over the years, then speak to the
people in power about why it's happening and if it should change.
Tip: One thing to keep in mind on any state budget story regarding higher education is the way colleges and universities are often
the first and safest place to cut, precisely because they have an alternate revenue stream (tuition, and federal aid to a lesser extent) and
because they don't have the political clout that parents of all those K-12 kids have.
Higher Ed Federal Financial Aid. Something very similar is happening in this area, and it's timely now because Congress is about
to overhaul the federal Higher Education Reauthorization Act, which set up all the financial aid programs and sets their monetary
limits. Over time, there's been a shift away from need-based aid and toward merit-based aid (actually that's maybe more a state
phenomenon, because it sells better for the lawmaker to hand out money strictly based on merit). On the federal level, the aid amounts
have stagnated, again not because of any deliberative process but just by default as funding pressures elsewhere take precedence. This
means students are turning much more to alternative aid -- costly credit cards and other bank loans that leave students with far more
debt after graduation. The financial aid director could trace how the source of those funds have changed over time, and look at the
increase in student debt on campus. National higher ed leaders want to see a nationwide discussion held on this somehow, maybe as
the Act is reauthorized, rather than just continue this trend by default. (Our thanks on these last two ideas to Karen Rivedal, higher
education reporter for the Wisconsin State Journal.)

Useful Sources and Web Sites
Here’s a listing of national sources and sites, to supplement important local and state sources such as your school district,
university, state education department and teachers union:

K-12 and Overall Education Coverage
•

Education Writers Association www.ewa.org Has listserv where you can post questions and find sources; sponsors yearly ed
writing contest and conference and fellowships; lists stories from across the nation on ed issues.

•

Investigative Reporters and Editors www.ire.org The Resource Centers offers more than 70 tipsheets on education coverage
and reprints of more than 800 education-related investigative stories, while Extra! Extra! offers links to recent coverage and
listservs serve as a resource.

•

Education Week magazine www.edweek.org Outstanding national news coverage of ed issues; goes in-depth. Also has a
state-by-state roundup. Weekly.

•

National Center for Education Statistics www.nces.ed.gov Has numbers and data on just about everything, including your
local school district. Great for state-by-state comparisons.

•

Rural Community and Educational Trust www.ruraledu.org The source for all things rural and schools. Lots of stuff on
small schools.

•

ERIC ed research database, http://ericir.syr.edu/Eric/ Just about every piece of ed research is archived by ERIC,
Educational Resources Information Center. Study after study after study on just about anything you can think of. Full-text for
many studies.

•

AEL (originally Appalachia Educational Laboratory, AEL serves regional and national clients) www.ael.org Lots of research
available, with a rural bent.

•

Phi Delta Kappan www.pdkintl.org/kappan/kappan.htm Highly respected and read ed journal that's written in
English.

•

Minority Student Achievement Network www.msanetwork.org/ A coalition of 15 multiracial suburban districts that are
striving to shrink the racial achievement gap.

•

U.S. Census Bureau www.census.gov offers data on educational attainment (high school, bachelor’s etc.) Using American
FactFinder and SF3, data can be broken out for communities, census tracts or block groups, and compared to earlier censuses to
examine educational patterns and relationship to poverty and race. School finance data also available.

Higher Education
•

The Chronicle on Higher Education http://chronicle.com/ should be part of your subscription lists. This weekly will offer you
story ideas, background information and access to some killer databases on plenty of universities.

•

American Association of University Professors www.aaup.org is the faculty union and is a great source on tenure, teaching and
other issues, (202) 737-5900.

•

Association of American Universities www.aau.edu represents about 40 of the nation's best public and private research
universities. The organization has a great deal of information on research trends and issues in higher education. Membership is by
invitation only. Nils Hasselmo, president. Peter F. Smith, press contact, (202) 408-7500.

•

American Council on Education www.acenet.edu will become your best friend. Its scholars and associates know everything
about just about everything. They cover the gamut from finances to governance to teaching and student life. Timothy
McDonough, press contact, (202)939-9300.

•

National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities www.naicu.edu is the umbrella organization for private
schools. Very useful for trend information. Tony Pals, press contact, (202)785-8866.

•

National Association for Equal Opportunities in Higher Education www.nafeo.org is the umbrella body for the nation's
historically black colleges and universities. Wilma Roscoe, president, (301) 650-2240.

•

American Association of State Colleges and Universities www.aascu.org is also a good clearinghouse of information relating
to public universities. It keeps some of the best databases on budgeting and finances. (202) 293-7070.

•

National Center for Public Policy and Higher Education www.highereducation.org/ every two years produces a report card
on states’ efforts in higher education. While criticized by some, it is the only attempt to look at the overall goals in higher
education and is a very useful starting point. Patrick Callan, president of the San Jose-based center, (408) 271-2699.

•

Higher Education Resource Hub www.higher-ed.org collects information about higher education in the United States and around
the world. Offers links to news, research, the history of higher education and portions of Higher Education in the United States:
An Encyclopedia.

•

The National Association for Campus Activities www.naca.org is a relatively new organization but has good ideas about what
goes on in student's non-class time. Karen Moody is the contact for the Columbia, SC- based group, (803) 732-6222 ext. 25.

•

Student drinking will become part of every higher ed writer's life whether they want it to or not. The best starting place is the
work of Henry Wechsler, director of the College Alcohol Studies Program at the Harvard University School of Public Health in
Cambridge, Mass. , www.hsph.harvard.edu, (617) 432-1137.

•

Richard Lapchick, director of the Center for the Study of Sports in Society http://www.sportinsociety.org/ at Northeastern
University in Boston, Mass., is one of the best all-purpose sources for information about college athletics, (617) 373-4025.

•

National Collegiate Athletic Association www.ncaa.org offers resources for journalists covering the inevitable sports scandals
that’ll occur at any major university. See on-line rules handbook and a searchable infractions database for your university’s past
violations. The main number is (317) 917-6222; you’ll be whisked to public relations where the staff will politely direct you to
appropriate rules and data. But you'll need to cultivate other sources – within the NCAA or elsewhere – to help determine whether
rules violations have occurred.

