The Business of Education: Data sources and story ideas
IRE Annual Conference * June 2003 * Washington, D.C.
Holly Hacker, IRE and NICAR
holly@nicar.org
Good investigative journalists are supposed to follow the money. That advice certainly applies to the
education beat, whether you're covering public or private schools, K-12 or higher education. Tackling the
financial and business aspects of education is even more crucial these days as states confront budget crises
and schools race to raise student achievement. Here, then, are some places to look for useful data, plus a
few story ideas. Keep in mind that most education decisions are made on the state and local levels, so you
should check on the types and formats of data available in your coverage area.

NATIONAL
Public Elementary-Secondary Education Finance Data (F-33 reports) from the U.S. Census Bureau
www.census.gov/govs/www/school.html
These Census files contain data on the revenues, expenditures, debt and assets (cash and security holdings)
of elementary and secondary public school systems in the U.S. The files, which cover several years, can be
downloaded as text (fixed-length or comma-delimited) or a SAS dataset.
National Center for Education Statistics, education finance division
www.nces.ed.gov/edfin
Click on "finance data" to find the National Public Education Financial Survey Data, downloadable state-level
reports on school spending and revenues. Also check out the "publications" section for relevant literature,
such as how to make cost adjustments in education, and how each state funds education.
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS)
www.nces.ed.gov/ipeds/
IPEDS is the Education Department's core data collection system for colleges and universities. It includes a
salary data file with the number of full-time instructional faculty, total salary outlays and number of tenured
faculty, by contract length, gender and academic rank. There's also a finance data file with current fund
revenues by source; current fund expenditures by function (e.g., instruction, research); physical plant assets
and indebtedness; and endowment investments. Be warned that the files tend to be outdated -- the most
recent salary data is for 1998-99, and the most recent finance data is for 1996-97.
IRS Form 990s
Look up individual 990s at www.guidestar.org
Order the complete set of 990s by year from IRE and NICAR at www.nicar.org/data/irs/
Tax-exempt organizations must file annual financial reports, called Form 990s, with the IRS. Churches, as
well as organizations with annual receipts of less than $25,000, do not have to file -- but some do anyway.
Filers include private schools and colleges, parent-teacher organizations and foundations that support public
school systems. The reports list revenues, expenditures, assets and liabilities, plus compensation for officers,
directors, trustees and the five highest-paid employees.
Federal Procurement Data System, maintained by the U.S. General Services Administration
Available from IRE and NICAR at www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/fedcontacts/

1

This data system includes all federal contracts worth more than $25,000. The data indicates which
contractors are educational institutions. So, it's possible to search for all federal contracts obtained by your
local universities.
Consolidated Federal Funds Report (CFFR)
www.census.gov/govs/www/cffr.html
Available from IRE and NICAR at www.nicar.org/data/cffr/
CCFR shows all federal government expenditures or obligations to states, counties and local agencies. That
includes salaries and wages, direct loans and insurance, as well as procurement contracts. Reporters can
track how much Uncle Sam spends in a community and on which programs. It's good for comparing
government spending between states, or between counties of the same size within the same state.
Federal Assistance Award Data System (FAADS)
www.census.gov/govs/www/faads.html
Available from IRE and NICAR at www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/faads/
FAADS contains records of federal assistance to state and local governments in the form of payments, loans
or insurance.

STATE
State education departments -- Check with the education department in your state(s) to see what financial
data they collect on individual districts. This is a good way to track spending and revenues in each district.
Which districts get the most state aid? Which districts must provide most of their funding through local
sources? What is each district's property tax rate? How much do districts spend on administration versus
classroom instruction? The data can help answer these kinds of questions.
State budget offices -- Many states have made huge cuts in K-12 and higher education because of the
economic downturn. How much does your state spend on education compared to health and human services,
transportation or prisons? Have cuts or funding in education kept pace with other departments? Some states
use lottery proceeds to fund education -- have those dollars been added to the education pot, or did they
merely supplant other dollars?
Secretaries of state -- Some school districts, universities and education groups hire lobbyists, who must
register with the state (and list their clients). Then you can find out how much the lobbyists get paid, and for
what results. Also look at the influence of lobbyists for companies that do business with school districts or
universities – for an example, see a Miami Herald story from
www.miami.com/mld/miamiherald/news/local/3025298.htm
LOCAL
Individual school districts (or colleges and universities) -- If you're interested in spending by local school
districts, go to them for the most detailed and current information. And, of course, it's a lot easier to work with
the data if it's in electronic format. Helpful data files include budgets, purchase orders (listing all services and
goods purchased, and from whom) and salaries. Also get copies of various contracts, such as the
superintendent's contract, contracts with educational consultants or service providers (such as companies
that run alternative schools), and contracts with soda or fast-food companies.
Campaign contributions – Get copies of contributions to school board races, bond campaigns and tax
measures.
Property records -- Get a copy of your local assessor's database. You can find out what land and buildings
schools, colleges and universities own, and see whether school administrators or elected officials own any
property that might bring about a conflict of interest.

2

10 story ideas on the business of education
1) Charter schools and student achievement. Charter schools are funded with public dollars but governed by
private boards. The theory is that charter schools will be more innovative and effective because they're free
of some restrictions that govern other public schools. Do they deliver better results? Compare charter schools
to regular public schools of similar demographics (especially family income). Sometimes, they do no better,
or even worse. For instance, an analysis I did for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch of test scores from 2002 found
that charter schools did worse than expected, given their student poverty rates. For other ideas on the
business of charter schools, see the St. Petersburg Times story “Public School Inc.” at
www.sptimes.com/2002/09/15/State/Public_School_Inc.shtml
2) Soda contracts. These days, the great cola wars are being played out on public school grounds. Get a
copy of the contracts local districts have signed with cola or fast-food vendors. Cola contracts usually require
districts to sell a certain number of cases each year, in return for a certain amount of money. Schools get
extra funds, but some people say it’s bad to push sugary drinks on youngsters.
3) School spending gaps. Some states have a large gap in the amount spent on individual school districts,
especially when most funding comes from local sources. You can go beyond straight comparisons and adjust
for the cost of living in districts, and the types of students they educate. For instance, special education
students cost more to educate than general ed students, and some parts of the state have a higher cost of
living than others. For information, look at the education finance division of the National Center for Education
Statistics.
4) School construction. Follow construction projects for school districts or universities. Projects may run over
cost, as reflected in change orders. For an example, see the Miami Herald’s story on “Crumbling Schools,”
and how the Miami-Dade school district wasted tens of millions of dollars “on a mangled construction
program.” www.miami.com/mld/miamiherald/living/education/5174472.htm
5) School field trips. What activities do schools spend their field-trip money on? The Charleston (W.V.)
Gazette found that local kids often went to movies. See the story at
sundaygazettemail.com/news/Valley+&+State/2001020438/ The Excel spreadsheet is a training exercise for
IRE at http://www.ire.org/datasets/practice/data/moviebus.xls
6) Testing contracts. Under the federal No Child Left Behind Act, states must develop standardized tests to
show what students have learned. That means testing companies get big bucks to develop, update and
score the tests. In addition, many testing companies also offer textbooks or other classroom materials. How
much does your state spend on testing? Who gets most of the textbook money?
7) School district foundations and PTOs. Schools in some affluent areas have well-heeled foundations or
parent-teacher organizations that contribute thousands of dollars beyond what the school gets from grants or
the state. Get copy of the IRS Form 990s to see how much they spend, and on what.
8) Research funding at universities -- See if your local college or university has a database showing all
research dollars -- some of the grant money comes from industry groups that may have a vested interest in
the results.
9) Campaign contributions -- Some reporters have built databases of campaign contributions in school board
races, bond measures or property tax measures. Contributors often include construction firms or unions, bond
lawyers or other people or groups that stand to profit. If a bond measure passes, you can see if the big donors
receive any of the bond work. With school board elections, you can see if the winners cast votes favoring their
biggest contributors.
10) Extra-duty or overtime pay for teachers. See if your state or school system tracks regular teacher
salaries, plus any extra-duty pay -- such as for coaching, advising a student club or working extra hours.
Some teachers earn several thousand dollars above their base salary.

3

