"Death on the Job."
Thomas Maier, Reporter.
New York Newsday, Long Island, New York.
Telephone: 631-843-3408.
Tmaier@Newsday.com.
2003 IRE National Conference, Washington, D.C.
"Death on the Job ? Danger and Profiteering" Panel.

Documenting the Undocumented:
As many as 8 million undocumented people are estimated to be in
the United States, Census officials say, about half of whom are living
in four large states ? New York, Florida, Texas and California. Yet,
these official estimates have proven to be often unreliable and
subject to dramatic change. As a result, we don't know very much about
the health and safety conditions for today's illegal immigrants in
America's workplace. Here is some ways to attempt to document these
developments:
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ? They keep the most reliable
statistics on workplace deaths to foreign-born workers. The agency's web
site is www.bls.gov and it lists several studies and annual reports on
worker fatalities, and the various conditions surrounding these events.
Their statistics come not only from the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration case reports on fatalities, but also from information from
police, hospitals, medical examiners and other sources. One expert who has
studied the issue of workplace fatalities to foreign-born workers is the
BLS's Janice Windau, who can be reached at 202-691-6160.
OSHA ? The good news is that the agency's database is well
maintained and easily available. You can get a copy from NICAR or through
the agency itself. Its address is www.osha.gov You should also file
Freedom of Information request on all fatalities in your region that fit
your area of interest. These reports can provide great detail about fatal
accidents, even if some specifics are blacked out. Make sure your Foia
request asks for all of the work sheets with these reports as well.
Unfortunately, the bad news is that information about place of birth ? the
immigrant status of workers ? is not kept by OSHA. As a result, immigrant
fatalities cannot be broken out from the overall OSHA statistics. As the
agency recently realized, they were slow to react to the sharp rise in
deaths among Hispanic immigrant workers in the U.S., and have pledged to
make changes in this regard.
U.S. Department of Labor ? they keep track of wage and hour
violations which are often the best place to find sweatshop working
conditions. You can contact your regional U.S. Labor office to get the most
recent reports or file a Foia to obtain them. Their address is www.dol.gov.
State Labor Departments sometimes do investigations as do State Attorney
Generals and local prosecutor offices. It's important to check the state
and local offices as well.

- Police/Coroner reports ? often it is the cops who are called to a
workplace incident. In a case of undocumented workers who are killed,
this may be your only official record. Ask for the homicide report and
Foia all of these work sheets. It can provide eye-witness accounts,
the place of birth of a victim (confirming immigrant status) and other
vital details about the fatal accident. Also check with your local
Medical Examiner, Coroner's office for all of the possible
documentation that they have. Often undocumented workers will us an
alias with phony papers, so it may be later in the process, as a
fatality goes through the system, that you find out the victim's real
name. For instance, Newsday once reported a worker killed in a 2000
recycling plant accident was "Filadelpho Moran, aged 20." But records
in the local surrogates court ? a necessary step for his family to
collect a death benefit from the government ? showed his real name was
Fredi Canales and he had only turned 16 when he was killed on the job.
This type of case became a central part of a Newsday series on this
issue.
- Other resources ? Here's some other resources from the July 2001
Newsday series on this issue.
Center for Immigration Studies ? a right-leaning organization that
often is critical of U.S. Immigration policy but keeps extensive,
well-informed web site on many issues related to immigrant workers. [Its
address is www.cis.org.]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [www.cdc.gov.] This
agency is increasingly monitoring the health and safety of immigrant
workers as an at-risk population. They are currently conducting a study on
this issue.
Sweatshop watch, Nikki Bas, 415-391-1655, a good resource on the
national picture.
Chinese Staff and Worker's Association, Wing Lam, director,
212-619-7979. An excellent contact in a Chinese community well-attuned to
worker safety issues.
Hispanic worker advocates include: Coalition for Justice, Marta
Ojeda, 210-731-8957, the National Counsel of La Raza, Lisa Navarette,
202-785-1670; The Workplace Project, Nadia Marin, 516-565-5377; The ACLU
Immigrant Worker's Project, 212-665-9460.

