ELISABETH LEAMY
SR. INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER
Fox 5 WTTG
Story Ideas
BREAKING THE LAW: (When companies break the law,
obviously that hurts consumers and makes a great
story.)
--Odometer Rollbacks: Find a used car dealer who's
rolling back odometers. Found mine through an insider
tip.
--Title Washing: I found a ring that was obtaining new
titles for cars (under false pretenses) to hide the
fact that they were salvaged or stolen. Proving this
story was a paper chase. The ringleaders went to
prison.
--Unlicensed Contractors: Find them through community
newspaper ads or business cards at home improvement
stores. Invite them to give you a bid on a job, then
confront them about working without a license.
--Candy Kids: Follow children selling candy on the
streets of your city. FInd out their ages. Document
the long hours they work. Confront the adult crew
leaders who exploit them, then check the criminal
records of those adults.
--Chinese Remedies: Small Asian grocery stores
routinely sell remedies that are illegal in the U.S.
because they contain lead, narcotics and other
contaminants. Get a list from the FDA and go shopping.
--Placement Race: Studies show agencies that find
permanent administrative jobs for people are twice as
likely to discriminate based on race as regular
employers because they assume their clients prefer
whites. Put them to the test.
--New homes: People assume if you buy a brand new house
it will be perfect. Have a certified home inspector
who specializes in new construction inspect new houses
and see how many building code violations he finds.
--Modeling Agencies: In many states they are not
allowed to take ANY money up front for classes, photos
etc. Test them. You can easily find victims through
the BBB or local consumer protection agencies.
--Credit Repair: These scammers are still at it. Find
a company that claims it can cure your rotten credit.
Recruit a tester who really does have bad credit and

send them in. See if the company promises the
impossible --and illegal.
--Curbstoning: Look for cars for sale by the side of
the road or in parking lots. The majority are sold by
illegal, unlicensed used car dealers. Find out who
really owns the cars. Then make appointments with the
unlicensed used car dealers to hear their sales pitch
and confront them.
--Puppy Peddlers: Check complaint records against local
pet stores. If they're selling puppy mill puppies
you'll probably find multiple complaints about dogs
that were sick or died. Also check USDA breeder
records.
--Pharmacy Foul-ups: Check pharmacy complaint records.
Pharmacies make tons of errors when they fill
prescriptions. Take it one step further and show how
lax the punishments are.
--Access Denied: Find somebody who uses a wheelchair
and arm them with a hidden camera. Go shopping, job
hunting, out to eat, and ride public transportation and
show how many businesses are violating the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
--Trouble on Tap: Test the temperature of water in
restaurant bathrooms. By law, it must be hot enough
for proper hand washing. (Get the exact temp from the
FDA). Fairly easy to find violations.
--Property Predators: Key into predatory lenders in
your community. Check with consumer agencies. Obtain
closing documents from consumers and show how they were
overcharged. This is a terrible, terrible problem.
--Going Out of Business: It's illegal to hold a fake
going out of business sale. Oriental rug stores are
famous for this. Keep track of how long it takes them
to go out of business and whether they reappear down
the street with a new name.
--Scary Salons: FOIA health inspection reports for
beauty salons. Find the most egregious violations and
go look for those violations yourself.
--Bodywork Bandits: Wait til you get complaints about
guys who offer to do body work on the spot, then do a
crummy job. Then get a dented car and go sit in the
same parking lot and see if they approach you. Body
shops are supposed to be licensed.
--Grave Neglect: Check for consumer complaints about

badly run cemeteries. I found some that were run down,
lost bodies and mismarked graves.
--Misleading Mail: Start collecting mail that looks
like it comes from the government or looks like a bill
or personal correspondence. It's the newest junk mail
tactic and some of it is illegal.
--Pay to Park: Parking garages routinely set their "in"
clocks slow and their "out" clocks fast, so it seems
like your car was parked longer than it really was.
This is covered under general consumer protection laws.
--Pyramid Pitch: Infiltrate a pyramid scheme that's
revving up in your area and arrange to hear the pitch
with hidden cameras rolling. Analyze what makes it a
pyramid.
--Voting Access: When election day is coming up, find
out whether the polling places in your area are
accessible to people with disabilities. It's shocking
how millions of people can't vote or can't cast a
secret ballot because of inaccessible polling places.
--All that Glitters: 10 carat gold is the lowest level
that's actually allowed to be called gold. It must
contain at least 41% gold. Shop at off price and mom
and pop stores for 10k gold. Have it tested. Some of
it will be undercarated.

NO LAW TO BREAK: (When an industry is unregulated THAT
can hurt consumers too. ALSO a great story.)
--Personal Trainers: Not regulated by the government
and the organizations that certify them aren't
regulated either. Some groups will certify you if you
just send a videotape of yourself exercising.
--Gumball Charities: Vending machines that imply
they're raising money for a good cause are usually
owned by for-profit entrepreneurs. There is NO LAW
saying the owners have to give any particular
percentage of their proceeds to charity.
--Beltway Bandits: Some towing companies make their
income by cruising freeways looking for stalled cars.
They swoop in, pretend to be the tow truck you called,
then overcharge you and take you to a shop that pays
them a bounty. Legal.
--Hospital Thefts: Go to local hospitals and show how
lax security is. Take a hidden camera and see if you
can easily access patients' personal valuables when

they're out of the room.
--Headhunters: Look for ads in the paper for "executive
counseling services" that take money up front and
promise to find people employment. They rarely get
people jobs and they refuse to return clients' money.
--Military School: If there's a private military
highschool in your area, it's quite possible there's
horrible hazing going on there. Often hazing laws only
apply to public schools.
--Pay, Pay, Pay Phones: Ever since payphones were
deregulated, the owners can charge ANY price for a
call. Try making the same long distance call several
different ways. I got prices ranging from 35 cents to
35 bucks.
--Charity Case: Find local organizations that claim to
be raising money for charity and see how much they
actually give to the cause. Vehicle donation programs,
especially. Get their tax returns from the IRS and
show how little $ does any good. They are not
obligated to give any particular amount to the cause.
--Fire engine chasers: Ambulance chasing is illegal,
but fire engine chasing often is not. "Public
adjusters" go to disaster scenes, approach bewildered
victims and get them to sign contracts paying the
adjuster to be the intermediary with their insurance
company. Adjusters take a huge percentage and do next
to nothing.
--Dog Danger: Chlidren's toys are regulated by the
CPSC. Pet food is regulated by FDA. But pet TOYS are
not regulated. We found dozens of complaints about
nylabone safety. Check for others online. Pets are
family members these days.
--Caged: FOIA complaints about local roadside zoos and
attractions. City zoos too. Visit them. You may find
horrible conditions, but federal standards are so
minimal, that what you find is probably perfectly legal.
--Making the Grade: Pop Quiz: Do private schools have
to meet government standards? No. Not really. They
may have to hold classes for a minimum numbers of days
per year and follow health and fire codes, but that's
about it. They can teach (or not teach) any curriculum
they want. They don't even have to be accredited
(Plus, accreditation is performed by private groups
that aren't regulated either.)
--The Spam Scam: Test whether unsubscribing from spam

actually helps or makes your problem worse. Compare
with reading spam, then deleting it and just deleting
it without opening. Laws are pending but this is still
relatively unregulated area.
--Poison Pipes: It's illegal to sell a home without
informing the buyers about lead paint hazards. But
there's no such law about lead pipes. Did you know
10-20% of lead poisonings come from lead pipes and lead
solder? 40-60% of infant lead poisonings do because
formula is made with water. Test homes in your area.
--Duped by Design: Consumers give interior designers
thousands of dollars up front and trust them to pass
the money along to furniture stores, etc. Thing is, in
many states ANYBODY can be an interior designer. No
licensing required. I found a man who was taking tens
of thousands up front and not providing goods or
services.

