CRAFTING THE INVESTIGATIVE NARRATIVE
IRE National Conference, Washington, DC, June 5-8, 2003
James Neff, Investigations Editor, The Seattle Times
jneff@seattletimes.com 206-464-2285

A few rules, tips and suggestions for writing an investigative serial narrative:
You need plot or saturation, preferably both. Saturation means hanging around, watching
things unfold, or having repeated in-depth interviews with a central subject.
Here are some story forms that can work:
*Pursuits (chasing the bad guy), adventures, journeys (a quest for “the truth”), “stranger
comes to town.” With The Terrorist Within, we had a two overlapping story lines: a
terrorist on a mission to blow up an airport and his pursuit by a prosecutor wanting to
discover him—a lot of “story.”
*Unfolding mystery is a natural: someone is pursuing the truth or the solution to the
mystery: an epidemiologist, an auditor, a whistleblower, a cop, etc.
You need a character who will take action from beginning to end. Character is usually the
engine in classic serial narratives such as Roy Peter Clark’s Three Little Words. But if
you have enough “story” as we did in The Terrorist Within, you can get aware with less
access and insight into characters.
All the rules and techniques of investigative reporting still apply, of course. But you may
need to go back and reinterview subjects or visits places when you find a gap in the story
or in character development.
WRITING
*Look for a deadline in the story or a ticking bomb and work toward it.
*Squeeze much of the attribution into box. You still need to use some, sparingly.
*Keep installments to about 1,000 words.
*Alternative blocks of narration (the “moving now”) with exposition (background,
summary). Suspense and drama is created by having a character confront an obstacle,
getting over or around it, then immediately facing a new one.
*Don’t give away the ending. Let events unfold chronologically.

1

*Put the exposition just after a scene (or narrative piece), just when the reader wants to
know what happens next.
*End a segment when you want to read on.
BENEFITS:
*Great way to provide the “explanatory elements” and make them readable.
*This form provides a place for texture and context that often stays in the notebook with
investigative projects.
*Reader interest. (Our single copy circulation went up about 10 % during the 15 days of
the series). People actually read your work from start to finish.
DRAWBACKS:
*Some readers or colleagues may be uncomfortable with the form and distracted by
wondering how much to trust what is being presented. We don’t have this problem
reading narrative history such as a Robert Caro biography. I think this objection is due
the unconventional nature of this little-used newspaper form.
*Sometimes interesting or new information has to be cut because of space or because it
can’t be jammed into the plot.
BOOKS:
Check out any number of how-to books on novel writing. The Weekend Novelist by
Robert Ray, Writepro (software) by Sol Stein, and The Art of Fiction by John Gardner
have helped me.

2

