A DOCTOR DATABASE
The gift that keeps on giving
Medical reporters should know as much as they can about their local doctors. Plugging information about
them into a spreadsheet or database can help you see the stories you’re missing. It also can help you find
information quickly when a doctor transplants the wrong organ or is arrested on drug charges.
1.

Keep your team small. Work with someone you trust, preferably someone more anal than you
are. It makes for more work at first but less work fixing mistakes before you publish or, God
forbid, correcting mistakes after.
2. As with any good story, build your database from a variety of sources. Your state medical
board might be a good starting point, but check court files for lawsuits, medical specialty boards
for certifications, hospitals for privileges, birth records, death records, etc.
3. Assume all sources are being stingy. If they tell you there aren’t any paper records, they’re
wrong. Get at least a sample of the paper records to go with any database. If they tell you there is
no database, they’re probably wrong again. Work your way to the person who manages the files
and the person who manages the database. They are usually the best sources and often are
motivated by low pay and poor working conditions to give you what you need.
4. Read the documents. Make sure you understand what everything means and where the holes are
you need to fill later. Doing the data entry yourself also forces you to read the documents.
5. Think big. Don’t build your database for one story. Build it so it can generate dozens of stories in
both the long and short term. That means creating as many fields as you can imagine. What would
you like to count? What would you like to be able to group together? (See flipside for ideas.)
6. Make notes about your notes. Databases force you to abbreviate, especially in the field names or
header rows. Months down the line you might not remember what a “IncYr” is or what the
difference is between “Hosp” and “Hosp2.” You can do this in a Word file, in comments attached
to the cells in your spreadsheet or in the design view box of your database.
7. Keep it together. Scan the documents that you’re using and put hyperlinks to them in the
database. Hyperlink to interviews and other spreadsheets and databases. Investigating doctors can
get messy; so keep as much as you can in one spot.
8. Think public. This database is a collection of your notes, but part of it might be posted online at
some point. Make sure you enter the information in a way that will make sense to readers. You
can always change field names from abbreviations to full titles. It’s more important to make sure
what you type in the cells makes sense.
9. Protect yourself. Every doctor has a lawyer, if not a legal team. Every word in your database is a
potential lawsuit. There’s only a one word difference between: “The coroner found the doctor did
not cause the baby’s death” and “the coroner found the doctor did cause the baby’s death.”
10. Keep it current. This is the toughest part. Your story was in the paper months ago, and you see
no reason to keep taxing your wrists with all that typing. Remember, there are many more good
stories in your future if you keep your database up to date. (This is another good reason to work
with someone with a mild obsessive-compulsive disorder who can keep you honest.)

Some stories The Orange County Register has done using its doctor database
California Medical Board allows doctors to practice despite long histories of complaints (April 2002):
www.ocregister.com/features/doctor/doctor00407cci1.shtm
Hospitals ignore medical misconduct that endanger patients, keep doctors on staff (September 2002):
www2.ocregister.com/ocrweb/ocr/article.do?id=3882
The head of one of California’s largest neurosurgery departments puts profits before patients (May 2003):
www.ocregister.com/investigations/2003/chambi/index.shtml
Regular updates on Medical Board investigations (ongoing):
home.myoc.com/cgi-bin/specials/docsearch.cgi

Prepared by: William Heisel, The Orange County Register, wheisel@ocregister.com

Doctor database basics
When building your spreadsheet or database of doctors, you can add or subtract fields, rows or columns as
you go, but why wait? Think of all the possible information you want about doctors first and then create
field names or header rows for each item before you start. Think about what you want to be able to account
for and what you want to be able to count. Here are some suggestions based on The Orange County
Register’s doctor database.
Last Name – It’s always best to split the first and last name. It makes it easier to link tables later.
First Name – Ditto.
License Number – You should be able to get this from your state medical board.
Date of Birth – This is not always easy to come by, but it’s good to have a spot to put it should you find it.
Date License Issued
Medical School
Specialty
Certification – Yes/No for whether the doctor is certified in his/her specialty. You can use a “1” for yes
and a “0” for no to let you easily count them.
Investigation/Case Number – Medical board investigations are typically numbered.
Incident date – The earliest recorded date of an offense by the doctor. First mysterious patient death, for
example.
Complaint date – When the medical board received a complaint about the doctor.
Filing date – When charges were filed against the doctor.
Yes/No fields for type of case – Drug related, sex related, quality of care, financial misconduct, patient
death, patient injury, criminal, etc.
Specific charges – Medical boards usually list the code violations in question, such as negligence, sexual
misconduct, dishonesty, etc.
Details of the case – The Register used this field to write summaries of each case against a doctor.
Number of patients involved
Number of patient deaths
Where the offenses occurred – You might have multiple fields for this information. Hospital names.
Office names. Home addresses. Possible field names would be “Place1,” “Place2” and “Place3”.
Repeat offender – A yes or no (“1” or “0”) for whether the doctor has previous offenses.
Type of discipline – Probation? Suspension? License revocation?
Details of discipline – Here is a spot for summaries of how the case was adjudicated.
Amount of fine
Cost of investigation – Often a medical board will detail the cost of its investigation in order to recoup
some of those costs from the physician.
Lead investigators name – You might want to write about which investigators get results.
Judge’s name – You might want to go back and find which judges are more lenient.
Hospital privileges – The Register has a separate field for 30 acute care hospitals in the county. We put a
“1” if the doctor has privileges there.
Hospital discipline – Has the hospital ever disciplined this doctor? This is difficult to come by. But why
not aim high?

Privileges check date – When did you last check to see where this doctor had privileges? You don’t want
to write a story or post a database with old information. Also, a doctor might lose privileges, and you would
want to find out why.
Lawsuit count – How many lawsuits name this doctor?
Lawsuit names – Who is suing this doctor? You might want to put this information into a separate table
linked to the doctor database by license number.
Lawsuit date – Earliest date of a lawsuit.
Lawsuit check date – As with privileges, you’ll want to keep checking lawsuit periodically.

