GOING BEYOND THE CENSUS
A Tipsheet on Combining Census Data with Other Datasets
Harvy Lipman, Chronicle of Philanthropy: (202) 466-1218
harvy.lipman@philanthropy.com
• Before you do anything else, write down in plain English just what it is you want to
find out. Forget about what data you think or know is available, at least at first. In our
case, we wanted to know how charitable giving is affected by variations in cost-of-living
around the country and by demographic factors.
• Define clearly the data you need: We decided to look at giving after living expenses;
that is, after people paid all the bills they have to pay, how much was left, and what
percentage of that did they give to charity. That meant defining what to include in living
expenses.
• Find the data. The Census is a treasure, especially the sf3 file, which includes
information on income, housing costs (including mortgages and property taxes), and
demographics. But it has its limitations. It doesn’t tell you what people pay on other
taxes, food, clothing, transportation, school, etc.
• Another less frequently mined source is the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ quarterly
Consumer Expenditures Survey. Four times a year the BLS surveys about 7,500
Americans on their spending patterns, in great detail. It includes, for example, how much
people give to charity, how much they spend on tobacco and alcohol, or how much they
spend on parochial school. Doing a story on patterns of smoking or alcohol abuse by race
or age or gender? Here’s your data. You can get the microdata, which allows you to look
at spending patterns regionally, by size of community and by demographics. Be sure to
ask the BLS experts how to use the data, though: You have to apply the correct weighting
factors to the right fields, and you won’t figure that out on your own.
• Especially when you’re dealing with large-scale social issues, you may have to settle
for using data from a variety of years, some of it “old” in terms of the way news
organizations normally think about things. While you don’t want to use terribly outdated
material, however, using data from 5 years ago may be fine. The Chronicle wanted to
look at how charitable giving varied from place to place, and the only data available was
an IRS analysis of the 1997 tax year. But is there any reason to think that giving patterns
changed dramatically over a 5-year period, or is it more rational to think they remain
relatively constant – especially when comparing one location to another?
• Figure out how to link up data that’s not designed to work together. Both the Census
and the IRS data were available at the zip code level, which allowed us to join them. But
specific local BLS data is available only for 23 major metro areas; the rest can’t be
broken down beyond region and size (metro areas in the south with populations between
1.2 million and 4 million, for example). Is that good enough for what you’re trying to do?
The answer will vary from project to project.
• Make sure you explain to readers the choices you’ve made and why you’ve made
them.

