Six Key Records for the Local Government Beat
MICHAEL MANSUR, KC STAR, mmansur@kcstar.com

1. Personnel and payroll. Get basic salary information on everyone. How many make
$100,000 plus? You may be surprised. In Kansas City, we found 60 in the ``$100,000 club.’’
Then examine overtime. What are the totals by department? Trends over at least three to
four years? Examine by individuals. Do any double their take-home pay with overtime?
2. Budget/finance. In examining the budget, pay special attention to any notes at the end or
bottom of pages. Study flexible spending versus dedicated dollars, that is those that votes or
court orders mandate the way they must be spent. Study, too, the annual management letter
that details problems in financial management, such as internal controls, reconciliation of
accounts or collecting water-use fees or tallying tax revenues. You won’t know the city’s real
financial situation without studying the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. Also check
on any bond prospectus issued by the city and keep close tabs on year-end balances in the
city budget.
3. Perks. Early-retirement programs are popular programs these days. Study the formulas,
paying attention to what counts as salary. Do workers get credit for overtime? If so, you might
match overtime records to see if there’s a pattern of workers about to retire getting a lot of
overtime, padding their retirement.
Cell phone records are sure to produce something. In Kansas City, we found $1,500 a
month bills and lax oversight, where workers who needed to use the phone a lot for legitimate
city business were on cheap phone plans, resulting in big bills. Meanwhile, high-ranking
officials had better plans but didn’t need their phones while they sat in their offices. To do this
story, we requested three months of billing data, which included the phone number,
department, employee and monthly amount. We calculated the most costly users and
requested the detailed billing records for the Top 25 users.
Take-home vehicles. How many officials get to drive home a city car. Gas and insurance
paid, too? Why do they need it? Study city policy and whether it’s being followed. Look for
daily logs.
Other benefits. Some high-ranking city officials in KC receive the government equivalent
of a 401K plan. How much does that cost taxpayers? Is it necessary?
4. City Property. According to new federal government accounting rules, cities and counties
must have an inventory of their property. In KC, city officials only now are compiling a list of
what real estate the city owns. If your city doesn’t have that list, that’s a story. If it does, check
the list against city inspection databases. Are city properties in violation of city codes? In KC,
we found salvage yards operating or squatting on city property, as well as other property
seized by the county for delinquent taxes.
5. Other Property. Check each year’s property assessment records. Run elected officials
through that database and check on the annual increases? Who has the highest increases?
Do developments winning abatement of property taxes or TIFs also petition for increases in
their assessments? In delinquent property tax records, you’re likely to find
Interesting delinquents. In Missouri, property owners are allowed to be delinquent for two
years. In the third, the county can take possession. Do many developers let their property
lapse for those years, then pay up at deadline? What’s more, is the county properly
assessing penalties and interest to discourage delinquency?
6. Fun Records. Any local government inspection record is fun. Look for inspection records
related to restaurants, swimming pools, nursing homes, daycares, even salvage yards.
Check your water department for a database of water loss or leaks. City’s can lose up to a
third of their water in aging pipes, poorly maintained fountains and swimming pools. Does the
city also keep track of water meters that are broken and tampered with?
Check city vendor lists, ranking the top contractors. Compare to campaign contributions.
Also, match TIF projects and their attorneys to political contributions. Check on which
disclosure forms the state or city requires elected and appointed officials. Request and write
about them; otherwise the laws are worthless.

