Mike McIntire
The New York Times

INVESTIGATING STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
What to Get From State and Local Governments
- Vendor lists. ALWAYS ask for these and other large databases in electronic
form. Find out who the biggest and best-paid suppliers are for your town or agency. Do
they have any family, business or political connections to people in power? Preferably,
get five or 10 years worth of data so you can see when these businesses were first hired
and what the payment trends are.
- Public employee payroll and pension databases. See what kinds of golden nest
eggs certain public officials are enjoying or what patronage jobs are being awarded in
town or state government.
- Criminal records database. A MUST. You can use this database to crossreference against lists of teachers, school bus drivers, etc. Most states will allow the
purchase of a criminal records database from the judicial department or, perhaps, state
public safety department.
- Ethics filings for state (and sometimes local) officials. Look for stock purchases
that coincide with public action affecting a company.
- Phone and email records of a public official or office. A word of caution:
FOI’ing these can be the journalistic equivalent of “going nuclear.” It will probably mark
the end of your relationship, if any, with whoever it is you’re targeting.
- Audits. Aside from audits prepared locally by state or municipal auditors, check
federal inspector-general web sites for U.S. agencies that provide a lot of funding to
states, like the departments of education or health and human services.
- Contract specs. For big or controversial government-funded projects, get the
specifications for whatever it is the state or municipality purchased (or is intending to
purchase) to look for evidence that they were tailored for the winning bidder.
Competitors who lost out in the bidding are always a good source of tips for this.
State and Local Beats
- Background members of boards and commissions, as well as department heads
and legal counsels. Look for business and political ties that could pose a conflict with
official actions. Evidence of financial, gambling or other problems can be found in
bankruptcy or divorce files.

- Background boards of prominent private-sector institutions, especially banks.
Look for bankers who are also involved in real estate and/or politics.
- Find out where the state treasurer is investing state employee pension funds.
Treasury boards-of-trustees meetings are public. Public pension funds can generate huge
fees for investment firms, who often are reliable donors to political campaigns.
- Check municipal clerk’s office regularly for new lawsuits and property records,
and browse Commercial Record periodically to see who’s building or buying what in
town. On a state level, check court filings regularly for lawsuits involving state agencies.
- Keep a list of key people, in public office and in the private sector locally or
statewide, and run checks periodically for lawsuits against them in state and federal
courts. List candidates would include the city council president, police chief, local bank
CEO, etc.
- Attend most town board meetings (even if you don’t write about them), or if not,
at least get the agendas. Make sure you’re getting all the supplementary documents that
accompany the agendas, and peruse them for little-noticed professional-service or
purchase contracts, acquisitions of property, building demolitions, etc.
- Scan campaign finance reports, on file either with the secretary of the state or in
town hall. Look for common last names or addresses of contributors (indicating bundling
of donations), out-of-town or out-of-state contributors, etc. Common dates for a slew of
contributions probably indicates a fund-raiser was held – who arranged it and why?
- Run the name of your town, state agency or department through the state
legislature’s web site for bills or other legislative action that it may be involved in.

