Draft 3—6/3/03

Remarks of Geri Palast
Executive Director, Justice at Stake Campaign
Panel: “Judging Judges: From Campaigns to Secrecy to Operations”
June 5, 2003
INTRODUCTION
Geri Palast, Executive Director of the Justice at Stake Campaign. We are a national
partnership working to educate the public and support efforts to ensure that our courts are
fair and impartial. Our 42 partners include the American Bar Association, the National
Center for State Courts, Common Cause, and the League of Women Voters.
I want to thank the Criminal Justice Journalists and the Investigative Reporters and
Editors for sponsoring this panel.

THE CHALLENGE OF COVERING J UDICIAL S ELECTION
Covering the courts is a pretty broad mission. I want to brief you on an aspect of the
courts that is often overlooked, even though it is heating up as a political issues: the
selection of state judges, whether by election or appointment.
Many people don’t know that almost 87% of America’s state judges are elected, and 38
states conduct some form of election for their Supreme Courts. State judges handle more
than 98% of all lawsuits in America, making decisions that affect the basic liberties and
welfare of millions of Americans.
Judicial elections and appointments aren’t exactly tailor-made for reporting:
1. Judicial elections have traditionally been seen as the poor stepchild of the American
election system: they’re low-profile, voter turnout is meager, and the candidates have
little to say that affects the daily lives of your readers and viewers
2. Judicial appointments are even harder to cover, since they seem to happen behind
closed doors
COVERING J UDICIAL S ELECTION
But the conventional wisdom is out of date. In fact, now is a very good time to cover
judicial selection, which is one of the hottest-growing stories in the United States.
I say that because during the last decades, an increasing number of special interests have
“discovered” judicial selection politics. The way we pick our judges who protect our
rights is changing—and the decisions those judges are making could be changing. But
Americans don’t know yet understand what’s happening.

2

TIPS FOR COVERING J UDICIAL ELECTIONS
Since most judges are elected, I’ll focus most of my remarks on those campaigns. There
are different kinds of judicial elections. Contested elections are like other political races:
candidates run against each other. In retention elections, incumbent judges run without
opposition, but they still need to get enough votes—usually a majority—to stay in office.
In addition, some states identify judge candidates by political party, while others are
nonpartisan.
Because of what’s been happening, I want to offer five concrete tips for finding
stories in judicial elections
Tip 1. Follow the Money: The cost of judicial campaigns is skyrocketing, forcing
judges to raise money like politicians—leading people to believe that justice is for
sale. Supreme Court candidates raised $45.6 million during the 2000 campaign, a 61
percent increase over 1998 and double the amount raised in 1994. 2002 brought new
spending records in Ohio and Illinois.
Tracking fund-raising in judicial elections is not always simple. State record-keeping
offices vary in how fast and friendly they are to deal with. That’s why we published
The New Politics of Judicial Elections, which analyzes the trends up to the 2000
campaign cycle. The sequel, covering 2002, will be out in the next few months. The
very best single source, however is one of our partners—The National Institute on
Money in State Politics. Their website is www.followthemoney.org, their phone
number is (406) 449-2480, and their Executive Director is Samantha Sanchez. The
Center for Public Integrity is another good resource.
Tip 2. Watch the Special Interests: In a growing number of states, special interests
have “discovered” judicial elections. They’re spending millions to elect judges who
they think will serve their interests. By the most conservative estimates, in 2000
political parties and special interest groups spent more than $4.3 million on TV ads to
support “their” candidates for Supreme Court. Even in 2002, an off-year cycle,
special interests spent more than $2.5 million on ads.
More and more interest groups are jumping into the water. The 2002 campaign
featured ads by groups with names like Idahoans for Tax Reform, the Law
Enforcement Alliance of America, Consumers for a Fair Court, Competition Ohio
and the First American Education Fund. There’s also a tort liability reform story
line: the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and some of its state counterparts dominated the
2000 race, and in 2002 it appears that the plaintiffs’ bar and its allies responded.
Make no mistake: political professionals are working harder every year to elect
judges who will decide cases in their interest, not the public interest. To help you
understand, we’ve brought a couple of these ads to show you.
[Run tape.]
phone 202-588-9700 fax 202-588-9485
www.justiceatstake.org
717 D Street, NW, Suite 203, Washington, DC 20004

3
Tip 3. Pay close attention to what’s being said—and who’s saying it: As you can
see, misleading and partisan attacks are now bringing politics into the courtroom.
During the 2000 judicial campaigns, 80 percent of special interest ads attacked
judicial candidates. In 2002, special interest groups sponsored almost all of the attack
ads. In polling sponsored by Justice at Stake, most state judges say the tone and
conduct of campaigns is growing worse.
Now there’s an added wrinkle. In order to ensure that judges don’t make explicit or
implicit promises as to how they’ll rule on cases, states have traditionally restricted
how much judicial candidates can speak out on the campaign trail. Last year, in the
case Republican Party of Minnesota v. White, the U.S. Supreme Court loosened many
of these restrictions on what judicial candidates can say during their campaigns.
As a result, you may find that judges are speaking out more on the campaign trail.
That’s good news for reporters, since you may have juicier campaign statements to
cover. But I would urge you to go beyond the sound bites, and make sure that your
readers and viewers know that this is a cutting edge issue in legal ethics—and that it
could have implications for whether cases are decided fairly and impartially.
Consider the Texas candidate who used to begin his stump speech with a promise to
never overturn a death penalty. In Pennsylvania, candidates are staking themselves
out as “pro-choice” and “pro-life” on abortion. In New York, a judge is now
appealing his disciplinary review after being cited for engaging in demonstrations
designed to disrupt the recount process in Dade County after the 2000 presidential
election, as well as offering potential voters drinks, donuts and coupons for gasoline.
And make no mistake: interest groups are watching. Last year, just weeks after the
White decision, the group Indiana Right to Life sent questionnaires to state judge
candidates seeking their positions on abortion rights, assisted suicide and in vitro
fertilization. Under White, the future of judicial campaigns is a New Dating Game
where special interests quiz judges to find out who will meet their litmus tests, and
judges are pressured to provide answers that will please their suitors. Every judicial
candidate will know that the “correct” could lead to big money, powerful
endorsements, and platoons of grass roots support. Your readers and viewers
deserve to know, too.
Tip 4. Look at how special interest pressure is eroding public faith in the courts. 76
percent of voters now believe that donors to judges’ campaigns get special treatment
in court—and even 26 percent of judges agree. 62% of Americans, including 85% of
African Americans, now believe there is a two-tier system of justice—one for the rich
and powerful, and one for everyone else. The public is increasingly fearful of special
interest influence over the courts. They want solutions. Indeed, many people who
oppose public financing of elections are willing to make an exception for judicial
contests—because they know that judges are supposed to be different than ordinary
politicians.

phone 202-588-9700 fax 202-588-9485
www.justiceatstake.org
717 D Street, NW, Suite 203, Washington, DC 20004

4
Tip 5. Take a look at who’s voting, who isn’t, and why: Most Americans ignore
judicial elections in their states. Turnout in some races is as low as 13% of eligible
voters. The public is not sure “how” to vote for judges, and they rarely know the
candidates. Only 1 in 8 voters say they have much information on judicial
candidates. And 9 in 10 fear that this information vacuum means that judges are
selected “for reasons other than their qualifications.” In other words, voter apathy
leaves the playing field open to special interests.
In our opinion research, we found many citizens who would be willing to vote in
these races—if they just had a little more information. They’re willing to use basic
information, like their life experience and legal career and a sentence or two from the
candidate, to help them make up their mind. Many bar associations and civic
organizations like the League of Women Voters publish voter guides. Better yet, if
your newspaper or website can publish such basic information, we know for a fact
that many citizens would find it useful.
Tip 6. Look at the connection between the state and federal benches: Everyone
knows that federal judicial confirmations grow increasingly politicized and polarized.
There’s more pressure than ever for presidents to pick the “right” judges, and for
interest groups and Senators to choose sides on ideological grounds. That means that
state courts, a traditional pool of federal judge candidates, are under even more
scrutiny. When there’s a federal opening in your region, consider who in your state is
being considered and which special interests have historically supported them. You
might be able to spot judges who have been groomed for years for higher judicial
office.

TIPS FOR COVERING J UDICIAL APPOINTMENTS
If your state appoints judges, you won’t be able to cover a campaign. But there are still
important story angles available.
•

Who picks the judges? In some states, an outside merit selection commission
screens candidates before the governor picks one. In others, the Governor’s staff
does the picking. In either case, it matters greatly whose doing the choosing, and
how they got that job. Is it a diverse group? What are their criteria?

•

Diversity: This topic actually applies to any system, elected or appointed. Most
racial and ethnic minorities are disproportionately involved in the justice system,
but underrepresented on the bench. And they’re far less likely than whites to
believe that judges are fair and impartial. Justice at Stake has gathered a series of
studies that can help you determine how diverse your state courts are. Does your
system try to help courts become more diverse? Which system is favored by
minority groups in your state? Is there a new tide against minorities? (In the last
two elections, African American incumbents running statewide for the Supreme
and appellate courts in Alabama and North Carolina all lost their seats.)
phone 202-588-9700 fax 202-588-9485
www.justiceatstake.org
717 D Street, NW, Suite 203, Washington, DC 20004

5

•

Special interest pressure: Are there any groups working to elect judges rather
than appoint them? What’s the relationship between key state interest groups and
the people who pick or confirm judges. Do interest groups attack unfavorable
rulings in a bid to pressure judges?

CONCLUSION
Judicial selection is one of the hottest growing stories in state politics. Not every state
has weathered a perfect storm of special-interest pressure on their courts, but no state is
safe. If you’re looking for stories, you won’t be disappointed. [Give JAS contact info.]

phone 202-588-9700 fax 202-588-9485
www.justiceatstake.org
717 D Street, NW, Suite 203, Washington, DC 20004

