Unsung Investigative Documents
IRE Conference
10-11:10 a.m.
Friday, June 6, 2003
Washington, D.C.
``The government produces so much information that they can't hide the truth all the
time.'' -- I.F. Stone

Jim Steele, Time Magazine
Jim_Steele@timeinc.com
Joe Stephens , The Washington Post
stephensj@washpost.com
Mike McGraw, The Kansas City Star
McGraw@kcstar.com

Some of the best documents and sources you'll ever use are little-known ones that you
probably haven't found yet. Don't ever assume the document you need doesn't exist.
There's an endless and continually expanding lode of documents and other sources to be
mined.
Jim, Joe and Mike's five basic rules for finding and using documents:
1. Never view documents in a vacuum. Combining two or more documents or documents
and interviews is often the key to investigative stories. Such ``triangulation'' unlocks the
full potential of unsung documents and sources.
2. Always view documents over time; compare this year's annual report to ones published
five and ten years ago.
3. Please help short circuit the troubling trend of journalists failing to use the federal
Freedom of Information Act and state open records laws. Yes it takes time, yes there are
delays, especially in the aftermath of 9/11. But sometimes they work and work well.
Either way, we have a constitutional obligation to keep them well greased.
4. If someone refers to or reads from a document during an interview, ask for a copy.
Carry a floppy disk with you so there's never an excuse for someone not to download
what you want.
5. Make copies of your documents before you start marking them up. That way, when the
graphics folks ask for copies for artwork, you won't feel so dumb.

Here, in no special order, is a list of some of our favorite documents and other
sources:
Federal tax liens (They can provide information on company inventories or whether
public officials pay their taxes).
State franchise tax reports
Notary Public Commissions
Campaign contribution databases
Docket pages at federal agency websites
Administrative Law judge opinions at various federal agencies
Statistical Abstract of the U.S. (Contains thumbnail tables of every conceivable kind of
statistic; footnotes to every table show you where to get the full document.)
Union "LM" financial reports
Government cell phone, ``calling card'' and 800 number information
Desk appointment calendars and visitor sign-in logs.
Gasoline credit card receipts.
Raw documents that governmental offices compile to later complete personal financial
disclosure reports. (Allows you to obtain the relevant information in real time, without
waiting a year or longer for its release.)
Federal Express billing records.
Flight logs and manifests for publicly owned aircraft (Such logs may also be available for
private or nonprofit-owned aircraft if they are involved in tax disputes).
Copies of correspondence and minutes of meetings from public agencies. (If letters
cannot be obtained directly under open records laws, as is the case with members of
Congress, you can request the correspondence from the executive-branch agencies to
which the letters were sent.)
Letters written by individuals and companies commenting on proposed regulations. (Ex:
An airline lobbyists' explanation for why new security measures are not worth the delays
and added expense).

Financial and performance reviews conducted by internal and external auditors.
Reports made by inspectors general, performance auditors, the General Accounting
Office or other oversight bodies.
Raw notes and transcripts of interviews made by auditors and investigators, as well as
drafts and early, unedited versions of audit reports or formal investigations. (GAO has a
policy of trying to honor at least some requests for documents used in audits.)
Logs or docket books of open record requests made by public officials, lawyers, and
private industry.
Company press releases, many of which are now archived by PR Newswire.
Industry magazines and newsletters.
All complaints received from a particular address by the local police department.
(Example: Police reports logged at the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in the
year before Timothy McVeigh blew it up.)
Transcripts of congressional hearings.
Documents showing free trips taken by judges. A searchable list is on the web at
http://www.tripsforjudges.org/
Lists of all opinions and letters issued by your state's attorney. Many states also have
ethics offices that periodically issue opinions.
Monthly lists of official documents and correspondence that are filed with your state's
archives.
E-mail lists sponsored by government agencies and private companies, where officials
often brag out-of-school and say what they really mean.
Internal newsletters at private companies and at government agencies.
Corporate annual reports.
Internal telephone directories, especially outdated ones, which may list former
employees, who may want to unload about their former employer. Phone lists can also
give you titles for company executives, and direct-dial lines that allow you to by-pass the
secretary and PR gatekeepers. Also, get a directory of home phone numbers, if possible,
through a friendly source or terminated employee.

Read the actual statutes applying to your subject in the U.S. code, state law and city
statute books. Often even lawyers and judges don't truly know the law, or what is
required of them by statute.
Read any and all court documents (regardless of who wins the case), including probate
and divorce records. LexisOne is a great free federal and state case search engine and you
can search by key words.
Every federal web site now has, by law, an area reserved for posting the documents most
frequently requested under FOIA.
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings. Journalists have long pulled these filings, but
they are complex and potentially much more useful to us than we have realized,
especially now that they are so easily available on the web. (Basically, these are official
statements, often filed at both the county and the state level) listing collateral pledged for
loans.
Building permits.
990 tax reports for nonprofits.
Certificates of occupancy.
Worker compensation records (available in some states).
Unemployment compensation records (available in some states).
Subminimum wage certificates (issued to employers who successfully argue to pay less
than the minimum wage).
Reports on workplace fatalities and injuries from the OSHA website.
Names of potential federal government whistle blowers plucked from the Merit Systems
Protection Board website. (Cases are searchable by key word by year).

