David Crumm, Detroit Free Press, for IRE June 2003

crumm@freepress.com

Ten Tips for Reporting on Arab / Muslim Communities:
1. While these communities often overlap, most Muslims in the world are not Arab
and millions of Arabs are Christian – as well as adherents of other faiths. (Worldwide,
Muslims in Pakistan, India and Indonesia far outnumber Arab Muslims.) Even in
metro Detroit, widely known as a U.S. center for Islam, the majority of Arabs belong
to a variety of ancient Christian churches. The term “Allah,’’ for instance, is Arabic
for “God’’ and is used by some Arab Christians as well as Muslims.
2. Christian Arab groups are rarely covered. Sorting out Chaldeans, Maronites,
Melkites, Coptic, Antiochian or Syrian Orthodox, etc. is a tricky job for reporters
with little background in the Middle East or religious history. But it’s valuable. In
metro Detroit, one of the biggest pro-Palestinian groups is an Antiochian Orthodox
church, St. Mary’s – and it’s miles outside the Muslim center in Dearborn.
3. Triple-check all statements about Islam. Basic guides to Islam are everywhere, but
the material can be surprisingly complex. Islam shares many figures and sacred
stories with Judaism and Christianity, including Jesus – but key details differ. Also,
sweeping statements about Islam ignore variances. For instance, not all Muslim
groups expect women to wear hijab. Or, consider: It’s true that Muslims are expected
to pray five times a day. It’s not true to say: Muslims pray five times a day.
4. Competing with a century of media bias. Hollywood has cast Arabs and Muslims
as “billionaires, bombers and belly dancers,’’ says Jack Shaheen, a leading expert on
the issue. His best book: “Reel Bad Arabs.’’ In your readers’ minds, deeply engrained
images surface when words like Arab, Muslim, sheikh or imam appear in print.
5. Choosing “experts’’ or “scholars’’ is a mine field. The entire spectrum of leading
academics, authors and activists seems to be embroiled in internal debates, sometimes
quite nasty. In many cases, Muslim lobbyists as well as harsh critics try to cast
themselves as neutral “experts.’’ Also, many Arab and Muslim groups have fancy
Web sites and choose impressive titles, including “Supreme,’’ “International,’’ etc. -but only a handful of them are truly influential while others are tiny, fledgling groups.
6. Islam’s structure is a challenge. The lack of hierarchy, plus regional variation,
makes Islam far more complex to cover than, say, the 1-billion-member Catholic
church. It’s also a local problem. Mosques have overlapping mailing lists – but no
membership lists, as such. Imams may – or may not – be religious administrators.
7. No one knows the number of U.S. Muslims. Even some reference books give 7
million as the U.S. population of Islam, but this is not supported by a census or
verifiable data. Claims of “fastest growing’’ also should be challenged. Where are the
converts? In terms of numbers, the LDS and Catholic churches are rapidly growing.
8. Where are the terrorists? On June 3, two men were convicted in Detroit of aiding
terrorism, but most cases wind up with reduced charges. Despite an erosion of
privacy and civil liberties, no major terrorist kingpin has been convicted here.
9. Who’s looking at the FISA courts? In the name of combating terrorism, a vast
expansion of these secret security courts’ authorization of surveillance has taken
place since 9/11. But FISA courts are largely unexamined by the press.
10. 100 Questions about Arab Americans. The Detroit Free Press – with extensive
input from Arab Americans – produced the helpful booklet “100 Questions.’’ It’s
now online at: http://www.freep.com/jobspage/arabs.htm

