The State of Junior Hockey in 2003: The Cover Up Continues
By Laura Robinson (laura.robinson@sympatico.ca)
University of New Brunswick
March 15, 2003
Skating into the Future: Hockey in the New Millenium:
On April 14 of this year, the Court of Queen’s Bench in Swift Current, Saskatchewan
will hear a civil case put forth by an athlete who once played for the Swift Current
Broncos. While Sheldon Kennedy openly disclosed the sexual abuse he endured at the
hands of his coach Graham James, the second complainant chose, as most sex abuse
victims do, to have his identity remain unknown. Three hundred sexual assault charges
were laid by police after Kennedy gave evidence, and another 50 charges were added
when the second complainant told his story. James pleaded guilty, which conveniently
meant there would be no more investigations and no criminal trial where incriminating
evidence could be submitted that may have showed that James operated in a culture that
allowed boys and young men to be abused in the name of saving face in hockey.
The scandal in Swift Current is framed as a “one bad apple story.” James infiltrated the
hallowed halls of this sport, did his terrible deeds, and has now been banished—at least
from the Canadian practice of the sport. Hockey could be hockey again. And then the
second complainant and his parents decided to sue.
In January, 1999, the complainant now the Plaintiff in his suit, and his parents lodged two
separate lawsuits against the WHL (located in Calgary), the CHL (Toronto), the Canadian
Hockey Association (Ottawa and Calgary offices), the Swift Current Broncos, the Moose
Jaw Warriors, the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League, the Saskatchewan Amateur
Hockey Association, the Winnipeg South Blues Hockey Club, the Manitoba Junior A
Hockey League, the Manitoba Amateur Hockey Association, and the numbered company
423547 connected to both Ed Chynoweth, who was the Commissioner of the WHL
during the Graham James era, and the WHL. Together the suits total over one million
dollars.
Individuals named in the suit include Chynoweth, Lyle Helland, Barry Trapp, Doug
Mosher, John Rittenger, Herbert Butz, and Gary Bollinger—all long time Western
Hockey League builders. All claim to have absolutely no knowledge of James’s actions.
They claim in a response filed with the Court of Queen’s Bench in Regina, “the ultimate
responsibility for the care and supervision of the Plaintiff remained and was reposed with
the Plaintiff’s parents.”
This case calls into question the very foundation of major junior hockey in Canada. Ed
Chynoweth, a mainstay of the WHL for decades, oversaw the league as Commissioner,
and sat on the CHL executive council. Since 1972 Chynoweth has held a variety of
positions from coach and general manager to director, commissioner and president of
both the WHL and the CHL. Chynoweth is the type of guy who will fly to Toronto to
attend Wayne Gretzky’s induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame, as he did in the fall of
1999, only to turn around the next night and attend a Kootenay Ice game, which is a team

1

he now controls. He is presently the governor of that WHL franchise in Cranbrook, B.C.
In December 2002, The Globe and Mail, in their summary of 2002 movers and shakers in
Canadian sport, listed him in their top ten.
But The Globe and Mail also reported in the winter of 1997 that “a former club
executive” of a WHL franchise had complained to Chynoweth about Brian Shaw, owner
and general manager of the Winterhawks, years ago. Just as in Swift Current, where
players would beg to be traded, desperate boys and young men tried to get out of their
contracts. The executive said he asked Chynoweth why they weren’t discussing the issue.
He says Chynoweth replied, “Why do you keep raising this?” to which the executive
replied, “Because it’s an issue.”
The former official believes, because of the lax attitude towards Shaw, James learned he
could get away with the same. “The point is, if you’re Graham James and you were
looking at this league and saw that this (Shaw’s abuse of players) is not a problem, no
wonder he felt he could prey on them.” Shaw died in 1993 and the WHL paid tribute to
him by naming their “Humanitarian of the Year Award” after him. In 1997 they quietly
removed his name, and Chynoweth denied the above exchange took place. He resigned
from his position as president and CEO of the league shortly after.
In my book, Crossing the Line: Violence and Sexual Assault in Canada’s National Sport,
I quote Chynoweth from the 1993 Memorial Cup souvenir book. When referring to the
drafting of European players to the junior leagues Chynoweth said, “The International Ice
Hockey Federation has expressed a concern to the CAHA. The whole concept is not to
rape the European federations.” (Crossing the Line: Violence and Sexual Assault in
Canada’s National Sport, McClelland & Stewart, Toronto, 1998, p. 88).
While I am sure Chynoweth did not use the word rape in its literal sense, it is interesting
to note that of all the words he could use to describe the European draft process, he chose
to use this one. In 1995, after a high-school girl accused five members of the WHL team
the Saskatoon Blades of gang rape, Chynoweth insinuated in the media that she was well
known to the team as a girl who provided easy sex before she went to the police.
Chynoweth is quoted in the StarPhoenix on February 11, 1995 as saying “Certainly if the
reports I’m getting [are true], this wasn’t her first time in the kip.”
Locker room talk, whether uttered by players or officials, is filled with sexually and
violently loaded words and innuendos. Greg Malszecki, a sport historian at York
University, argues that there is a deep connection between “the erotic and the combative”
in sport. He refers to the sexualized violent language of sport, which he calls “man talk”,
and lists words such as “penetration” “attacked” “obliterated” “impotent” and dozens of
others that are common to the male sporting world.
The upcoming Swift Current case will question practices such as turning a blind eye
when allegations of abuse are brought forward and the way in which the culture that is so
well described by the above words forms “the rape culture of the locker room.” Most
importantly it will examine how a culture of consent is constructed by the very people

2

who are responsible for the well-being and good health of young people. The tradition of
“duty of care” in Canadian common law that asks adults in positions of power to exercise
care for others who have less power, especially when those others are children, will be
pivotal to this case. The Plaintiffs believe the pillars of the WHL listed above, “knew or
should have known,” about the years of abuse James’s second victim suffered.
Many close to hockey argue that the roots of abuse within Junior Canadian hockey have
existed at least since the 1970s when players abruptly left Brian Shaw’s teams when he
was owner and general manager of the Winterhawks. Before this he was shunted about to
different minor league clubs. There were plenty of indications that James followed the
same path. He was abruptly fired and moved from team to team before he landed in Swift
Current. Players also abruptly left teams he coached and many have displayed signs of
anti-social personality disorder, a behaviour that can be put forward in court in cases such
as this one when victims of abuse sue their abusers. This disorder includes selfdestructive behaviour such as drug and alcohol abuse, driving while under the influence,
and violent behaviour that is destructive to others. Many players from Swift Current—
Sheldon Kennedy is only one example—had serious alcohol problems while they played
on the Broncos. These self-destructive and violent signals from young people are SOS
signs for help and it is at these crucial moments that responsible adults must exercise
their duty of care.
The Supreme Court of Canada clarified the concept of duty of care in a strongly worded
decision. In June 1999, the court stated unequivocally that the rights of abused children
must be of utmost importance and take precedence over the financial well-being of
corporations and organizations that employed the abusive adult while acting “in locus
parentis” when children are under their care.
The Supreme Court was clear on how such cases should be determined in their decisions
concerning The Children’s Foundation and the Vernon Boys and Girls Club. In both
cases the sexual abuser was convicted and in both cases, the Plaintiffs sued the
organizations for putting them at risk while they were in the organizations’ care. The
Justices sided with the Plaintiffs and asked for a test in such cases that focuses on,
“whether the employer’s enterprise and empowerment of the employee materially
increased the risk of sexual assault and hence the harm. The test must not be applied
mechanically, but with a sensitive view to the policy considerations that justify the
imposition of vicarious liability—fair and efficient compensation for wrong and
deterrence…. Because of the peculiar exercises of power and trust that pervade cases
such as child abuse, special attention should be paid to the existence of a power or
dependency relationship, which on its own often creates a considerable risk of
wrongdoing.” (Supreme Court of Canada rulings 1999, File No: 26041 and 26013).
The decision, in other words, recognizes the way in which a relationship between young
people and adults that is based on power and dependency automatically puts young
people at risk. The court also believed that making organizations responsible for the
abusive behaviour of their employees, “may also deter other incidents of sexual abuse by
motivating charitable organizations entrusted with the care of children to take not only

3

such precautions as the law of negligence requires, but all possible precautions to ensure
that their children are not sexually abused.” (ibid.)
The Respondents have argued in the media that Shaw and James were outsiders who had
infiltrated their ranks. They defend the intrinsic goodness of hockey, and believe that it is
one of the most important elements of Canadian culture where great care is given to the
upbringing of boys and young men. In fact, in legal arguments given in the 1970’s when
girls started to make boy’s teams, the Ontario Minor Hockey Association stated their
organization was “the result of many years of hard work by men sincerely interested in
the welfare of the boys of Ontario and in the game of hockey.” The views of the OMHA
were shared by all other provincial organizations—hockey was good and it was good for
boys.
(Cummings v The Ontario Minor Hockey Association, Ontario Human Rights
Commission, 1976, also Ontario Minor Hockey Association, rules and regulations 1976)
There may be a belief in leagues dedicated to boys that the game is a positive experience,
but major junior hockey is a multi-million dollar business that openly refers to boys and
young men as its most valuable commodity. Each franchise has an annual budget of over
$1,000,000.00, new ones sell for even more, and week-long Memorial Cup
championships are touted as bringing at least that amount to the cities that host them.
Boys as young as fourteen can be bought and owned (as Sheldon Kennedy and the
Plaintiff were) until they are old enough to play in the junior league. Because of the draft
system, where teams pay for the rights to a player, the owners make crucial decisions
about a boy’s future. Even in the United States where the National Colleges Athletic
Association (NCAA) is accused of creating a meat grinder approach to athletes through
athletic scholarships, the athlete has a say in what team he or she will play for.
In the CHL the owners decide. Players must report to the team that has bought them, no
matter how far away from home, no matter how isolated they feel in a new community,
no matter how naïve and green they are about life in major junior hockey. These boys
may appear confident and strong—many weigh in close to 200 pounds, tower above their
parents, and have learned the script of male bravado early on. But in the eyes of the law,
they are still children, and socially and emotionally they often remain child-like.
Physical maturity does not indicate other forms of maturity. In fact, the privileged and
often violent world of rep hockey the boys play in before they reach the junior leagues
can deny them a balanced maturity. As long they play well and hit hard, they are well
rewarded. A hockey stick clutched in the hand is a silver spoon in the mouth. But this
privilege is only relative to their peer group, not to adults.
Michael Robidoux lived the junior hockey life, but his work in anthropology in university
got him thinking. If he allowed himself to be honest he realized the players in the system
have no power relative to the men who run it. Eventually he abandoned that world for
one of scholarly investigation. Robidoux argues that today masculine power lies, not in
one’s body, but in one’s intellect (indicated by wealth in a capitalist culture), and the

4

means to dominate the bodies of others occurs through the power wealth bestows. The
hockey player who physically dominates on the ice has no real power. The man who
owns him has the power, and can live vicariously through the player’s ability to dominate
other bodies.
Robidoux says “the athlete undeniably experiences levels of control and power made
possible by subjecting himself to disciplines of excellence and (he) is subsequently
celebrated within this framework. In fact these male figures are often made heroes,
placed upon pedestals for everyone to see. It is the celebration of this masculine identity
that makes it such an attractive identity to adopt, and thus, ensures compliance.”
(emphasis added).
The hockey player learns to sell his body to men. Thus Shaw and James are not
anomalies, but rather logical products of a system that uses young male bodies. Robidoux
argues that hockey is highly homosocial—that only one sex prevails and that sex is
idealized. He does not argue that the culture is homosexual. However, depending on how
we define the term homosexual, it could be used to describe certain aspects of hockey
culture. Sexual acts—both homosexual and heterosexual—include much more than
penetration and include sexual play as well. This includes flirting, body touching, eye
contact, spoken words, and actual sexual play.
There is plenty of nude preening, promenading, bodily contact, and play in the all-male
locker rooms of junior hockey. There are towel fights, feigned sex acts, and a great deal
of bragging about sexual conquests over women that frequently denigrate women.
Amongst players who are relatively equal to each other, this is nothing more than
adolescent sexual experimentation—a phase just about all boys go through, though there
is something about an all-male team that frequently exaggerates this play.
But the locker room culture often gets carried into bars and parties where the preening,
denigrating, and bragging continues. In my research I found that girls and women are
frequently disdained objects on which a player performs a sexual act in order to prove his
manliness to the rest of the team while they watch. This is sexual assault, not
experimentation.
Sport sociology professor Alexis Peters of the University of Lethbridge studied 102
Ontario Hockey Association players and compared them to a control group of 74 nonplayers. The players showed a statistically significant higher level of hypermasculinity,
belief in danger as excitement, violence as manly, sex-role stereotypes, callous attitude
towards sex, adversarial sexual beliefs, rape myth acceptance and acceptance of
interpersonal violence. She writes, “there appeared to be an association between elite
athletic participation and sexual violence which warranted further investigation,” and
asks, “whether the social and cultural organization of sporting practices around the
celebration of hegemonic masculinity might place elite male athletes at higher risk for
perpetuating acts of sexual violence…(and) might place the elite male at risk for
engaging in sexual violence by encouraging a violent peer subculture.”

5

I spoke to ten young women in Swift Current who say they experienced everything from
sexual harassment to gang rape with the Broncos. They described sexual behaviours that
were completely devoid of any understanding of, or caring for female sexual pleasure,
but did emphasize a sexual bonding and a sexual display between the players. In this
context, paradoxically, a sexual assault against a female is also a homosexual act in that
the ordeal is performed to titillate the other members of the team who are present, and
show the physical dominance of the player performing the rape.
Similarly, rookie initiations are often sexualized with the rookie acting as the “designated
female.” Broken down with vast amounts of alcohol, these boys find themselves stripped
naked and forced to perform any number of sadomasochistic acts. From performing oral
sex to being penetrated with objects varying from marshmallows to cigars, they must
obey orders or risk being ostracized and attacked for the rest of the year.
One former WHL player who wrote his master’s thesis on initiations at Queen’s
University described what happened to him: “They made us strip naked on the bus,” he
told me, “and then we had to stand in front of each senior player with our hands behind
our heads. They beat our genital area with whatever object they wanted—coat hangers,
whatever—it didn’t matter. I was a quiet guy who didn’t cause trouble and they didn’t
hurt me. But the guys with attitude…they beat them until they were bleeding. The coach
was sitting in the front of the bus laughing. He coaches in the NHL now. I never told my
parents even though I lived with them.”
The players know that ultimately they must meet the approval of coaches, owners,
managers, and scouts and endure abuse so they won’t be seen as weak or not compliant.
Consciously everyone agrees player selection should be determined by playing ability.
But the subculture of the locker room and team bus wouldn’t loom so large if
hypermasculine performance in these venues wasn’t vital to acceptance on the team. The
subconscious need to belong to the group, and to establish a strategic position in the
pecking order within that group still are ways in which “who will leave and who will
stay” are determined.
On the subject of pecking order Robidoux writes, “…agricultural metaphors are accurate
descriptions of the players’ commodity status. The players are literally cultivated (italics
his) ‘on the farm,’ and only those with suitable qualities are picked to be used in the NHL
market. Moreover, the cultivation period is limited and those who do not develop
sufficiently will eventually be replaced with new stock.”
Older players recognize the talent of younger ones and can’t afford to be squeezed out of
the market by these new upstarts. Hence the brutal hazings and feminization of them as
players jockey for a chance to impress the decision-makers. (This behavior is similar to
that recently reported from the CFB Winnipeg Armed Forces base. The base was
investigated after it paraded a man dressed up as a tranvestite/woman [take your pick],
and was jailed in a pink cage on the “Crazy Train.” (The Globe and Mail, “No Harm Was
Meant With Float, Soldier’ Leader Says”, March 7, 2003).

6

This was a parody directed at soldiers who sought psychological help to cope with posttraumatic stress syndrome after they returned from duty. The message was clear that men
who admitted to mental stress were weak and crazy, and thus like women, and therefore
objects to be mocked.
In junior hockey I found a similar obsession with turning “weak” boys and men into girls
and women. As Sheldon Kennedy said of James’s attitude towards him, “he treated me
like I was his wife.” Given the misogynistic nature of their abuse, one wonders how these
players will ever be able to form healthy sexual attitudes towards women, and what their
definition of “a wife” is.
At the same time as this James ensured silence through homophobic fear. Admitting to
sexual abuse was admitting to femaleness, to weakness, and to craziness. Because he was
the one who could open the door to the NHL for them, James’s players had to play by his
rules within the homophobic culture of junior hockey. With the exception of one player
in Winnipeg, who played for James’s as a child and was sexually abused, fear of being
branded a homosexual/woman has kept the rest of James’s victims quiet. Police believe
there are anywhere from 20 to 100 victims from the James era. Many have been accepted
into some kind of league, whether it be the NHL, varsity, or the many semi-pro leagues
that proliferate in North America or Europe. In order to maintain the male pose, they
must keep their Swift Current secrets to themselves or they too will be included in the
homosexual/woman category. Being one of James’s favorite boys means being one of his
favorite girls. Today, however, it is not their old coach who keeps them silent, but their
peers, and the men who judge them. The following is an example of how players have
tried to cover up the problematic James era.
Former Bronco player, Jason Becker, denied he attended an all-night meeting where the
team decided to ask management to fire James because of his behaviour in February
1994. “I don’t recall a team meeting at all. I wasn’t involved at all,” Becker told me of a
meeting that caused him to miss practice. But once he is told his best friend on the team
remembers sitting with him and exchanging worried glances throughout the meeting, he
does recall the meeting. “We just wanted to get the hell out, finish off the season and
leave Swift Current,” his friend told me.
Becker remembers meeting with president John Rittenger and scout Doug Mosher. “I’m
assuming it was near the end (of the meeting),” he says, “they may have been in before
and after. Darren (McLean) and Kevin (Powell) talked to Mosher before and may have
after,” he adds of the two players who called the meeting in the first place.
The meeting took place at the house of the billeting parents of two players on the team.
They kept a list of those attending and Becker was on it. One player was posted to make
sure another player who billeted with James at the time didn’t intervene and spy for him.
By this time, the team was divided into “Graham’s boys” and the rest. The billeting
parents also remember the players telling Rittenger and Mosher they could no longer play
for James.

7

The billeting mother (who wishes to remain unnamed) remembers early in the next
season (1994-95), after James and Rittenger had moved on to form the Hitmen, going in
to the bedroom of one of the players to make the bed and seeing a note on his dresser.
“Deny all meetings took place—Jason Becker” the note said. She mentioned it at the time
to her husband. By then Becker had been made captain. She remembers all of this as if it
were yesterday. “I didn’t send no letter out,” Becker told me. “That’s total bullshit.”
When James finally did leave Swift Current after the 1994 season, he brought two of his
players, whose identities will not be revealed, from Swift Current to Calgary. One of
those players lived with him, a fact confirmed by former Swift Current Broncos president
John Rittenger, and one of the Hitmen players from the 1995-96 season. The player
denies moving in with James after he built his new house in Calgary, but his denial
appears to be the norm amongst former athletes who played under James.
“We were told not to say anything,” says a player who started out on the Hitmen team in
1995-96, and was later traded to Swift Current. “I was playing for the Broncos when the
news about Graham hit, and management told us not to talk to anyone about it. But the
guys on the team who had been there in ’94 and before told us they knew what Graham
was like all along. They said everyone knew.”
It wasn’t just young players who were willing to help James start out again. James and
Broncos’ president John Rittenger left Swift Current to form the Hitmen, a new CHL
franchise with NHL players Theoren Fleury, Joe Sakic, Geoff Sanderson, Sheldon
Kennedy, pro wrestler Brett Hart, and NHL scout Anders Hedberg also buying into the
team. Rittenger referred to the support James received from such stellar NHL players
during an interview with The Regina Leader Post in 1994. When the Broncos announced
that James would be going to Calgary, Rittenger said, “What astounds me is the number
of calls Graham gets from alumni. Every day, he hears from somebody like Geoff
Sanderson, Joe Sakic, Sheldon Kennedy. The only disappointing thing is that most of
them call collect.”
Once James moved to Calgary he had support from another former player who had
moved on to the NHL. During the 1995-96 season, Theoren Fleury sat out from NHL
play as he waited for the right offer from the Calgary Flames. “Theo trained with us five
days a week,” says a former Hitmen player. “He was always around.” Fleury didn’t just
attend James’s practices. A former employee of the bank that handled the sale of the
Hitmen in Calgary said, while all of the above were involved with the deal, it was Fleury
who did most of the footwork. “For a while he was at the bank all the time,” says the
former employee. “To me it looked like it was his deal.” Evidence presented at the
sentencing hearing by Lorne Scott, James’s lawyer shows that Kennedy also played a role
in reassuring James that he would be there for him should he need him. In the postscript
of his Christmas card to James before he went to the police, Kennedy wrote, “If your job
is on the line, Woody [James’s nickname], tell me, and I’ll pay cash for the team.”
This normalizing of an extremely abnormal situation is one way victims try to deny that
they have been abused. They will go to extraordinary degrees and expense to create an

8

environment to tell the outside world that everything is just fine. It is particularly
common when the abuser is someone close to a victim and is in a position of trust.
Kennedy, with the help of other NHL players, spent plenty of energy, time, and money
trying to create a situation that tried to normalize James, but in fact supplied him with a
fresh crop of boys. He says he finally went to the police when he saw James start to
isolate and favour another player. He simply couldn’t watch history repeat itself.
Kennedy’s denial and eventual need to tell the truth is somewhat predictable. But if the
Plaintiffs in the civil case are successful in proving that there was a conspiracy of silence
at work during the James era, when did it start and has it ever ended? There are athletes
who played during the same time as the Plaintiff did who say they remember, not just the
abuse he suffered, but that James’s behaviour was general knowledge. If the Broncos
management is found to also have known about the abuse the Plaintiff suffered how long
have management—and James’s former players--been covering up?
Added to this questions are even more far reaching questions. What if the girls who
allege that they were sexually abused at the hands of the Broncos sue those players for
sexual abuse? Civil cases alleging sexual abuse need not just follow successful
convictions in criminal cases. More and more victims are deciding not to press criminal
charges because of the trauma involved throughout the legal process, and the slim chance
of convictions. So if girls from Swift Current start suing players, will the players answer
back in defense and say that their actions were caused by anti-social personality disorder
caused by the abuse they suffered? Will they name the Broncos, the WHL, the CHL, the
CHA, and possibly individuals as third party defenders in the cases? The tentacles of this
story are indeed long and reach well into the future.
We shouldn’t be surprised if this case does not come to fruition and instead is settled out
of court with a publication ban invoked on all evidence. If we follow this story to its
source, the phrase “Hockey Night in Canada” will indeed take on a very different
meaning.

9

How to Tell A Complicated Story:
Tips from Canada: Uncovering the Rape Culture of the Ice-hockey Locker Room
Writer Laura Robinson
laura.robinson@sympatico.ca

Harper Collins Canada
Global Conference on Investigative Journalism, Copenhagen, Denmark, May 2003.
This tip sheet is based on experiences gleaned from thirteen years of investigative
journalism in Canadian sport. Much of that time was spent writing the book, Crossing the
Line: Violence and Sexual Assault in Canada’s National Sport (McClelland & Stewart,
Toronto, 1998), and working on the accompanying CBC TV documentary, On Thin Ice.
Ice hockey has a status in Canada of religious proportions. When hockey czar Allan
Eagleson finally went to jail on a number of fraud charges just before my book came out,
a former prime minister and a former chief justice wrote letters of recommendation upon
sentencing. Hockey’s power runs deep. If a journalist is going to suggest that there is a
deeply disturbing culture that facilitates violence and rape in the junior system that feeds
the NHL, she better have the story straight. The following are some of the techniques that
helped me tell me this very complex and complicated story:
1. If you are writing a book, try to organize your chapters by being a journalist: Take
what looks like a complex chapter and turn it into an op ed or feature piece. If you have
to limit yourself to between 800 and 2500 words, you will be forced to find the essence of
what you are trying to say, and you will have to write it clearly for a newspaper editor.
(Books editors allow a little more meandering). I did this for nearly every chapter of
Black Tights: Women, Sport and Sexuality, my book after Crossing the Line. I had a
blueprint for the chapters, and got paid to do it.
2. Keep files on everything: For instance, by reading the sports sections of two papers
every day, I found one small item reported (135 sex crime charges laid against owners,
managers, coaches, senior players after a hockey team initiation). Following up on this
three-sentence story allowed me to make the link between alleged gang rapes of girls by
hockey players I was investing and the sexual abuse of players. Once I honed in on
initiations, I found them to be sado-masochistic and systemic in junior hockey. I argued
(with plenty of data to back me—see points #4 and #6) that these boys and young men
were at high risk of becoming sex offenders themselves. By the time the book was
lawyered, I could give the doubting publisher’s lawyer boxes of detailed files, from the
original source to the national study that supported my thesis, to the court transcripts
from the trial. If the story has legs for the next few years after your book is published,
well-organized files can provide you with several more features/ op ed’s as you will be
able quickly put stories together. I found physically lying files out in the order in which
they appear in the book helpful when slogging through writing that must contain minute
details. You need to dedicate a room to this.
3. Work closely with your editor when planning your book and “arranging” chapters: A
complicated story has many, many tentacles, and the writer who surrounds him/herself
with the story can’t always see how its entirety can be told with clarity. What are the

advantages of telling stories chronologically? In order that the story flows, what
information must go in footnotes? What are the advantages of using the case study
approach? Should the story be told geographically? If you are challenging social norms,
you need to include the “expert voice” to give your thesis credibility. Where should this
voice be situated? Many discussions with a good editor will help sift the story out and
help it take shape.
4. Use every opportunity to interview experts on your story: You can use friends and
colleagues (if they allow you to) who are “experts” on the issues in your story to help
clarify it and sort out complex issues. I cornered lawyers when I was looking at the issue
of consent in sexual abuse cases. After this, I spoke with every lawyer who was involved
in the cases I wrote about. The guidance from expert friends prepared me for these
subsequent interviews. In 1999, a Supreme Court of Canada decision dealt with “duty of
care” in sexual abuse cases. While this decision came down after my book came out, I
dealt with “duty” or “ethic” of care in Crossing the Line extensively. The concept of in
locus parentis is very much a part of this story, in that it addresses the responsibilities of
all adults to care for children who are in their charge. Anyone looking at the sexual abuse
of children should refer to these two Supreme Court decisions (they are listed in the
attached story). I did the same to psychologists and psychiatrists. They became my
unpaid clarity consultants….
5. But now and then take yourself away from the story: I went for long runs, bike rides,
and skis, all of which helped to clarify troubling details, etc. It is very important to find
ways to take yourself out of the story regularly. If you don’t do this, and you are normally
living, breathing, and eating the story, you won’t be able to write with a convincing
perspective. A complicated story takes a huge amount of energy to do, but you can’t
allow it to swallow you—both you and your story will suffer. It was during a run that I
realized the thesis of my book was about the buying, selling, and trading of boys by men
for their physical prowess. Once I figured that out, every case study in the book needed to
prove that thesis.
6. Attend professional meetings of organizations that may have essential information for
your story: Every year I try to attend the North American Society for the Sociology of
Sport (NASSS) conference. It has counterparts in all other continents. Just google “sport
sociology organizations.” There is also NASSH (North American Society for Sport
History) for an historical perspective on sport. NASSS members have provided me with
countless papers on the issues I address in my work. By attending a conference, you can
collect a great deal of papers that address some of the latest and most complicated issues
in sport. You will also make contact with valuable expert voices for later on. Similar
organizations exist in other beats. Over the years you will be able to build up an excellent
library of papers. Often they have been peer juried and give credibility to your story when
writing about difficult issues that people normally won’t address.
7. If you are working free-lance, try to piggy-back the story: Even with a reasonable
advance from a publisher, a complicated story may need information gathered over years,
and frequently requires travel. You need to have a substantial amount of money behind

you. Crossing the Line started out as a magazine piece. The magazine paid for all
expenses, including the cost of thousands of pages of court transcripts. They also paid me
well to write the piece, but a change in editors in chief killed the story. At that point I was
able to take it to CBC TV’s the fifth estate who also paid for all expenses and paid well
for the story. By the time I went to a publisher (who offered a good advance), a great deal
of necessary evidence had been gathered. On top of this, lawyers for the magazine and
CBC had gone through the stories so I was able to present a well-documented outline. (A
word of caution: Even with all this backing I was in a $10,000.00 deficit when the book
came out).
8. Try to think like the people you are writing about: I needed to find lots of hockey
groupies. Simply by hanging around until the last of the fans left a hockey arena, I could
find girls who waited for players. Getting a few phone numbers and names became
invaluable a few years later when those girls grew up and realized what they were
involved with at the arena. In another case study, by hanging out at a shopping mall
beside the school where the majority of junior players in city attended, I found kids who
gave me leads to a girl who had alleged a gang rape committed by this team. While the
expert voice is essential in a complicated story, most important is the authentic voice.
9. Don’t let them see you coming: Don’t look like a journalist from a big city, especially
in a small town. If you want the kind of quotes and difficult stories that will be necessary
from local people (the authentic voice), you can’t construct physical barriers like
clothing, etc. that may make them feel inadequate. For this particular story, it helped
immensely to be female. The young people who were sexually assaulted were assaulted
by boys and men. Not coming from that group made getting stories from all survivors—
male and female—a lot easier. As well, many people in power did not take me seriously
and did not imagine I was a journalist. They said and did incriminating things in front of
me that were invaluable for the book. Men who tackle sexual assault stories may want to
think seriously about co-researching or writing with a female. It also helped to have been
an athlete to do an investigative piece on sport. While I didn’t come from hockey, I did
come from sport, and this gave me (as a female) more credibility in that milieu.
10. If you don’t have to, don’t act like a journalist: At one point I talked, from personal
experience as an athlete, about career-ending injuries to a hockey player who had a
career-ending injury. I was able to steer him eventually to the alleged gang rape of the
girl he brought to a hockey party. A trust must have been built up because he couldn’t
stop talking. The information he provided was crucial to the book and to my thesis.
11. Don’t forget the obvious: Try to do all interviews in person: Websites are great for
some things, but nothing beats watching someone’s face as they tell a lie. Many people
feel the compulsion to fill dead airspace. If you don’t talk, they will.

