THE BIG STORY: HOW TO CONCEIVE AND CARRY OUT
MEANINGFUL INVESTIGATIVE PROJECTS.
By Don Barlett and Jim Steele
Time Magazine

THE IDEA:
1. WHERE DID THE IDEA COME FROM? It doesn’t have to
be your idea. Some writers resist ideas from editors
(with good reason sometimes). But if it is a good
idea, or has the germ of being good, then go with
it.
2. HOW BIG A STORY IS IT? Evaluate whether it is
worthy of being a project or a series. Decide
whether you can justify asking for the time and
resources you need.
3. IS CONVENTIONAL WISDOM CORRECT? Some reporters like
to start projects with a road map showing what they
hope to prove. We prefer to start with questions
that often test generally accepted theories about a
subject. In 1973, during an international oil
crisis, conventional wisdom said the world would run
out of oil in 10 years. Obviously, not so. What are
some generally accepted beliefs that are treated as
facts by the media around you today?
4. HOW MUCH TIME WILL IT TAKE? Time is the single most
valuable resource for an investigative reporter. How
much time can you get for a project? More than any
single factor, this determines how far you can go
with a story. It is not usually possible to know
with any accuracy how long something will take, but
it is best to at least make an estimate so that
everyone involved knows the scope of the undertaking
before beginning.
5. WHAT ARE THE ODDS OF GETTING THE STORY? These vary
considerably. A story examining whether a person has
been wrongly imprisoned can be highly speculative,
and you may spend months and come up with nothing.
An investigation of a broader topic almost always
will produce a story or a series. This isn't to say
you shouldn't investigate the possible wrongful
conviction. The importance is to recognize what you
are getting into from the start.

THE REPORTING
1. START BY READING, NEVER INTERVIEWING. You learn
more and it gives you some intellectual independence
when you start interviewing. You then have a better

idea of whether the person being interviewed knows
the subject. It also helps you develop the questions
to ask.
2. READ OR VIEW EVERYTHING. (Or as close to that as is
possible). Newspaper articles, magazine stories,
television tapes, books. But especially primary
materials -– government documents, foundation
reports, court cases, corporate records -– any
original document. Never rely on how someone else
has interpreted a document. Read it yourself and
form your own opinion.
3. STAY FOCUSED. It is always tempting to pursue
tantalizing leads that invariably crop up during an
investigation, but it is best to stick as closely as
possible to your main theme. Otherwise you wind up
pursuing endless leads --- endlessly. This is the
most difficult area in any project – knowing what to
pursue and deciding how much time to give over to
promising leads. There is no simple answer to this
challenge. You have to stay as focused as possible
or you may get lost.
4. BE FLEXIBLE. Even if you don’t find information to
support some of your original theories, you may be
surprised to find another story -- one every bit as
intriguing as you had hoped -- just different than
the story you had originally conceived.
5. IDENTIFY SOURCES OF INFORMATION. Identify major
government and private sources that apply to your
topic. Our only rule is to assume that records,
documents and data are available -- somewhere. Adopt
a "documents state of mind." Assume that the record
exists until proven wrong. This especially applies
to the Internet which continues to revolutionize
access. International and national agencies are
continually dumping their records on the Web in the
same way they used to store them in file cabinets.
In the U.S. for example, documents filed by
lobbyists listing their clients and their
legislative agenda before the U.S. Congress used to
be kept solely in an obscure office in Washington,
D.C. Now you can get that information via the Web,
24 hours a day, from anywhere in the world.
6. DON'T LOOK FOR BLOCKBUSTER DOCUMENTS. They rarely
exist. The power of documents is the pattern the
individual records form. Documents are like parts of
a puzzle: No one piece may tell you a lot, but when
pieced together with others, they form a clear
picture.
7. INTERVIEWING. Don't interview, if possible, until
you get a broad understanding of your subject. And
don't interview someone who may be portrayed
negatively in your story until near the end of your
project.

8. ORGANIZING THE RESEARCH. Develop your own system.
We know people who use highly complex methods to
keep track of their documents and emerging themes.
If that works for you, then go with it. We have
always maintained a very simple system to keep track
of the vast amount of paper and data we collect for
each project. We have proper name files (of
individuals, corporations, foundations, government
agencies, etc.). We maintain subject files such as
International Aid, Pensions, Defense Spending. We
cross-file all interviews and we maintain a Quote
file. When we come across an extraordinary quote –
from an interview, testimony, a speech or a book –we
cross-file it in the Quote file.
9. NEVER ASSUME. You never know where you will find
documents, data or a Web site, or who will talk to
you.

THE WRITING
1. BEGIN EARLY. Don't wait until all the reporting is
done to start writing; write as you go along. Focus
on pieces of your story -- a person, a company, a
government program, a project, a town -- whatever -and start writing about it as soon as you can. This
helps clarify your thinking and it ultimately helps
the writing a great deal. For most of us mortals,
the more time we have to revise and polish, the
better.
2. IDENTIFY MAIN THEMES. Start noting patterns and see
which of your examples fit the themes. This helps to
organize the story.
3. MAKE EXAMPLES RELEVANT. Humanize the story. This is
especially important with investigative stories that
examine government programs or failures. This rule
is as old as journalism and it will never change.
4. MAKE NUMBERS MEANINGFUL. Don't just throw
statistics at readers or viewers. Give them context
and perspective on what the numbers mean. Relate the
number to the life of an average person in a way
that would have meaning to that person. This is one
of the single most demanding, yet single greatest
sin of omission of a lot of journalists. We need to
go the extra step to make numbers make sense. Relate
a number such as the amount of oil in storage to how
long it would heat homes or power cars or generate
electricity, if called upon in an emergency.
5. WORK ON TRANSITIONS. In big projects, transitions
are the single most important element of the writing
after the lead. If your story is about to embark on
a new theme, you need to alert and prepare your
audience. Don’t just let them wander into a forest
without a warning. Assure the reader or viewer that

the upcoming journey will be worth their time. We
spend a tremendous amount of time trying to get
these all-important paragraphs just right. The
advice of the famed long-time editor of the Wall
Street Journal Barney Kilgore is still relevant
today: “The reader is always looking for an excuse
to stop reading. Don’t give it to him.”
6. DON'T OVERSTATE YOUR CASE. Make sure not to paint
every finding in the sharpest black and white terms,
unless you can really do that. Statements often need
a qualifier.
7. REWRITE. Don't agonize about length in the first
draft. Go ahead and write. Just get the material
out; worry about cutting and boiling later. The
sooner you put it into words, the clearer your
subject will appear. And the better you’ll feel.
#

