Christoph Lütgert; ARD German TV
„Das Lipobay-Desaster“ – „The Baycol-Desaster“
An investigative examination of Bayers lethal drug

Preparing for this Conference I went through the remarks Nils Mulvad, the coordinator, had
sent to all the speakers. „Focus on useful tips“ was one of his demands and the speakers are
also asked to give the listeners or the readers „something they cannot get elsewhere“. I am
afraid I must disappoint you, because: Whatever I did as an investigative journalist was quite
a normal research, a development step by step.
So it also ran with our documentary „Das Lipobay-Desaster“ about the deadly cholesterollowering drug Lipobay or Baycol, produced by the world-renowned german pharmaceutical
manufacturer Bayer. This documentary had been broadcasted by ARD, German TV, in May
2002.
Perhaps not quite normal was the development of our research. The result at the end of the
day was the opposite of what we had planned or expected. The direction of the story changed
within weeks or months for 180 degrees. The good guys became bad guys, the bad guys at
least partly good guys.
What was the story ?: In August 2001 Bayer voluntarily withdrawed Lipobay from the market
after scores of deaths worldwide were associated with the drug (sold under the name Baycol
in the U.S.). Bayer announced the withdrawel as an act of corporate responsibility and
concern for patient safety, emphazising that there was no proof that Lipobay had caused any
injury or death.
In that time quite succesful Bayer convinced at least the german public that Lipobay did not
have more or worse sideeffects than other cholesterol-lowering drugs, so called statins. Press
coverage in Germany particularly was favorable toward the flagship company. Bayer claimed,
the problem with Lipobay or Baycol only existed in America because US-Doctors ignored all
warnings and contraindications in the package-inserts. Many doctors – that was the Bayerversion - prespribed too strong doses or ignored the contraindication not to use Baycol
together with another cholesterol-lowering drug. Bayer’s conclusion: If american doctors had
not failed there had been no real problem with Baycol or Lipobay. At that time undisputed
experts confirmed that position. The president of the german drug-approval-authority told us,
Lipobay was an excellent and phantastic drug. It could have remained in the market, but the
image had been spoiled by the faults the american doctors had to be blamed for.
The Lipobay-Story seemed to be a non-scandal.
At that time we got reports that hundreds of american lawyers had immedidately begun filing
class action lawsuits against Bayer on behalf of alleged victims for damages suffered as a
result of taking Baycol. This was the initial hook of our documentary, the reversal of the usual
good guy versus bad guy roles, in which the pharmaceutical companies usually wear the black
hats in an investigative examination of product liability. Determined by independent experts
we were convinced: Not Bayer was to blame but unprincipled American lawyers, motivated
not by facts but greed. With the Bayer-Case as an example we intended to do a documentary

2

about the dubious american law-system and the obscene billion-Dollar-actions which can
destroy innocent companies.
Bayer was initially happy to cooperate with this documantary. When I visited the head-office
in Leverkusen in October 2001 for the first research erverything was perfectly arranged. I was
introduced to high ranked experts who had all the time I needed. A conference-room was
prepared, an overhead projector installed. I got explanations, lectures, scientific statistics, - all
designed as proofs that Lipobay/Baycol was a safe and efficient drug designed, developed,
tested and marketed with extreme care. For hours and hours I was flooded with facts or what
they called facts. Bayer’s spokesperson promised that I would get any interview face to
camera I needed, and I would get permission for filming the laboratories and the productionlines. During the endless conferences with the Bayer-experts I asked several times for written
or printed sheets of all the facts, scientific surveys, statistics I had been confronted with.
Bayer refused. All these surveys and statistics, they said, were strictly confidential. I was told,
perhaps later I could get some papers. At this point I got my first doubts.
But I came back in the track against the supposed greedy lawyers when I met two well known
german lawyers who tried to cooperate with large american firms in this case. Very fast and
easy I found out that these lawyers only collected names and accusations of alleged german
victims for joining the class action lawsuits in America without any own research. One of
these lawyers organized a dramatic press-conference in Berlin in January 2002. He presented
a crying old man who had lost his wife, heartbreaking. We show this scene in our film. But
with the slightest knowlege of the facts and the effects of Lipobay one could find out that his
wife could not have been a Lipobay-victim. Some time later the lawyer Michael Witti gave
me access to all original-files of all of his 2.000 Lipobay-Clients. I did not find more than five
cases which could have been related with the Bayer-Drug.
Our research came to a turning point in the second half of January 2002. We flew to San
Diego (California) and Minneapolis for filming two great conferences. Lawyers engaged in
federal and state class actions against Bayer convened in both cities to discuss their strategy.
Some lawyers confronted us with results of thorough researches, we could not argue against,
at least not immediately. Some firmes distributed documentations, files with public and
confidential documents from Bayer, approval authorities like the american FDA and links to
related publications or documents in the internet. My Co-Author Siri Nyrop and I collected all
we could get – alltogether thousands of pages. Many of the documentes were
incomprehansible – for us as non-experts. But with the help of legal and pharmaceutical
experts we made progress step by step. And we found one chapter within the approval
documents from the american FDA that electrified us. Giving the approval for lower doses of
Baycol the FDA had written a very strong warning. „There is concern that increasing the dose
in people has the potential for serious toxicity.“ The FDA reflected on Bayers own preclinical tests with dogs and rats. In the approval-documentas we also found these Bayer-Tests
and it’s results.
What we had found was important, because years later Bayer had got the approval for a
blockbuster in much higher dosage. And this blockbuster caused most of the Baycolcasualties. With the paper we had found we had the first proof that from the very beginning
Bayer was aware of the risks of it’s product. And it was a proof, that the whole system did not
work, because also the approval-authority had failed. With the approval for the higher and
more dangerous dose the american FDA had ignored it‘s earlier warnings. FDA refused any
interview on that issue.

3

This was the moment we had to inform ARD, German TV, that very likely we could not
deliver the story we had intended: Greedy american lawyers versus an innocent german
manufacturer. The first reaction was disappointment and the consideration to stop the whole
project. One argument was: this would become the usual old story in which the
pharmaceutical company wears the black hat in an investigative examination of product
liability. And we had done enough of these stories. The other argument or concern I had to
accept was more general: It was obvious that Lipobay/Baycol had the potential of a multibillion Dollar-case. Any crucial failure in our research against Bayer could generate a millionrisk for the german TV. With all the papers we had collected in America we returned to
Germany for several meetings with superiors and our lawyers. At the end we had a decision or
non-decision: To continue the work, but no guarantee and no obligation to bring the
documentary to an end. This was an expensive risk, expensive for the tv-company. In my
oppinion this – at least in Germany - is only thinkable for a public TV-system not for a
commercial one.
During all the months of our research we were in steady contact with two pharmacologists
who perhaps are the most competent german scientists in this discipline. In every stadium we
informed them of what we had found and confronted them with the main arguments of both
sides, Bayer and the plaintiff attorneys. We also faxed them the papers which seemed to be
crucial.
Specially the FDA-Paper concerning the risks of the higher dosage motivated them for their
own research whether they could find more. With one of the two scientists we went through
all the papers we had collected so far. This Professor is one of the harshest critics of the
pharmaceutical industry but he is also well known as an incorruptible and very precise
scientist. For many years and many stories we had relied on him. Many pharmaceutical
manufacturers had sued him. But he had not lost one single case. You need experts like him to
be on the safe side. With his help we avoided false conclusions and misinterpretations of all
these complex and partly incomprehansible documents we had collected. The other Professor
discovered what we as non-experts never had discovered in this hugh amount of papers:
Before Bayer had asked for approval for Baycol the company financed an own clinical study.
The comparison of this study with studies for other cholesterol-lowering drugs shows: The
risk of side-effects was ten times higher with Baycol then with other drugs. But one had to be
capable to read and to understand the statistics in the studies to come to this conclusion. The
Bayer-scientists published a false conclusion against their own statistics. Baycol, they wrote,
was well tolerated and the incidence of adverse events was similar to other cholesterol
lowering drugs.
So we had the second and very valid proof , that Bayer knew about the risks of
Lipobay/Baycol from the very beginning. We never had got this without the knowlege of the
scientists who cooperated with us.
Also from the scientists and from the FDA-Papers we lernt an important formula: Registered
victims of pharmaceutical drugs have to be multiplied by 50 or 100. Experience with other
cases teaches, that only one or two percent of casulties are registered. So we have to calculate
not only 50 Lipobay-deaths but at least 2.500 worldwide. A hugh percentage of deaths or
injuries in America was caused by co-perscribing of Baycol with another cholestrol-lowering
drug. Bayer said that in the package-inserts they had had warned about co-perscribing. All
victims we met in America insisted, they never had seen any packege inserts. With a very
simple test in several pharmacies we found out they were right. Pills on perscription are
counted and filled up from larger units in the pharmacy. Normaly a client does not get the

4

original package with the package insert. For that reason Baycol-consumers have not got the
warnings Bayer referred to. Later Bayer itself confirmed this.
Till that time we had not informed Bayer of the results of our research. But now we hat to.
We still had the promise to get every interview we wanted. So we met Bayer‘s american
lawyers Bartlit and Beck in Chicago, one of the top- and most expensive lawyer-firms in the
US. We confronted the attorney Philip S. Beck with our research, the documents and the
main-arguments of the plaintiff-lawyers. In our oppinion he could not invalidate one single
result of our research. This was the end of any cooperation from Bayer. Bayer withdraw all
promises concerning other interviews and filming in the factory.
At the end we looked for analyst-predictaions what compensation Bayer will have to pay. It
was not difficult to get informal estimations from analysts on telephone. The all predicted
compensations between one and four billion Dollars. But it was very difficult to get a quote
face to camera. Analysts in general seem to be shy. In this case, as we were told by one
analyst, Bayer had warned several Banks not to answer the questions from German TV. They
threatended with consequences if predictions of analysts woud harm them. We had to talk to
more than 50 analysts in Frankfurt, London and New York to get three who had the courage
for an interview face to camera.
What remained at the end after a research that took weeks or months and forced us to go
through thousends of pages ? A simple story based on few papers. Bayer had marketed a drug
knowing that it was riskier than all the other drugs of that kind. And Bayer had published
warnings on package inserts which had never been distributed. And for that reason thousands
of people had to die or to suffer.

Synopsis "The Lipobay Disaster"
In August 2001, Germany's world-renowned pharmaceutical manufacturer Bayer AG
voluntarily withdraws its cholesterol-lowering drug 'Lipobay' (sold under the
name 'Baycol' in the U.S.) from the market after scores of deaths worldwide
are associated with the drug. In ARD German Television's documentary "The
Lipobay Disaster", Reporter Christoph Luetgert and Producer Siri Nyrop show
that Bayer knew early on about the dangers of this drug and still entered it
into the highly lucrative market, with the approval of a regulatory system
that did not heed its own warnings.
Bayer announces the withdrawal as an act of corporate responsibility and
concern for patient safety, emphasizing that there is no proof that Lipobay
has caused any injury or death. There is indeed no such established link at
that time, and press coverage in Germany particularly is favorable toward the
flagship company. Any bad publicity is directed against unprincipled
American lawyers who have immediately begun filing class action lawsuits
against Bayer on behalf of alleged victims for damages suffered as a result
of taking Baycol, motivated not by facts but greed.
This is the initial hook of ARD's story, the reversal of the usual good guy
vs. bad guy roles in which the pharmaceutical companies usually wear the
black hats in an investigative examination of product liability. Bayer is
initially happy to cooperate with this documentary, even when the ARD team's
research turns up complications with Baycol in wide release in the huge
American market. Bayer eagerly documents warnings to doctors and patients
in response to these problems regarding dosage and contraindications in use
with other medications. Bayer insists these warnings were disregarded by
prescribing doctors in the U.S., acting under the motto that 'more is better'
in combating America's high death rate from cardiovascular disease.
But Bayer's cooperation abruptly ends when ARD raises questions after
research into the original application to the U.S. Food & Drug
Administration, the agency that regulates the American drug market, reveals a
sharp warning about toxicity if Baycol's dosage is raised from the initial
application level. This warning is forgotten or dismissed when the FDA later
indeed approves higher dosages of Baycol. ARD's research also points to
differences between Germany and the U.S. in the marketing and dispensation of
drugs that either contradict warnings or make them easily missed by even
conscientious doctors and patients.
There is no doubt that American lawyers see a pot of gold on Bayer's horizon,
and they have assembled legions of clients in class action suits in state and
federal courts. But the documentary includes statements by pharmaceutical
experts who, because of this investigation, go on the record to take issue
with Bayer's research and development of Baycol, as well as industry analysts
who believe Bayer will be held liable to the tune of one to 3.5 billion
dollars.

2

Biographies for "The Lipobay Disaster"
Christoph Luetgert, Reporter:
Born May 8, 1945 in Germany
Currently Chief Reporter at NDR Television, the ARD German Television
Network's Hamburg-based station.
Began his career in journalism in 1970 (until 1984) with the German wire
service DPA covering North Rhine Westphalia. Moved to the national bureau in
Bonn in 1984 to 1986.
NDR Radio correspondent in Bonn from 1986 until 1988.
1988 joined NDR Television, starting with the investigative news magazine
"Panorama" and then as Chief Reporter with assignments in China, Southeast
Asia, the U.S. and the U.K.
Siri Nyrop, Producer:
Born October 9, 1951 in Boston, Massachusetts
Currently freelance documentary producer in Washington, D.C.
Started career in television in 1978 as field producer for ARD German
Television's Washington bureau.
1988 - 1992 with the Christian Science Monitor's news magazine "World
Monitor", first as coordinating producer and then as correspondent in Berlin.
1992 - 1994 correspondent in Washington, D.C. for Vox, German-based cable
news program.
Assignments in Central America, Europe, former East Bloc countries and
Central Asia.

Treatment: "The Lipobay Disaster"
Visuals: a cemetery in a suburb of Chicago, the gravesite of Georgia May
Affolter. Husband Karl and son Kim visit her grave.
Narration: the sudden death of the Georgia, otherwise in apparent good
health, after taking Baycol [the U.S. name for Lipobay]. (Documentary
includes profile of another American plaintiff who claims to suffer
debilitating side effects from Baycol, despite discontinuing use of the drug.)
Opposing soundbites by lawyer representing class action against Bayer Corp.
and by Bayer Corp. official

3

Visuals: an elderly man in Germany slowly making his way to his mailbox,
later in his home with his daughter and doctor.
Narration: the case against Lipobay/Baycol is made in Germany too, as
exemplified by Jens-Uwe Middelhauve, a once active businessman whose doctor
attributes his ill health to having taken Lipobay/Baycol.
Visuals: German television news coverage of Bayer Corp.'s August 2001
announcement that it was withdrawing Lipobay/Baycol from the market.
Narration: Coverage focuses on Bayer's explanation that it was acting out of
concern for patients' health after doctors failed to follow treatment
guidelines. Denies any causal connection between Lipobay/Baycol and reported
deaths or lasting side effects once drug use is discontinued.
Visuals: lawyers engaged in federal and state class actions against Bayer
convene in Minneapolis and San Diego to discuss strategy.
Narration: description of the 1000's of lawsuits that American lawyers filed
immediately after the withdrawal of Lipobay/Baycol; the liability case the
lawyers plan to make against Bayer in anticipation of high awards.
Visuals: the offices of Bayer's lead U.S. defense counsel, Bartlitt Beck in
Chicago, complete with mock courtroom and instant video analysis of trial
strategy.
Narration: description of Bartlitt Beck as one of the top 10 US law firms;
guided tour by Senior Partner Phil Beck who explains the role of the jury in
tort cases. Interview with Beck, who defends Bayer as having acted
voluntarily and responsibly, and dismissing the merits of plaintiffs' lawyers
as opportunist.
Visuals: exterior shots of Bayer in Wuppertal, taken from a cable car.
Narration: after the Beck interview, Bayer ends all cooperation with the
documentary and forbids personnel in the U.S. and Germany from speaking with
reporter Luetgert.
SOT's throughout the documentary from German and American pharmaceutical
experts, and FDA documents of Bayer's original medical review: refutation of
Bayer's claims that its clinical trials gave no indication of potential
toxicity if Lipobay/Baycol is taken in combination with other
cholesterol-lowering medications and/or in higher doses; statements that the
cases of death and continuing side effects are much higher than disclosed by
Bayer; criticism of the FDA's regulation of "me too" drugs.
Visuals: tv and print advertising in the US for cholesterol-lowering
medications, including Baycol/Lipobay.
Narration: explanation of the lucrative statin market in the US, the
influence of advertising and marketing to doctors, the acceptability of new
"me-too" drugs within a class of medications that have a successful track
record on the US market.
Visuals: a pharmacist in the U.S. dispensing prescription drug doses; copy
of "Dear Doctor" letter from Bayer to U.S. doctors; examples of
co-conscription and dosage warnings on Bayer package inserts for Baycol.

4

Narration: differences between German and American drug dispensing practices
that in the US result in generalized warnings to patients about any given
drug instead of package inserts; the inadequacy in American practice of
warning physicians about adverse developments in a drug in wide release;
Bayer's long experience with marketing pharmaceuticals in the US.
Visuals: New York Stock Exchange, skyscrapers in Frankfurt's banking
district.
Narration: Bayer's hopes for its pharmaceuticals division on the NYSE, prior
to the legal challenges resulting from Lipobay/Baycol's withdrawal from the
market, and financial analysts' predictions (despite being contacted by Bayer
not to make any statements) that Bayer would end up paying compensation
awards between one and 3 billion dollars.
(END)

