The Letter from Lundbeck
By Anne Lea Landsted,
Freelance journalist
E-mail: landsted@mail.dk
Phone: +45 23613831 (mobile)
2003 Global Investigative Journalism Conference, Copenhagen
Examining the pharmaceutical industry

It began with John le Carrés book, the Constant Gardener, and it ended with a scandal involving
the Danish pharmaceutical company, Lundbeck
In 2001 I read John le Carres book, the Constant Gardener, about the pharmaceutical industry. Inspired by the book I started investigating the Danish pharmaceutical companies and came across an
e-mail from a Sri Lankan professor of pharmacology. He was wondering how the Lundbeck drug,
Deanxit, that he had rejected twice for sale in Sri Lanka could end up being sold in Sri Lankan
drugstores.
I searched the internet for information about Deanxit and Lundbeck. I spoke with the Danish drug
authorities, psychiatrists and the Sri Lankan professor of pharmacology who at this point felt
cheated. Lundbeck did not want to be interviewed.
I found out that:
- Deanxit had been rejected twice for sale in Sri Lanka
- Deanxit is a combination drug for mild anxiety and depression
- Deanxit has never been registrered i Denmark because we don’t accept combination drugs
- Deanxit has been registrered for export only
- Lundbeck lies about registration in general. Deanxit is not registred in many of the countries they
List on the internet.
- Deanxit is a very old drug. Most of the documents about Deanxit are old and never published
documents and the drug had not been tested properly.
Later I got access to all documents concerning Lundbeck, Deanxit and Sri Lanka. Among them I
noticed a document saying that Deanxit is registered in Denmark. It was a lie. I also found a letter
from Lundbeck to SL DRA that should end up being my key document. It referred to a meeting
between Lundbeck and seven of Sri Lanka’s leading psychiatrists. The meeting was held in January
1999 six month after Deanxit had been rejected for the second time by SL DRA. The letter stated
that all the leading psychiatrists recommended that the drug should be registered for sale in Sri
Lanka.
I went to Sri Lanka in December 2001 to check all the information in the three page letter.
I found out that it was a lie, too. During my visit I spoke with all the psychiatrists and a Lundbeck
representative who tried to make me give up the story. I also spoke with members of the SL DRA.

- Three of the psychiatrists never attended the meeting
- None of the psychiatrists were told that the drug had already been rejected twice by the SL DRA

1

- None of the psychiatrists were told that the drug is not registrered in Denmark
- Only one or two of the psychitrist have perscribed the drug
The Letter from Lundbeck was published in Sygeplejersken and broadcast as a radio documentary
in March 2002. TV said no which they ended up regretting. The story was widely quoted. In a
newspaper interview Lundbecks top manager, Erik Sprunk-Jansen called it a scandal and ordered an
investigation. The results came a few months later.
- Lundbeck gave an apology to the three psychiatrists who hadn’t participated in the January
meeting.
- Lundbeck offered to withdraw the 40 old drugs from the Sri Lankan market
- The case had no consequences for the employees of Lundbeck
Shortly after the SL DRA decided to withdraw Lundbecks license to sell Deanxit in Sri Lanka. Up
to the last minute Lundbeck was very eager to promote the drug. Even after the license was withdrawn a Lundbeck representative showed up at one of the psychiatrists doorstep I was told.
Methodology:
The first month of my research I mainly used the internet to get information about the drug and its
whereabouts in the world.
During my research I several times asked Lundbeck for an interview. They refused. After the story
had been published they finally agreed to talk to me.
Nobody except the professor of pharmacology knew about me coming to Sri Lanka in December
2001. I was afraid that Lundbeck would find out and persuade the psychiatrists not to speak with me
if they knew about my visit. It turned out to be a smart move. When the local Lundbeck representatives found out about me being in Sri Lanka they contacted me trying to persuade me to drop my
story. At that time I had already spoken with most of the psychiatrists.
And off course I had very good sources.
I could not have made the story from Denmark. I had to go to Sri Lanka to find out that Lundbeck
had not only gone behind the back of the SL DRA they had also lied about crucial information

2

Link til dansk artikel i Sygeplejersken:
http://www.sygeplejersken.dk/sygeplejersken/default.asp?intArticleID=7735&menu=195009&strSe
archword=brevet%20fra%20lundbeck
English version of the article in Sygeplejersken:
http://www.sygeplejersken.dk/msite/text.asp?id=118&TextID=1414

Link til Radiodokumentar på DR:
http://www.dr.dk/p1/ondemand/index.asp
Her skal man søge på "brevet fra Lundbeck"

3

