Attacks against journalists
•
• Deaths
• Arrests
• Physical attacks/threats
• Media outlets censored
source: Reporters without borders

2002
25
692
1,420
389

2001
31
489
716
378

Keynote speech – Fernando Rodrigues
Global Investigative Journalism Conference
Copenhagen – Denmark – 1.May.2003

After the death of a journalist:
the stories to do; the work to finish

Good morning.
My name is Fernando Rodrigues. I’m a journalist from
Brazil, Latin America, and it’s an honor and a great pleasure
to be here. I would like to thank the organizers of the
Conference for this invitation which pleased me very much,
as well as the organizations that I represent, basically the
daily newspaper Folha de S.Paulo and the newly formed
Abraji, the Brazilian Association of Investigative Journalism.
In order to keep myself within the schedule, I scribbled a
few words and hope I can be brief. My talk will be about a
serious subject that affects all of us: the attacks against
journalists and the deaths of journalists on duty around the
world.
Firstly, I would like to give you some figures.
In 2002:
- 25 journalists were killed (against 31 in 2001)
- at least 692 were arrested (against 489 in 2001)
- at least 1,420 journalists were physically attacked or
threatened (716 in 2001)
- at least 389 media outlets were censored (378 in 2001)

On the 1st of January of 2003, 118 journalists were in prison
around the world.
These figures are from Reporters sans Frontiers (Reporters
without Borders, a freedom of the press organization).
Although the 25 deaths of last year represent a decrease as
compared to the 31 deaths of 2001, all the other statistics
got worse.
The number of arrests, physical attacks and threats against
journalists soared in 2002 and outnumbered the figures of
2001.
The figures of 2002 include, amongst others, Daniel Pearl,
the Wall Street Journal South Asia correspondent. He was
kidnapped and killed by his captors, in Karachi.
This year, most probably, the figures tend to be worse.
Needless to say, the deaths of our colleagues covering the
Gulf War will make this appalling statistic to rise.
I come from a country where democracy has recently been
restored, less than two decades ago. Even though, we still
have journalists being killed while on assignment. Last year,
two journalists were killed in Brazil.
The most reported case was of TV reporter and producer
Tim Lopes. Lopes, an award-winning investigative reporter
with TV Globo, was brutally murdered by drug traffickers.
He disappeared while working on assignment in the
suburbs of Rio de Janeiro in a favela (a shantytown, an
impoverished area of the city). It took several days until
Rio’s Police could find some parts of Lopes’ body buried in
clandestine cemetery.

I think this sad example of the Brazilian reporter is very
emblematic. Democracy, very unfortunately, is not by itself
sufficient to deter drug traffickers and organized crime in
general when they decide to go after journalists.
Colombia, in Latin America, for instance, can be considered
a democratic country. They have regular a free elections.
Even so, the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ)
called in April on the Colombian Government to provide
immediate protection to 16 journalists facing death threats
from both guerrilla and paramilitary groups.
Very sadly, two journalists were assassinated this week in
Colombia: Guillermo Bravo Vega and Jaime Regifo Revero.
Up to now, since the beginning of this year, six journalists
have been murdered in Colombia.
In the United States there was a sad event back in 1976,
when reporter Don Bolles died after the explosion of car
bomb in Phoenix, Arizona. There was an immediate
reaction of all American press at that time. They felt
compelled to show to the organized crime that the death of
a journalist on duty could no be regarded as just another
killing.
The reaction resulted in a team of about 40 reporters of
various newspapers and other media who were sent to
Phoenix. For nearly 3 months they investigated the
organized crime and the corruption accusations that were
being followed by Don Bolles –which was the reason he
was assassinated.
At that time, in 1976, the journalists wanted to convey a
clear signal to the local mafia in Arizona: it was senseless to
kill an investigative journalist, because many others would
quickly appear to continue the work.

In the end, two people were convicted and sent to prison for
the killing of Bolles.
I was not there, but what I’ve learned that the initiative in
Arizona back in 1976 helped to consolidate the IRE
(Investigative Reporters & Editors), which was still a small
group at that time and then became a national entity.
That’s the point I wanted to make. We are gathering here in
Copenhagen to discuss and debate Investigative
Journalism. We live now in a time of globalization, of ideas
misplaced all over, of threats of terrorism. All this makes our
job more difficult. It is of foremost importance that we drive
our efforts to consolidate more and more organizations
around the world like, for instance, the Danish Association
of Investigative Journalism, which is organizing the present
conference.
As long as we improve our investigative techniques and
skills, the more we will be prepared to fight today’s gloomy
scenario in certain areas of the Globe. Last year, and the
year before, more than one media outlet per day was
attacked or had some form of censorship imposed to it.
The only response we can give to that is to investigate more
and better. All the time. That’s why we’re here.
Thank you.

