2003 IRE Annual Conference, Washington, D.C.
"Statehouse Investigations."
CHECKING FOR ILLEGAL CAMPAIGN ACTIVITY
by Dee J. Hall, reporter, Wisconsin State Journal
1. Examine any partisan offices attached to your legislature. More than a dozen states have them.
Find out what their policies are regarding campaign work and how they're enforced. Then track down
former employees to see whether those policies are followed.

2. Get phone records. Even people with cell phones sometimes slip up and use their government
telephones. Compare numbers with those found on campaign Web sites, at political consulting firms, from
campaign press releases and candidates' home and office numbers.

3. Develop a web of sources. Ask each source to name as many other sources as he or she can
think of who might be helpful to the story. Political watchdog groups can be helpful in finding sources or
explaining the political landscape.

4. File public-records requests for documents, photos and graphics. We found that even when
records custodians took great care to excise documents that could incriminate them (a crime, by the way),
they still sometimes forgot to delete everything. Among hundreds of photos and brochures we obtained
electronically from the Assembly Republican Caucus, we found three campaign documents they'd
forgotten to delete.

5. Keep all campaign brochures. We found some of the same photos taken by state photographers
showed up in literature put out by so-called "independent" political organizations and the candidates
themselves. We found one brochure produced as a state publication that was nearly identical to a
campaign brochure the caucus produced illegally for a candidate.

6. Talk to first-time candidates. They are the most likely to be candid about people who worked for
their campaigns. Ask who designed their brochures, who designed their TV ads, who distributed literature
for them, who raised money for them. If they claim not to know, they're either untruthful or perhaps not
smart enough to run your state.
A full copy of the Wisconsin State Journal series is available from the IRE Resource Center
(www.ire.org/resourcecenter or 573-882-3364) by ordering No. 19736.
Dee J. Hall, Wisconsin State Journal, Madison, Wis., (608) 252-6132, dhall@madison.com

