CASE AGAINST THE HIGH PRIEST OF JUSTICE (SIR LANKA)
Victor Ivan, Chief Editor “Ravaya” news paper, ravaya@slt.lk
This is a story in which the Chief Justice stands at the centre. It may be considered a
process that subjected the conscience of the society of Sri Lanka to a severe test.
At the climax of this process the parliament is compelled to move a motion of
impeachment against the Chief Justice and, for the purpose of stopping it, the supreme
court in turn is compelled to impose a stay order on the parliament. This crisis develops
into a constitutional crisis. As a direct consequence, the President is forced to dissolve the
parliament, and the general election that follows results in the party that moved the
motion of impeachment coming to power. However, the party that has come to power,
too, is not taking action against the corrupt Chief Justice due to the fear that the President,
who holds the executive power, would dissolve the parliament immediately if any step is
taken against the Chief Justice. All this has pushed the entire system of justice to a state
of rot.
This crisis started with my exposure of a rapist magistrate. Then, when the attorney
general was following a policy of protecting the rapist magistrate, it became necessary to
go into the corrupt transactions of the attorney general and to expose them too.
Consequently the struggle became one centering round the attorney general. Thereafter, at
a time when two inquiries had been started against the attorney general, the President
appointed him to the post of Chief justice for the purpose of protecting him. It was that
process which developed into an impeachment against the Chief Justice.
Although there are a number of lessons which those who are practising investigative
reporting can learn from this turmoil, my intention is not to talk about that but to draw the
attention of those who participate in this conference and who are involved in this subject
to this turmoil and to get their active support to overcome it.
The problem now is in such a state that there cannot be an internal solution to it. It is a
common problem that the media people practising investigative reporting in all countries
have to face. My hope is to find a solution to this dilemma through this conference.

Case AGAINST THE HIGH PRIEST OF
JUSTICE (SIR LANKA)

1. In this presentation before a group of
outstanding persons in the field of investigative
reportage the subject I am dealing with is an
experience involving the chief justice of Sri
Lanka.

2. The story I am going to tell is one which
started as a minor incident and developed into a
massive crises. At a high point of it the parliament
had to move a motion of impeachment against the
chief justice and the supreme court in response
imposed a prevention order on the Parliament.
This protracted crises which has caused a rot in the
entire judicial system of the country is continuing
with no end in sight.

3. This specific experience raises a very
important fundamental problem relevant to the
results that might be brought about by
investigative reporting.

4. A woman who came to see me in August
‘97 told me a story about a magistrate which
was not easy to believe. Her husband had been
remanded. The magistrate had wilfully blocked
the possibility of bailing him out. Their lawyer
asked her to see the magistrate for the purpose
of recording a statement to help release her
husband. When she went to see the magistrate
he, took her to a rest house and raped her .

5. When the remand prisoner learned that the
magistrate had raped his wife he employed a
unique form of revenge. On a date of hearing he
came to the court with a bag of feces hidden in
his person. When the case was called he went
before the magistrate and emptied the bag of
feces on his head.

6. What happened next was that the magistrate
got together with a group of court employees and
beat the remand prisoner until his arms and legs
were broken.

7. When the prisoner was sent to hospital he
told the doctor reasons for the assault. The doctor
was surprised by the story and informed the
human rights commission about it. The
commission started an inquiry against the
magistrate. The inquiring officer recorded a
statement from the prisoner’s wife too. It was he
who advised her to see ‘Ravaya’ editor and to tell
him everything if she wanted early justice, That
was how that woman came to me.

8. I published this story as a lead story,
including also what the magistrate had to say .

9. What I expected of it was to help ensure
justice to the woman and her husband and to see
that the law was enforced against this evil
magistrate.

10. The result, however, was different . A
Sunday newspaper published in English devoted
hafer page in defence of the magistrate. That long
comment said that this magistrate was a person
who was rendering eminent service and who
strictly enforced the law against the criminals,
and that the ‘Ravaya’ story had been invented by
a few criminals who had a grudge against him in
order to destroy him.

11. The following day a Sinhala language
newspaper too had joined in this eulogy. A
lengthy statement issued by an organization of
Buddhist monks had been published in it’s front
page .

12. In the meanwhile the magistrate, in
compliance with the attorney general, complained
to the CID against me. With that an inquiry was
started for the purpose of initiating a case of
criminal defamation.

13. In this context I had to make further
inquiries about this magistrate As a result I was
able to find out that this person had served as a
clerk in an insurance corporation and that he had
been interdicted by the authorities there for
defrauding third party claims and had been
dismissed after an inquiry.

14. I published in the newspaper the story about
the insurance corporation too along with the
relevant documents.

15. At the inquiry initiated by the complaint
made against me by the magistrate the CID
recorded a statement from me too. There I made
available to the police inspector who recorded my
statement copies of the documents related to the
insurance fraud and requested him to find out how
such a person had been recruited to the judicial
service. The police inspector recorded a statement
also from the woman who had been raped. In it she
had stated all the details. The police inspector had
also made inquiries about the fraud committed at
the insurance corporation.

16. After making all these inquiries the CID
sent the inquiry file to the AG seeking further
advice. According to the contents of it, what
should have happened was to suspend the inquiry
against me and to take legal action against the
magistrate.

17. The AG had a close friendship with the
magistrate and there was also a close kinship
between them. Instead of getting the law enforced
against the magistrate, the AG followed a policy
of suppressing the inquiry report in order to
defend the magistrate. So I met the minister of
justice, told him all the details and requested him
to query the AG about this inquiry.

18. The minister had made an inquiry from the
AG and he had sent a confidential report to the
minister.

19. By this confidential report the AG had, in
order to protect the magistrate, distorted
completely all the facts revealed at the inquiry.
The feeling that the confidential report had
created in me was that the AG too must be a
scoundrel like the magistrate. What I did next
was to make inquiries about the AG.

20. One of the stories I learned about him was
this : While serving as the head of the appeal
court he had developed an undue relationship
with the wife of a close friend of his who was a
chemical engineer and had gone on to a state of
cohabitation with her without divorcing his own
wife.

21. The engineer instituted an action in the
district court citing his wife and the head of the
court of appeal (Sarath Silva) as correspondents.

22. The district judge who had inquired into the
case had done so to suit the interests of the
president of the court of appeal and in
contravention of the law.

23. At the first hearing of the case the judge
dismissed the plaint without making any inquiries.

24. Unaware what had happened to his
plaint, engineer Jayasekera filed a fresh
plaint. Without making any inquiry from
the complainant the judge ruled that the
president of the court of appeal be taken off
the position of a respondent and issued
summons to Jayasekara’s wife only. In
order not to permit an appeal against his
ruling, the judge saw to it that the
complainant did not receive the ruling.

25. The judge advised Jayasekera to come to an
amicable settlement. When he did not agree, the
judge ordered Jayasekera to pay his wife, who
was living in adultery with the president of the
court of appeal, a monthly maintenance of Rs. ten
thousand, and costs amounting to Rs. 50,000.

26. Although Jayasekera’s lawyer filed an
amendment against this order the judge did not
consider it. Instead, the judge took up for inquiry
a plaint submitted by that woman and ordered
Jayasekera to pay her compensation amounting to
Rs. 1 million as costs.

27. Against these two illegal orders Jayasekera
filed two petitions in the court of appeal. The
lawyers of the opposing side informed Jaysekera
that, unless those two petitions were withdrawn,
action would be taken to get a court order to
acquire Jayasekera’s property in order to recover
the compensation. Considering the
embarrassment that might be caused if the house
in which he was living with his children was
acquired, Jayasekera withdrew the two petitions.

28. Thereafter Jayasekera complained to the
judicial service commission about the conduct of
the judge. The commission held an inquiry into it.
At the inquiry the judge was found guilty and the
commission forwarded the inquiry file to the
attorney general in order to take action against the
judge.

29. Sarath Silva manipulated to change the
composition of the JSC and also became the
attorney general with President’s blessings. That
also marked the end of the enforcement of the law
against the judge.

30. This story which appeared in detail in
‘Ravaya’ caused a great shock in the legal
community. At the same time the question was
also raised as to what the minister of justice
would say about the charges levelled against the
AG in that exposure. It is the minister of justice
who functions as the spokesman of the
government at the news conference in which the
cabinet decisions are announced.

31. The minister knew that the AG was wrong.
However, as the AG was one of the most trusted
friends of the President it was not possible for the
minister to speak against him. Surmising that
Ravaya might attack him too on this issue, the
minister spoke to me over the phone and told me
that the AG would be summoned to the news
conference announcing the cabinet decisions the
following week.

32. The questioning of the AG lasted for about
one and a half hours. All the electronic and
printed media gave a wide coverage to that
questioning.

33. The news conference caused a commotion
in the legal community too. The Bar Association
summoned a conference of the former presidents
of the Association in order to decide what to do
about the accusations levelled by ‘Ravaya’
against the two judges and the AG.

34. The conference proposed to the chief justice
that the accusations made by ‘Ravaya’ against the
magistrate and the district judge must be inquired
into .

35. As a result the JSC appointed two, three
members committees to inquire into the charges
levelled by ‘Ravaya’ against the magistrate and
the district judge. This happened in November
1998.

36. The two committees of inquiry found the
magistrate and the district judge guilty of all the
charges made against them. This happened in
June and July 1999.

37. Thereafter, charging that the AG had misled
the minister of justice by making a false report in
order to protect the magistrate by withholding the
facts revealed at the inquiry against him, I
submitted a plaint to the supreme court requesting
that the AG’s name be deleted from the roll of
lawyers in terms of section 42 of the Judicature.
Act.

38. Jayasekera too filed a plaint against the AG
on the grounds that he had used his official status
to suppress the case filed citing him. Both these
plaints were given wide publicity by the media.

The chief justice appointed one judge to inquire
into and report on my plaint and a nother judge to
inquire into and report on Jayasekera’s plaint.

39. Mr. G.P.S. de Silva who was holding the
post of chief justice was due to retire on
September 16, 1999. There was a rumour afloat
that the President was going to appoint the AG to
the post of chief justice, disregarding the serious
charges that had been levelled against him. A
number of prominent lawyers including the
President’s legal advisor had requested her not to
make that mistake. At the same time she was
aware that her friend was in a predicament from
which there was no easy escape. The only thing
she could do in the circumstances for his
salvation was to appoint him to the post of chief
justice.

40. In spite of a notice made by UN rapporteur
on the independence of the judiciary, and
conveyed to the President not to appoint him to
that post until the two inquiries were over, the
Precedent appointed him to the post of chief
justice.

41. Even among those who were in favor of this
struggle, an opinion has built up that, due to the
very great power of the post of chief justice, any
future talk about the issue was fruitless. In order
to dispel the fear that was growing, a bold step
was essential. What I did was to publish a
blackened issue of Ravaya, containing an analysis
which said that the death of the freedom of the
judiciary had started, and carrying a photograph,
turned upside down, which showed the new chief
justice taking his oaths before the President.

42. Thereafter I filed a fundamental rights
petition before the supreme court challenging
Sarath Silva’s appointment. Jayasekera too filed
a FR petition.

43. I did not believe that justice would be done
to these FR petitions while Sarath Silva was in
the post of chief justice. I had two aims in filing a
FR petition. One was to draw international
attention. The other was to keep the issue alive
until a proper time came to stand up.

44. The supreme court dismissed the petition
without leaving any room for further examination
and said that the President’s appointments could
not be challenged and that if there was any error
in this appointment, that had to be settled by a
motion of impeachment submitted to the
parliament.

45. The CJ consolidated his power in the
judiciary through a course of action that turned
the judiciary into a puppet of the executive. He
changed the method of appointing panels of
judges and the method of distributing the cases
among the panels so that he could get before
himself all the court cases of political significance.
The scope of the fundamental rights was
narrowed down. He drove out en masse the
judges who would not agree to his scheme. He
turned the Bar Associations too into a puppet
movement that he could manipulate in the way he
wanted.

46. In these circumstances, a powerful opinion
had built up among the opposition parties by the
end of the year 2000 that a CJ should be
impeached. That chief justice made a great
attempt to prevent, with the help of the lawyers
among the MPs of the opposition.

47. When he found that the impeachment
could not be prevented, the CJ got three FR
petitions presented through lawyers loyal to him
against the impeachment which was going to be
presented in parliament. He appointed a panel of
judges loyal to him to inquire into the three
petitions. His strategy was to impose a prevention
order so that the Speaker would not be able to
entertain the impeachment. This plot was put into
force with also the blessings of the President. The
attorney general, and the Speaker (at that time the
President’s brother)

48. On the very day on which a prevention order
was imposed the motion of impeachment signed
by 77 MPs was handed over to the speaker.

49. This prevention order raised strong
opposition in the parliament and led to a
constitutional crisis too. Due to the powerful
public opinion that was growing against the order
the speaker’s had to issue a decision rejecting the
order. On the day on which the speaker gave his
decision a group of MPs from the government
joined the opposition, and consequently the
President dissolved the parliament. Due to that
reason the impeachment too was suppressed.

50. At the election that followed, the opposition
party won and become the government party. As
the executive power continued to be in the hands
of the President the government party was too
scared to follow a tough line of action against the
CJ. The government fears that, if any action is
taken against the CJ, the President might dissolve
the parliament immediately. In this state of
uncertainty, the CJ is able to continue his fascistic
programme with no deceit.

51. A democratic system needs the rule of law.
It is the judiciary which is in charge of the rule of
law. A large number of serious misconducts on
the part of the person who holds the highest
position in the judiciary, I have inquired into and
exposed to the country in an investigative manner.
He did not give up his post because of what I did,
no did the laws operate against him.

I had studied CJ’s telephone bills for three
months and found that he has had connections
with the underworld. As a result I was able to get
the police to arrest a criminal who had been
hiding with the help of CJ.

52. What I did was to go beyond the traditional
framework of investigative reporting in order to
create an environment in which the law might
operate against him. In fact I had to move
towards litigation without limiting myself to
exposures by the pen. I had also to occupy
myself in a movement to persuade MPs to move
a motion of impeachment.

53. It was not a simple or smooth journey.
Some of those who joined this action were
subjected to cruel victimization. There were
constant death threats. Acid was thrown on the
motor vehicle in which I traveled. The office was
attacked with a smoke bomb.

54. The International Bar Association sent a
three member delegation in August 2001 to Sri
Lanka for the purpose of investigating these
matters. They published an excellent report with
the title ‘SRI LAKNKA FAILING TO
PROTECT THE RULE OF LAW AND THE
INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY’(www.
ibanet.org).

55.

Neither my exposures nor the international pressures
have been able to effect any change in the prevailing
circumstances. This turmoil has been continuing and
developing for nearly six years. It takes various forms and gets
renewed. Its new shape of development seems to be moving
towards a destructive end. In February a certain person filed a
fundamental rights petition citing the three members of the
judicial service commission, including the chief justice, as
respondents. The chief justice who is a respondent in the case
took it up for inquiry before a panel of judges in which he was
a member, and within a few short minutes found the petitioner
guilty of the offence of contempt of court and sentenced him to
one year in prison. Something stranger was to follow.After he
was sent to prison, he was subjected to a cruel assault.

56. In the final analysis has not the
investigative reporting made a judiciary which is
rotten to some extent to rot entirely? What went
wrong? Was the way in which I practiced the
theory wrong? Or, is that theory inapplicable to
countries like ours? It is necessary to overcome
this destructive situation and the public of Sri
Lanka expect your help to overcome this callenge

