HOLLAND & KNIGHT LLP
CHARLES D. TOBIN
DIRECT DIAL 202-419-2539
ctobin@hklaw.com

WASHINGTON, D.C.
2099 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Suite 100
Washington, D.C. 20006-6801

TELEPHONE 202-955-3000
FACSIMILE 202-955-5564

Newsgathering and the “Inadvertent” Crime

Question:

“Our producer ‘inadvertently’ bought crack cocaine. Can we go with
the video?”

Answer:

“No problem. We’ve got tons of bail money in our sweeps budget.”

Few lines are brighter in this area of the law: journalists cannot commit
crimes to gather the news and expect that the courts will approve. Consider the
cases of:
•

an award-winning Maryland radio journalist, arrested in 1996 on 15
counts of exchanging child-pornography over the internet. Despite his
defense that he was pursing a story, and therefore was protected by the
First Amendment, the court convicted him of all counts. The appeals
court upheld the conviction. The judge who sentenced the man to 18
months in prison pronounced that while the journalist “argued that he
should be allowed to receive and distribute child pornography in order to
gather news for a future story . . . a press pass is not a license to break the
law.”

•

a book author who, in 1997, persuaded an investigator in the probe of the
crash of TWA Flight 800 to smuggle out a swatch of the fabric from the
airplane’s seats. The author wanted to test residue on the seats to
determine whether, as his book theorized, a Navy missile had brought
down the plane. Prosecutors charged him with aiding and abetting in the
violation of federal law, and a jury convicted him after deliberating just
two hours. The judge, in sentence the author to probation, said, “The
press may not use First Amendment protection to justify otherwise illegal
actions.”

•

a pair of Salt Lake City broadcast journalists who, with the school’s
permission, interviewed a group of teens about chewing tobacco. The
journalists told the teens “to do what they ordinarily do” while the camera
rolled. Because of their suggestion, prosecutors charged the journalists
with contributing to the delinquency of a minor. According to the Utah
Court of Appeals: “Simply put, representatives of the press may not
encourage crime so that they my record it and report on it, and then claim

that the prosecution amounts to an attempt by the government to restrain
or abridge the freedom of the press.”
•

in another story involving teens and vice, a Minnesota TV reporter and
cameraman bought two cases of beer for a group of teenagers, then filmed
the teens drinking. After their station fired them, the pair was sentenced
to 90 days in jail.

Whether through hardcore and direct activity, or suggestive and indirect
complicity, in the eyes of the law, journalists go beyond their First Amendment
rights when they participate in the planning or execution of crimes. They expose
themselves – and their station – to the full weight of the law in instances like these.
Obviously, journalists in day-to-day newsgathering encounter lots of shades
of grey. Can I show up if I know in beforehand that a crime will be committed, but I
didn't do anything to help plan it? Can my source give me something that he stole?
There are no one-size-fits-all answers to these questions, which are best handled by
specific consultation with newsroom counsel.
If the station does learn that a journalist may have violated the law to get a
story, the following are a few prudent measures that management should take
immediately.
•

contact station counsel. Additionally, the station should be prepared to
discuss retaining separate lawyers for every person involved in the story.

•

cease all conversation among station personnel about the matter.
Everyone involved in the story has a Fifth Amendment right against
making statements that would tend to incriminate them. But each person
who hears another’s statement can be compelled to repeat it to the
authorities.

•

Preserve all notes, documents, footage, and any other tangible items. It's
against the law to destroy potential evidence of a crime.

WAS1 #1164847 v1

2

