HOLLAND & KNIGHT LLP
CHARLES D. TOBIN
DIRECT DIAL 202-419-2539
ctobin@hklaw.com

WASHINGTON, D.C.
2099 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Suite 100
Washington, D.C. 20006-6801

TELEPHONE 202-955-3000
FACSIMILE 202-955-5564

A Promise Is Not Just A Promise – It May Be A Contract As Well

Question:

“We’re burning a confidential source at 6:00. Anything we should
worry about?”

Answer:

“Do you want to tell the jury ‘promises are made to be broken’?”

Ask just about any journalist, and they will tell you that a promise of
anonymity to a source is a sacred bond. Not surprisingly, a majority of the U.S.
Supreme Court justices saw the issue the same way.
The Court in 1991 sided in favor of a Minneapolis source who was “burned.”
After reporters promised the source anonymity in exchange for documents, editors
decided his identity was as newsworthy as the information he provided. They ran
his name. Justice White, writing for the majority, said that “generally applicable
laws do not offend the First Amendment simply because their enforcement against
the press has incidental effects on its ability to gather and report the news.”
Clear and definite promises, where they induce the source to talk, can form
the basis of a valid lawsuit. On the other hand, a vague aspirational statement that
is too hard to define probably will not be enforced.
For example, a trucking company in Maine sued a network after journalists,
in order to get the company to participate in the story, allegedly promised “positive”
coverage. The network also had promised it would not include comments from a
specific group of trucking-industry critics.
The broadcast was anything but “positive.” It leveled strong criticisms at the
industry in general and this company in particular, and it featured a healthy dose
of commentary from the critics’ group. In the ensuing lawsuit, the court of appeals
held that a promise of “positive” coverage was too vague and indefinite to enforce.
It would not let the network suffer a verdict for that alleged promise.
But the court reached a different result on the promise not to publicize the
critics’ group. That alleged promise, according to the court, was clear and specific
enough to warrant enforcement. While the court reversed a six-figure jury verdict
against the station, it allowed the trucking company to pursue a misrepresentation
claim based on the promise not to air the group's views.

A few things to keep in mind in dealing with promises to sources:
•

jargon like “off the record” and “on background” mean different things to
different ears. The source and the journalist giving the promise need to be
on the same page. “I will not use your name,” “I will not use your
information without confirmation by another source,” “I will quote you as
‘a high-level administration official’” – all of these examples make it more
clear to the source, and the broadcaster, what is expected.

•

it's easier to defend a promised process than a guaranteed result. A
journalist can never be 100% positive that they can fulfill a promise such
as, “No one ever will know who you are.” But the journalist has far
greater certainty when he tells the source exactly what the station
proposes to do: “I will only shoot your hands and feet,” “I will hide your
face and disguise your voice,” or “I will only film the back of your head.”

•

reporters and producers need to know the limits of everyone’s authority
before they extend a promise. Once a journalist make that promise, the
entire station could be bound.

•

everyone in the production chain needs to know what promises have been
made to sources. That makes an accidental unmasking of the source less
likely.

•

wherever feasible, newsgatherers should try to record the terms of the
promise. Casually reciting the promise while shooting reverse angle, for
example, can eliminate lot of the uncertainty if the source remembers
things differently after the story airs.

Whether to use confidential sources at all is a policy decision for station
management, not the lawyers, to make. But along with the news value, before
publishing damaging information based on an anonymous source, journalists and
management should consider how the station will defend itself in litigation if it
cannot name names. In situations like that, consultation with counsel can be time
and money well spent.
WAS1 #1164846 v1

2

