INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING ASSOCIATIONS
IDEAS FOR STRUCTURE AND FUNDING

Associations: These are professional associations. Members can include working journalists,
free-lance writers, educators, and other interested parties. IRE, created in 1975, has over 5,000
members from 27 countries. It sponsors an annual conference attended by over 1,000 journalists
from around the world. The Swedish IRE, Gravande Journalister, attracts to its annual conference
over 500 journalists from across Scandanavia.
IRE and Mexican journalists formed a Mexican investigative association in 1996, which does
training, publishes a newsletter and holds training seminars.
There are various roles these groups fulfill: they give out awards, publish guidebooks, hold
regional, national, and international conferences, run workshops and teach, and lobby to support
endangered journalists and freedom of the press. Some are affiliated with universities, such as
IRE, which is based at the University of Missouri’s Journalism School.
The more successful groups define investigative journalism broadly and offer training and
membership to beat and daily news reporters. The idea is to make investigative skills broadly
relevant to every newsroom. IRE also developed an National Institute for Computer Assisted
Reporting (NICAR), which has attracted interest worldwide.
In Denmark, there is an association of journalists, FUJ, that hold seminars and conferences and an
association, DICAR, which is based on the model of NICAR. IRE and the Danish organizations
are holding a Global Investigative Journalism Conference in this coming May.
In Norway, journalists there have an association known as SKUP, which also does training and
holds conferences.
In the Netherlands and Belgium, journalists have an association of French-speaking journalists
that recently held a conference of more than 200.
Last German journalists formed an investigative reporting network.
Eastern European journalists also are forming associations. Associations have formed in Romania
and Bulgaria and others are beginning to form.
Reporting Organizations: A number of groups are hybrids; that is, they combine elements of a
news reporting organization with that of a professional association. Most are primarily news
agencies which sell investigative projects on contract to various media outlets. Some, like the San
Francisco-based Center for Investigative Reporting and Wash., DC-based Center for Public
Integrity, have had annual contracts with major TV newsmagazines, in which they provide tips,
story memos, and production assistance. The Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism
publishes its own magazine and produces newspaper and TV stories, but also does a great deal of
training for journalists in Southeast Asia.

1

INCOME SOURCES
Membership fees: As with most professional associations, these groups charge annual fees to its
members.
To attract journalists from small news organizations, free-lancers, reporters overseas, IRE keeps
its fees among the lowest fees any US journalism association ($50/year). For this, members
receive a newsletter, have access to its online and hardcopy libraries,
IRE and other organizations use the model that to attend a conference you must be a member.
This ensures that the networking and training continues for a year after attendance at a
conference.
Foundation grants: Key to the growth of all these groups is foundation funding. In the 1980s,
funders realized that investigative journalism is essential to democracy. The reporting
organizations have created public policy areas which foundations can fund – such as projcts on
the environment, corruption, or the arms trade. Other groups receive funding to run workshops
and conferences, do trainings, and reach out to minority and foreign journalists.
Funders range from small liberal foundations interested in public policy to large media
organizations pushing professional development. Annual reports and web pages of the various
investigative reporting groups will give an indication of the kind of funders available.
The groups have found it essential to build a wall between any funding and management
decisions, much as media outlets must maintain distance between advertising and editorial.
University Funding: Some groups, such as IRE and the St. Petersburg Centre for Investigative
Reporting, are affiliated with important universities. The schools can offer teaching fees,
subsidized office space, and sometimes legal and political protection. They also give students the
opportunity to work with professionals and help with staffing.
Corporate Funding: Direct corporate funding is a controversial area. IRE, for example, does not
accept corporate donations except from media groups, such as newspaper chains and TV
networks. Other groups have accepted such donations, however.
Government Funding: In the last ten years, there is a realization among governments that
investigative reporting is key to fighting corruption and building up civil society. The European
Union has funded some groups, as has the World Bank and the United Nations. The US State
Department also funds some training. But this, too, is a controversial area. Concerned about being
perceived as a tool of government policy, IRE refuses to accept government money.
Individual donations: Some groups encourage individual donations. They maintain lists of
funders and update them regularly about progress on key projects. IRE has begun an endowment
project to obtain a pool of money from which it can earn interest income each year. Under US
law, contributions to a nonprofit group are tax deductible, and this is a strong incentive for people
to give money. As with other funding, it is important to keep individual donations from
influencing the independence of the group.
Sales and services: The more successful groups are entrepreneurial in spirit. That is, they support
their NGO or non-profit status with commercial activities that bring in needed income. Among

2

the sources: conference fees, profits from sales of guidebooks and other materials, workshop fees,
database libraries, archives of stories, and teaching and training.
Guidebooks can provide significant income. Projects have included an investigative reporting
manual; a directory of public records; and handbooks for beat reporters on covering business, the
environment, crime, and other areas. Journals can help support themselves with advertising.

For a fee, IRE and CPI offer access to databases they have obtained from government records.
IRE also helps journalists to analyze those databases and also performs searches in its archives.
The San Francisco-based CIR created its own editing studio to produce documentaries for public
television; they have earned substantial income from this.
Endowments: We currently think the best answer to funding is to create an endowment that is
wisely and conservatively invested. While it requires much effort and time, an endowment
ensures that the association will always be there and will maintain its independence of political
and financial influences. It also ensures that the association can focus on training, resources, and
networking rather than spending too much time on raising money.
****

3

