Cash for Classes
by Natalya Shulyakovskaya IRE/June 2003
The Orange County Register
714.796.7024, natalyas@ocregister.com
Data is abundant in the field of education. So is money. So is the number of insiders ready to
explain why you shouldn’t attempt to independently analyze educational and, especially,
educational funding data. So, be conservative in your calculations and tenacious in figuring out
how the system works. And you will be able to enlighten yourself and your readers on where and
why the education millions flow.
Last winter, the Register reported on community colleges reaping millions of taxpayer dollars by
counting high-school athletes as students, their coaches as college instructors and their regular
sports practices as college credit courses. In 2001-2002 academic year alone, these phantom
classes generated at least $56 million in taxpayer funding to colleges. (You can read the stories
online at www.ocregister.com/features/phantom_classes/)
We used statewide enrollment and apportionment data, along with paper records, to nail the story.
Here are bits of advice that could help you dissect community college financing and other
education business stories.
•

Most educational databases are either readily available online or well documented on web
sites ran by state departments of education. Plow through these websites to find record
layouts, data reporting manuals, names of database administrators, data samples and,
sometimes, actual data files. Use this information before you start negotiating for the
actual data.
California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office has its entire Management
Information System documentation and record layout online at
http://www.cccco.edu/divisions/tris/mis/dedmain.htm

•

While a lot of information is collected at statewide agencies, some individual schools
might have computer systems that accumulate a lot more data than they are required to
report to a statewide chancellor’s office or department of education. Request additional,
more detailed, records from local colleges.
In California, 108 community colleges upload data on their courses, students and faculty
to the chancellor’s office MIS database. We used the data to analyze high-school student
enrollment. But it was missing an important detail: Were the classes held on college
campuses or at high schools? MIS did not require that information, but some schools
(Los Angeles Community College District, for example) collected it. Los Angeles district
even conducted its own analysis of high-school enrollment and looked at the class
location. We and the California Department of Finance turned to their numbers for
reference.
Colleges themselves were also the only source for grade sheets. They arrived with names
of students redacted, but still showed that high-school athletes enrolled in community
college P.E. courses got straight As.

•

The state provides the majority of money for California community colleges. College
districts report their enrollment numbers, amounts of local taxes they receive and how
much money they collect in student fees to the state chancellor’s office. Based on that
information, the state distributes funds to districts. Allocations are done twice a year.
In California, state apportionment reports for the last five fiscal years were available on
line at http://www.cccco.edu/divisions/cffp/fiscal/allocations/apportionment.htm
We used pdf files of state apportionment reports (Second Principal Apportionment,
Exhibit C) to build a funding history database. Information from the pdf files was copied
into Word, imported into FoxPro and parsed there.

•

Educational funding is convoluted, even for college administrators. Therefore, there is
plenty of manuals explaining how funding is done, how state apportionment money is
allocated, how much money is available for capital projects and what changes are
happening in funding rules.
In California, the chancellor’s office conducts annual state budget workshops for college
administrators. For those workshops, the office produces information packets – the size
of a thick binder – with lists of all coefficients, growth rates and other numbers necessary
to plan funding for each community college district.
The packet also includes funding rates per full-time equivalent student enrollment. We
copied recent packets at a local community college district and requested earlier versions
from the statewide chancellor’s office. We used this information to estimate how much
money each college received for physical education classes that turned out to be regular
high-school practices.
The state fiscal services unit also supplied college administrators with an excel workbook
set up to help them with formulas and calculations. I asked for a copy and fiddled with it
to make sure I understood how funding formulas work.

•

There are usually very few people who actually know ins and outs of education funding
mechanics. They can provide invaluable advice, most of the time off the record.
Community college finance directors could be very helpful explaining how all parts of
funding equations jive. Some experts could be found at a state departments of finance or
legislative audit committees.

•

Community college interest groups have staff analysts. They have access to a lot of
college data. They are insiders and often lobby for colleges in budget fights. Their
analysis might be useful in double-checking your work.

•

To maintain your sanity amidst the onslaught of funding and enrollment figures, do
plenty of field reporting. After yet another complicated calculation comes out askew, sit
calmly, breath deeply and close your eyes. Visualize a whole bunch of high-school kids
knocking each other at a football practice for three hours, with an hour-long middle
section of their practice called “a community college course.” Then, imagine a few
numbers you came up with so far and the dollar amounts that go from your paycheck to
the state taxes. Then, you are ready to go back and pour over 4.5 million course
enrollment records to hunt for trends in enrollment in yet another obscure class.

