International Data
by Natalya Shulyakovskaya IRE/June 2003
The Orange County Register
714.796.7024, natalyas@ocregister.com

While working in Russia, I found and used several Russian governmental databases. Some of
them were available online. Incomplete versions of some databases were displayed online and
sold by a company founded by a group of former KGB analysts. Some databases were simply
peddled at Moscow street CD markets. Yet there were others that I have only heard about, but
never saw or touched.
Two main caveats about using these databases are:
•
•

The legal grounds for using them are murky. Therefore, they could only be used as an
off-the-record tip.
Since their exact source and completeness are hard to track, they couldn’t be used for
quantitative analysis.

Here is a list of Russian databases:
1. Moscow and St. Petersburg phone numbers. Useful because white pages with home phone
numbers are still not available.
2. The City of Moscow Registration Chamber database. This database proved invaluable when I
was profiling business empire built by the wife of Moscow’s powerful Mayor Yuri Luzhkov. It
also helped track holdings of a woman-financier running the main charity for the head of the
Russian Orthodox Church. I used this database in combination with the customs import database
to find and interview Russian human tissue traders.
The database lists companies registered in Moscow. It reflects all changes made since the
original registration. The chamber does provide dial-in access, but the application process is
cumbersome and charges are high compare to the cost of “off-the-market” CDs.
Contains names, addresses, phone numbers, directors, founders (individuals
and companies) and their shares, banks where the company has its accounts.
For individual founders, lists passport information (an equivalent of nationwide ID number.)
Absolutely great for tracking company ownership. OKPO id numbers are also used to track
companies in Custom’s databases. INN id numbers are assigned by the tax authorities. The first
two digits represent the region, the following two represent tax district.
Some companies have more than one record in the database, which means records have been
updated. The database provides dates when changes were made.

3. Moscow Regional Registration Chamber database. Contains the same information as the city
database. Major companies such as airlines are often registered in the region.
4. Russian State Customs Committee database of export-import operations.
Lists companies, their business partners, shipping companies, banks used to process payments,
type of shipped goods (national classification codes are used), amount of goods and value. It also
lists the specific customs department a shipment went through and customs inspector checking
the cargo.
4. Russian Banks database. Covers 1,050 Moscow and 1,500 regional banks. Claims to include
every Russian bank.
Contains information on founders, owners, shareholders, major borrowers, largest outstanding
credits. For each bank, lists its “corresponding” accounts in foreign banks. Also, provides a
monthly list of top ten lenders for each bank. Monthly financial data including assets, liquidity,
etc.
Other useful databases:
•

U.S. Census Bureau collects export-import data. Summary data is available here:
http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/www/index.html

•

Food & Drug Imports and Import Alerts:
FDA’s Office of Regulatory Affairs Import System. Import Alerts:
http://www.fda.gov/ora/fiars/ora_import_alerts.html
Import Alerts and Import Detentions at http://www.fda.gov/ora/orasrch.htm
Import Refusal Reports from the FDA’s OASIS system:
http://www.fda.gov/ora/oasis/ora_ref_cntry.html

