Note: The original contained copies of referenced stories. To request any of the stories, please send email to Holly Heyser at hheyser@pioneerpress.com.
Tip sheet: Statehouse Investigations
Holly A. Heyser
State government editor, St. Paul Pioneer Press (hheyser@pioneerpress.com)
President, Association of Capitol Reporters and Editors (www.capitolbeat.org)
The statehouse is a gigantic metropolis of breaking news where time for enterprise reporting can be
scarce and getting good scoops often depends on how many tell-all sources you've cultivated.
But that's not the only way to do it. Here are eight ways to do stories big and small that the other guys
aren't doing - but they will be following:
* Call 'em on it. Politicians spout a lot of hooey to make a point, and invariably we end up printing at least
some of it. Go the extra mile and check their facts - routinely. If you can't do it on deadline, come back to
it the next day.
Is state spending is out of control? Sometimes "spending" includes items such as tax relief. ("Spending,
tax facts questioned," St. Paul Pioneer Press, Feb. 7, 2003)
Is the state's bond rating, which determines how much taxpayers pay in interest on state debt, safe? Call
the analysts and find out what they think. They won't say if they plan to change your state's bond rating,
but they might tell you what kinds of decisions on the state level would factor into a change. ("State tops
with bond agencies," St. Paul Pioneer Press, May 25, 2002)
Getting ready to cover an important political debate? Don't just leave it to one reporter; assemble an
accuracy SWAT team to check on the candidates' claims. It's hard work - you really will need a whole
team - but it's the kind of service that readers expect from us, and all too often don't get. ("ColemanMondale debate: the claims and the facts," St. Paul Pioneer Press, Nov. 5, 2002)
* Read the bills. Really. It's amazing what you can learn if you read bills, particularly last-minute
measures that come out of closed-door negotiations. Think about how many times you find out about
some new provision in state law and track it down to last-minute deals a year or two earlier. Why wait that
long? ("State will charge fee to small tobacco firms," St. Paul Pioneer Press, May 28, 2003)
* Get the numbers and do your own math. If you're lucky enough to get a spreadsheet that details
some action the state is taking, take advantage of the format and add a column or two where you can
calculate impact. Is aid to cities being cut? Calculate the per capita loss and see who's taking the biggest
hit. Is the state limiting eligibility for health insurance? Take their predictions of who's losing coverage and
calculate that as a percentage of who's covered now. ("Insurance cuts key to budget negotiation," St.
Paul Pioneer Press, May 15, 2003)
* Stop saving all the good stories for your buddies. The biggest failing of most politics reporters is that
we tell fabulous stories over beer, but we don't put them in the paper. The Capitol is loaded with human
drama, and it's not all the dreaded "inside baseball." Share the stories that make you love your job - put
them in the paper. ("Freshman senator makes himself HEARD," St. Paul Pioneer Press, May 20, 2003)

* Open your eyes to stories in disguise. Be alert to good ideas hidden in unusual places. Who knew
that the back of an invitation to a presidential fundraiser could turn into a lesson on how a contributor can
direct gobs of money to a candidate without flouting contribution limits? ("Diggin' into the money pot," St.
Paul Pioneer Press, July 14, 2002)
* Don't follow the money - sometimes it doesn't follow the beaten path. If you're blessed with a good
campaign finance database in your state, look for hardcore party supporters - people who've given
repeatedly in the past - who AREN'T contributing to their party's guy this year. Also: did the people who
supported the loser in the primary transfer loyalties - and checks - to the winner? Or better yet, are a lot of
people switching parties? What does this say about the candidates? ("Hager backers reluctant to donate
to Earley," The Virginian-Pilot, Oct. 24, 2001)
Another little-traveled path in campaign finance is expenditures. You might be surprised to see where
politicians spend that money people donate to help them win. Some of them buy $1,650 chairs right
before voters boot them out of office. ("Campaign money or 'personal bank accounts'?", Virginia
Commonwealth University journalism students, May 2002)
* Conquer your fear of the state budget. Invariably, you will find cool stories or hidden angles the
competition misses because most reporters are terrified of budgets.
Go ahead and read the handouts passed out by legislators and the administration to explain the subject
of the day, but don't stop there. Learn how to read forecasts and revenue reports - there's almost always
some soul who's so grateful you care that he or she would be happy to show you how. (Attached: "Late
checks help Gilmore make stronger case for car-tax cuts," The Virginian-Pilot, Aug. 14, 2001)
And be sure to track budget trends over several years. What's happening with welfare spending since
welfare reform? You might be surprised. Plug the raw numbers into a spreadsheet and see where they
take you. If you're really ambitious, add the annual consumer price index (available online at
www.bls.gov) and population numbers (www.census.gov) so you can adjust per capita spending for
inflation. ("Minnesota's budget," St. Paul Pioneer Press, Feb. 18, 2003)
* Leave the Capitol. Lots of papers will send reporters out in the field to get the "real people" stories
behind what's going on at the Capitol, but they often don't send their top political reporters. They should.
Mix that expertise with a little experience out in the fresh air and you'll get stories that are clearer than
they've ever been before. It's a huge risk, letting a warm body escape the Capitol when the Legislature's
in session, but the potential payoff is great. ("The high cost of Austin," St. Paul Pioneer Press, Jan. 19,
2003)

