How to write dailies and investigations
and retain sanity
Natalya Shulyakovskaya
The Orange County Register
natalyas@ocregister.com
714.796.7024

Organize your mind
Don't think of yourself as a lowly gatherer. Be a Hunter. Your attitude counts. Be in the
right mindset.
Don't stop your curiosity after you are done with a daily. Ask further questions, see if
something is a part of a trend. Think big.
Don't lock yourself into covering just one aspect of your beat. Look at how things are
interconnected. Schools are about education. But they are also a big money-making and
money-distributing entity. Look at the business side of your school board, at its contracts,
construction, borrowing, investing. Look for influence peddling, for those who win, for
those who loose.
Don't be shy. Ask your sources about what to look into. Let them know you are looking
for investigative angles, for abuse of power or influence, for waste of public money, for
insider deals.
Strategize. Focus on a subject or an institution and develop your knowledge of them for
six months or a year. Pick a target – a local university, a trend on your beat – and give it a
fair chunk of your time. Build sources, build your own expertise, read trade publications,
research papers, regulations, legislative proposals.

Organize your time
Keep a running list of story ideas.
Start a week with a list of stories you plan to make progress on. List sources you need
to contact or documents you need to read. Keep a separate list for each story. See if you
need to talk to the same person for more than one story. Look for overlapping and try to
kill two, three or four birds with one stone. It will save you time and allow for progress
on investigations without drawing too much attention to a particular line of inquiry.
Check items on your list as you complete interviews, file requests and leave messages.
Track your progress. There is something strangely satisfying about having a long list of
little accomplishments at the end of a long day.

Nurture your source file. Give yourself time to log in all new contacts in your contactmanaging software or a file. I keep my contacts in Microsoft Outlook and make my
source file sync among my workstation, my laptop and my handheld.
I note subject areas for each source: community colleges, data analysis, finances, boating.
I write story terms in the notes field. This allows to find sources for a particular story
right away. I often also write down names of people who referred me to a contact, so I
can search for all people who know a key source.
Read or at least quickly review documents as soon as you get them. Don't waste time
hunting down something you already have sitting in a pile of paper waiting to be read.
Set aside time each week to figure out what information is easily accessible. This will
save time on the deadline and help establish precedents for your future public records
requests. If information is released on the web site in one form, it is clearly a public
record. You can get it in a database format. Study agencies' web sites. Most agency
officials or PIOs don't have a very clear idea of how much information they already have
on their web sites.
Master advanced Google search that allows you to drill down to information posted on
particular web sites..
Knock off little tasks as they come up.
Learn simple computer shortcuts. It's amazing how much time it saves. Have you tried
Ctr-V?

Organize your work
Create a separate folder on your computer for each major story you are working on. For
Phantom Classes investigation, I had a folder called Bogus with the following subfolders:
Audit
Data
DataDocuments
Excel
Fox
SQL
Notes
(Where I kept files named
Memo 2003 10 08 Data Bases
Notes 2002 08 06 George Prather Study
Notes 2002 09 23 Cypress
Notes 2003 01 15 Assembly Hearing
Request 2002 09 03 CCCCO Data via e-mail
Response 2002 10 25 CCCCO Chancellor)
Documents
Apportionment Reports
Funding Documents
Board Documents

2

Studies

I try to scan important documents and keep them electronically. It helps, especially if you
like doodling on the margins and your paper likes to put documents online.
Keep a detailed log of all the work you do on a story. You can keep one daily log for
all your stories and projects or separate logs for all stories.
In the log, for each day, quickly note interviews you completed and major findings, place
links to the separate note files where you type up your interviews. Write what documents
you downloaded, what spreadsheets you created, what requests you filed.
Note your impressions and ideas from reading a particular document. Quote portions.
Log your findings and impressions before they will fade. Save time by not wasting and
letting go of all the valuable information you collect. Read and re-read your notes as you
go on. Small details will grow in importance as you learn more.
Write up interviews in a story form.

Date Time Project Person
Company
Phone
916.323.7007 o
6-Jan
Bogus Robert Turnage CCCCO
6-Jan
Bogus Jim Foreman Department of Finance
o
6-Jan
Bogus Scott Lay
League of Community Colleges
o
6-Jan
Bogus Steve Boilard Legislative Analyst Office
o
916.323.7007 o
7-Jan
Bogus Robert Turnage CCCCO
7-Jan
Bogus Anita Gore
Department of Finance
916-323-0648 o
7-Jan
Bogus Scott Lay
League of Community Colleges 916.441.0353 o

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1

I am now moving to keeping track of my calls, requests and e-mails in Outlook’s
Journal.
Set aside time to think and analyze.
Don’t go around in circles. Keep track of all the issues you tackle. Write out answers in
your log or in memos to yourself. Write down answers, do it in a story form whenever
possible.
Start writing early on. Build an outline. It will help you see holes in your reporting.

3

Talked

Message

They

I

PhoneKind

Log your phone calls. One of my colleagues keeps a spreadsheet of phone calls he
makes. It helps, especially when you negotiate for records. Here is a snippet from my
phone log:

Notes
and e-mail. Abo
and e-mail. Abo
1the proposal wil
and e-mail. Abo
wanted to talk a
wanted to talk a
1

Manage your editors
Get closer to a big story using series of small ones. Build up expertise. Show your
command of the subject. Build up sources. Make sure your editors see that you know
what you are talking about.
Don't tell them too much too soon. Avoid framing yourself into a deadline before you
are ready for it.
There are two lines of thoughts on this subject. Some reporters recommend running
stealth operations, building up an investigation by working in time here and there until
you know for sure what story you have on your hands. Bounce your ideas off your
friends and mentors.
Editors, on the other hand, advise against hoarding on ideas. Bring them in on a story
early on. Cultivate them as advocates. Bring them in early. Make them invest time and
thinking into your story. Get them hooked. Engage them. Social research shows that the
amount of time managers invest into your project determines how highly they think of it.
Build trust.
Produce. Stay away from getting a reputation of an ambitious reporter with great ideas
who cannot deliver.
Don't oversell. Manage expectations.
Take charge of internal deadlines. Give yourself plenty of time. But deliver when you
promised, so your editors don't feel that they need to micro-manage you. Sending your
editor a weekly memo or setting up a weekly meeting to talk about your progress could
work. Be proactive updating your editors about your progress. Don't wait until they ask.
Learn to manage your editor's editor. Do it in a diplomatic way, so your own editor
doesn't think that you are overstepping boundaries. But make sure that you have a line of
communication with your boss' boss.
Talk to them once in a while. Occasionally cc them on a memo. Be cheerful. Understand
and know what is important to them. Do they feel that a story should have a state-wide
perspective? Deal with that angle of your reporting early on, don't wait until it becomes
an issue on the editing stages of your story.
Advocate for yourself and your project.

4

Ask for records early and often
Scout your beat for documents just as you would for good human sources.
Meet with officials to talk to them how they document their work. Ask for tours of data
systems or file archives. Do it well ahead of time when you actually will have to have the
documents in your hands.
Ask for records or data before the crunch time, before the agency knows you are onto
something and relationships become tense. This will accomplish two goals: First of all, it
will allow you time to learn all the quirks of the documents and data before you need
them in your system of proof. Secondly, you establish a precedent that such documents or
data are public and easily releasable.
Use documents or data on simple stories first, building up your understanding of them.
Each database could be a source of features, background for news stories, quick-hit trend
stories as well as investigations. Get acquainted with data doing features and simple
stories, build up your expertise.
Find other agencies -- local, state, national -- that receive the same documents, reports,
data. What one agency doesn't want to give you, another one could easily release.
When you anticipate a fight for public records, find a benign agency likely to release the
same type of records. Wait until they arrive and include a sample with your records
request to the agency you are interested in.

P.S. For those venturing into data analysis: Organize your data to maintain sanity, stay error-free
and keep your personal life intact in the midst of a project
Keeping track of your data analysis work is critical. Some projects take a long time, and
it is hard to remember what changes you made to your data. Data analysis is a trial-anderror process. Make sure you can always take a few steps back.
•
•
•
•

Always keep a backup copy of your original data.
Never make changes to your original data.
If you need to make changes to a field – make a new field, copy data from the
original field, and only then make changes.
For each subject or project, create a new folder. Here is an example of
organization for Cal-Trans work:

5

•

Keep thorough notes on your data negotiations electronically. Log in your
requests, an agency’s responses, notes on your phone conversations regarding
your request
For example, on Phantom Classes, in my Notes folder, I kept each data request as
a separate file, i.e.
Request 09 03 2002 CCCCO Data E-mail.doc
Response 09 13 2002 CCCO.pdf
Request Response 09 13 2002.doc
If you file a lot of requests, keep a master Excel file where you log all FOIA
requests, including dates, subject, status, charges, main contact person. Use
Hyperlink feature (Ctr-K), to link to the actual requests.

•

Type up notes to yourself outlining questions you want the data to answer.

•

Write out your hypothesis as well as paragraphs your want to be able to write
based on your analysis. Go back and refine them as you do your analysis.

•

Interview your data. Before you start running any analysis, familiarize yourself
with the data. Run queries counting cities to see if any were misspelled. Look at
maximum and minimum values. Assess how dirty your data are and how much
information is missing.

•

Run reality checks. Find official reports and statistics based on the data you are
analyzing. See if you are coming up with the same results. If your aren’t there
could be two reasons: #1. The agency is wrong. #2. Your math aint right. Check
both. Start with #2.

•

Keep a log of your data work, recording your methodology, any changes you
make to the data, any queries you run. Save Queries in Access. Copy queries and
note on what you were trying to figure out in your Data Work log file.

6

•

Again, don’t go around in circles. Keep track of all the questions you tackle.
Write out answers in memos or in your log and create Excel spreadsheets showing
answers to the questions you were working on.

•

Discuss your methodology with experts – in house, as well as outside experts.

•

Read research literature on your subject.

•

Don’t re-invent the wheel. You are not the first one to attempt to calculate birth
rates, crime rates or other statistics. Learn from experts. Follow their
methodology. It will give you peace of mind as well as numbers to compare your
results to.

7

