1

Using the federal Access to Information Act
(October 2003)

Why use it?
It’s cheap. Average charge per request is about $20; cost to government is about
$1,000.
It’s effective. The act cuts through the bafflegab of politicians, bureaucrats and flaks to
get at the truth, despite some 500 loopholes.
It raises your profile. Stories are exclusive and investigative. Beats competition.
It makes you an insider. Useful for backgrounding, getting a jump on developments.

How to use it.
Think. What key documents lie behind the stories you read or write each day?
Be concrete. Ask for documents, such as briefing notes, minutes, contracts, audits,
inventories.
Fill out the form. Use plain English or French; hand write requests; use the word
“record”; limit time period; exclude newspaper clippings; ask for draft versions if final
versions not yet available.
Be patient. About 30 per cent of requests take longer than 61 days to process.
Complaints to Information Commissioner take about six months to resolve.
Fill the pipeline. File new requests regularly to ensure a steady stream of results.
Be a pest. Complain about missed deadlines. Get commitments in writing. Follow up
by telephone.
Be creative. Read material carefully – the story is not always obvious. Note references
to other documents and make requests for them.
Cut costs. Negotiate lower fees; exclude unwanted documents; narrow time periods;
seek summary documents; avoid unnecessary photocopying.

2

Always add interviews. Get a human voice in the story. Ensure you understand the
meaning of the documents.
Branch out. Apply these principles to provincial acts.

14 things you can get using the Act.
Ministerial briefing notes
All departments. Ask for all briefing notes prepared specifically to help the new
minister become acquainted with his/her new portfolio. Make request a week or two
after a new cabinet is named. Yields wide range of information about a department’s
plans and activities.
Expense claims
All departments/agencies. Ask for receipts, invoices and guest lists detailing travel and
hospitality expenses claimed by a deputy minister or other senior bureaucrats. Limit
request to no more than one year’s worth of claims. Can reveal spending habits and
establish dates of key meetings, dealings.
Correspondence
All departments/agencies. Ask for correspondence with a minister or agency head on a
topic of interest. Frame request narrowly. For instance, exclude letters from the public
if you do not require them. Can uncover letters from provincial premiers, lobby groups.
House cards
All departments. Ask for all cards prepared for the minister in the Commons on a
specific issue. Watch headlines, Commons debates for ideas. Often contain much more
detail, background than revealed in Question Period.
Material on possible legislation
All departments. Ask for records concerning possible legislation or other initiatives on
a given issue. Limit request to cover the last year to ensure currency of material.
Provides insight into initiatives that might be in pipeline, and reasons why they might
(or might not) proceed.
Meeting minutes
All departments/agencies. Ask for minutes from the two most recent meetings of a
specific committee. Make calls to find out meeting schedules and whether minutes are
kept. Can aid in understanding of internal policy debates, decisions.
Audits
All departments, most agencies. Ask for audits and evaluations completed by or for the
department/agency on specific subjects in the last year. Often reveal shortcomings in
programs, policies.

3

Polls
All departments, but especially Privy Council. Ask for polls conducted for the
department on a given subject. Some (but not all) polls are released informally. Can
reveal public attitudes toward government policies.
Contract information
All departments. Ask for a copy of the contract for a specific project. Public Works and
Government Services administers many contracts. Reveals details of financial
arrangements with private companies.
Responses to discussion papers
Any department that publishes consultation/discussion paper. Ask for copies of all
submissions in response to the department’s paper. Put in request just after cutoff date
for submissions. Narrow request if only certain submissions are required. Reveals
views of wide cross-section of groups on pressing issue.
Contracted studies
Privy Council Office. Ask for specific studies, research conducted for PCO. Ask
informally for list of studies, which is updated regularly. Yields advice prepared for
government on unity, security, parliamentary affairs, other key issues.
Cabinet documents
Privy Council Office. Ask for cabinet records older than 20 years on a specific issue.
Check almanac for noteworthy past events. Meeting minutes reveal thinking of
ministers on issues. (Cabinet documents routinely become public only after 30 years.)
Prime Minister’s e-mail
Privy Council Office. Ask for e-mail sent to the prime minister by visitors to his
website. Limit request to a one-week period. Names of correspondents are deleted, but
yields interesting mix of light-hearted, angry and thoughtful public feedback.
Observer reports
Fisheries and Oceans. Ask for fisheries observer reports prepared for the department.
Limit request to specific geographic area and time frame. Can provide details about
operations of foreign vessels.

How to learn more
1. Federal government’s main ATIA website (“Info Source”), with forms, addresses,
background:
http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pubs_pol/gospubs/tbm_121/siglist_e.html

4

2. Information Commissioner of Canada website:
http://infoweb.magi.com/~accessca/oic.html#1
3. U.S. Freedom of Information guide:
http://www.spj.org/foia.asp
4. Canadian “Open Government” coalition:
http://www.opengovernmentcanada.org
Dean Beeby/Jim Bronskill
The Canadian Press
OTTAWA, Ont.

