IRE Better Watchdog Workshop/ Eugene. OR / 10-4-03
Dan Meyers/Projects Editor/The Denver Post/303-820-1555

dmeyers@denverpost.com

Seven ways a government watchdog can chow down
1. Finances. Follow the
money, know where it comes from. Have
campaign contribution data handy.
Know who gives, how they make money
and whether the there’s a tie to
legislation. From “conflict of interest”
forms or other sources, know where
the public official got outside income.
Sample story: “Sen. Smith voted five times for a bill to benefit the cryogenics firm run by
her husband Chilly, records show.”
2. Watch the contracts. Many contracts are issued without bids. Some big
contracts are broken up to avoid the public bid process. Learn the bid process. Sample
story: “The county executive steered a million-dollar contract to a business partner by
splitting it into portions small enough to avoid the public bidding process, records show.”
3. Read the audits. Often, auditors are independent and really do find things.
Also, take note of which departments have not been audited. “The state auditor’s office,
which never has been audited, cannot account for $50,000 in travel expenses.”
4. Bonds. Watch for any sort of public financing, especially bonds. The
prospectus for a bond contains tons of information, from basics on largest employers to
confessions of financial liabilities from lawsuits and other sources. “The county is on the
verge of bouncing paychecks to its 347 employees, financial documents show.”
5. Expenses. Review the expenses for city council, the mayor, the state
transportation committee. Find out how the travel expenses are filed. Find out where the
lawsuit settlements are filed. Where the phone bills are paid. “A city council member
who said he traveled to Italy to research solid-waste disposal methods, ran up $4,000 in
meal and hotel bills, several of which were for two people, financial records show.”
6. Review the lawsuits. Who is the biggest tax evader in town? Is the city hiring
outside counsel? Is that law firm a campaign contributor? “A Denver newspaper editor
owes more unpaid taxes to the City of Phoenix than anyone else, and has a string of
unpaid bills at jewelry stores and golf courses, city records show.”
7. Check resumes. People lie, you can catch them. “The new head of the state
Board of Rocket Science, who claimed a degree from Harvard University, in fact
graduated from a mail order school in Havarti, an experimental farm in Denmark.”

