Pennsylvania’s Open Records/ Right to Know Law

I.

Background: On June 29, 2002, Gov. Mark Schweiker signed into law a
series of amendments to Pennsylvania’s Right to Know statute. A victory for
advocates of more openness in Pennsylvania’s state and local government –
including newspapers – the law took effect the day after last Christmas. So
consider it a belated present from lawmakers.
a. Actually, it doesn’t radically reform one of the country’s very worst Open
Records statutes, so maybe it’s more of a stocking stuffer.
i. NOTE: The notion of what’s a “public record” has not changed.
The common law still largely dictates this. The General Assembly
and the courts also are exempted from most of the act’s provisions.
ii. An extremely fine primer on the law is available from the
Pennsylvania Newspaper Association. Go to www.
pnpa.com/legal/quickresponse/rtk.htm

II.

The Big Changes:
a. How an agency responds to a public records request.
i. For the five decades before passage of the latest Pennsylvania
Right to Know Act, an agency could, and did, take forever to
respond to a request for documents. Often, a reporter would have
to haul the agents into court to compel release of records. Now, the
statute compels Commonwealth departments to respond, in writing
and with good faith, to a request within 10 business days. A nonCommonwealth (local) agency has five business days.
ii. A denial must consist of:
1. A specific, written reason for the denial, including statutes
or cases cited.
2. The name, title, address, telephone number and signature of
the public official denying the documents.
3. The date of the response.
4. A procedure to appeal the denial.
iii. If no response is sent in the allotted span, then the person
requesting the documents can treat inaction as a denial. An agency,
however, can file an “exemption” for more time in fulfilling the
request. Written notice of this “exemption” must include a
“reasonable” date when the agency expects to fulfill the request.
They can’t go over 40 days (state) or 35 days (local).
1. An “exemption” can only be filed if:
a. The request requires redaction or if the documents
are stored in remote places (this is not unusual,
especially if you are seeking records older than four
years old).

b. The agency suffers from “bona fide and specified”
staffing shortages.
c. A legal review is necessary to determine that the
agency can release the documents.
d. The requester either has not complied with the
agency’s policy on retrieving documents or has not
paid “reasonable” fees.
i. I have had very, very bad luck with agencies
actually getting the documents to me after
paying the fees. This is an area of the law
that needs to be stiffened, with real
penalties.
b. Redaction. OK, I think this is a huge change, but none of my editors do.
Under the law now, an agency can release a document tha t typically was
denied last year because it contained confidential or privileged
information that was exempted by the courts. Theoretically, an agency
can now give you the document and use a marker to delete the confidential
stuff. For those who regularly work with FOIA, this is old hat. You
always can go back into court to dicker over the redacted data if it is
absolutely vital.
i. Redacted material automatically constitutes a “denial in part,” and
you can fight it.
ii. I’m using this exception now to retrieve very important documents
from the Department of Public Welfare and the Allegheny County
Emergency Planning Committee.

c. Electronic Records. For those of us who work with databases, this is
very nice. If a record exists in the electronic medium, then an agency must
produce it in that medium. If the record exists only in electronic form,
then an agency must make a paper copy of it.
i. Important note: An agency still doesn’t have to make a list or
organize the data in a special format for you. If it comes in an
Excel format, for example, with 87 rows, then you have to take it
like that. They don’t have to redact or reconfigure the data for
you.
d. Copying fees. Some agencies have attempted in the past to deny the
release of documents by charging exorbitant fees for copies or services
rendered. They can’t do that now. Copying charges are based on local,
commercial rates. I always offer to do the copying anyway.

e.

Appealing agency decisions. Others will speak specifically about this,
but it’s a process I’ve unfortunately encountered. To me, it doesn’t work
well, and you might as well be prepared to go to court anyway.
i. The agency denies your request. You have 15 business days OF
THE AGENCY’S MAILING DATE to file an appeal. Your appeal
should include why you believe the agency erred in its initial
denial and must tackle, specifically, the arguments the agency used
in its denial. In a sense, you are in a quasi-court wherein an
agency gets to forestall, for a time, your path to a Common Pleas
judge.
1. I believe it is an unnecessary delay and I wish more
newspapers would get on this. Even if you are successful
at this level, the agency is going to appeal it further and
send it to court. So you gain nothing.
2. The agency still has 30 days after YOU HAVE MAILED
IN YOUR APPEAL to work out a “final determination.”
3. The agency can request a “hearing” on the issue, but they
are not bound by the hearing officer’s decision any more
than you are. It can still go to court.
ii. You must file “exceptions” with a Commonwealth Agency before
you can take your case to Common Pleas or District Court. By
now, you’ve spent two months waiting on your document.
1. You can bypass the “exceptions” business if you’re dealing
with a municipal/local agency.
2. You must appeal within 30 days of the Commonwealth’s
final denial or you have to start all over again.
a. Bonus: If the court determines the agency has acted
in “bad faith,” you can get back reasonable
attorneys’ fees and court costs.
b. Another Bonus: There are now civil penalties for
public officials who flout the law. An official who
intentionally violates the Act is fined summarily
$300, plus cost of prosecution. An agency that does
not promptly comply with a court order regarding
the Act can pay up to $300 a day until the records
are produced.

III.

Some Tips. I use public documents and databases often, but I never file a
request unless I know exactly what the agency/department has. I will try to
find out where they keep it (including the specific filing cabinet); the medium
in which it exists (Access, Excel, SPSS, whatever), who handles the care and
compilation of it; where duplicate information might exist at other levels
(federal, local, other state departments), etc.
a. Offer to do the grunt work. Some agencies or departments rely on a single
worker, often a harried secretary, to compile records. He or she might
deny a request simply because they don’t “have the time” to do it.
Sometimes this is sheer laziness or obstinacy, but it could also be the sign
of a flustered employee. So, offer to go through the records in the filing
cabinet or closet. You would be surprised what other great documents are
shuffled into the dust jackets.
i. If s/he still denies your request after that, at least you know it’s not
for the originally stated reason. Use that in court.
b. Find out what records the department keeps. A good source for this is
Y2K documents compiled by state and county agencies before 2000.
These keys explain what databases are available; what format they’re in;
how many bytes they ho ld, etc. It’s hard for a department to say they
don’t keep records in that form if they have another document saying they
do just that.
c. Shame an official into compliance. Rather than go to court, simply tell the
agency official in County X that his counterpart in County Y already
supplied the document – and was PROUD to do so. People are inherently
competitive, especially so for politicians, school athletic directors and top
level bureaucrats. Use them against each other to get what is yours legally
anyway.
d. Tailor your request to the person reading it. A functionary at the State
Police is used to a certain kind of discourse in a request. It’s more like a
form letter. That might not work as well for the lady at the local junior
high, who prefers a friendly tone. Sometimes, the official wants the letter
in a certain way for his or her boss to approve. It helps to talk to a clerk
before you write it. That will help you be as specific as possible, and
specificity helps.
e. Don’t be afraid of obscure documents, or records no one has bothered to
look at before. We’ve pioneered coverage in our region of the spread of
heroin by looking at accidental death records and autopsy reports kept by
local coroners. No one had ever asked for them before concerning drug
abuse, but the files give you great, detailed information about narcotics
victims, including the spot where he or she perished, the sort of stamped
bag used, etc. We’ve built databases around the death data to show which
brands are most popular in which neighborhoods. Spin it into some
mapping software and look for trends.
i. Local Emergency Planning Committees are great places to
research the dangers from chemical facilities, water treatment
plants and nuclear processors/ reactors.

ii. Deeds, offer sheets, etc. Available at local Recorders’ offices, you
can see exactly what government offers for property, including
land seized by eminent domain. Compare it with market rates on
other parcels. Want to bet poor, often minority, sellers don’t make
as much money as banks, holding companies or well- heeled
politicos? Look into the initial assessments of the land, too, and
see how hard people had to fight for fair compensation.
iii. School athletic director accounts. Many school boards cede all
spending on football, basketball and baseball teams to the athletic
director. Many run their department right out of a check book.
Heard the argument about how “football pays for all the other
sports in the school?” Don’t believe it. We checked, and ADs here
LOSE more money on football than the costs of all other teams
COMBINED. And that doesn’t count capital or maintenance
costs! See how much he rakes in from the Friday night games –
and note where he spent the take (friends? Family? Businessmen
in the football booster club?).
1. Want to know how much money a booster club spends on a
team? Try 990 forms filed with the IRS and available
online. By law, any club that garners more than $25,000
annually in donations must file tax exemptions. Using the
same strategy, we’ve used the same methodology to get
good stuff on the NHL, local service providers and business
organizations.
iv. Pennsylvania Healthcare Cost Containment Council. Look at the
inpatient data set to track infection rates and other dirty little
secrets kept from the public by your local hospital. Records can be
expensive, but you can ask for smaller data sets on specific
institutions and issues.

