1

COVERING TERRORISM IN CANADA
I WHO IS A TERRORIST?
Marc Nadon, Judge, Federal Court of Canada (ruling the Mahjoub case):
Terror must receive a broad and unrestricted interpretation. In my view, that is
the only sensible approach.
A politically motivated organization which sets off bombs, killing innocent people
and which engages in assassinations is surely an organization engaged in terrorism.
John O'Sullivan, National Post (in a definition adopted by Judge Nadon):
A terrorist is a man who murders indiscriminately, distinguishing neither between
innocent and guilty, nor between soldier and civilian. He may employ terrorism planting bombs in restaurants or hijacking planes and aiming them at office towers - in a
bad cause or a good one. He may be a Nazi terrorist, or an anti-Nazi terrorist, a
communist or an anti-communist, pro-Palestinian or pro-Israel. We may want to defeat
his political cause or see it triumph. For his methods, however, the terrorist is always to
be condemned. Indeed, to describe him objectively is to condemn him, even if his cause is
genuinely a fight for freedom with which we sympathize.
Judge Nadon on membership: It is trite to say that terrorist organizations do not issue
membership cards. There is no formal test for membership and members are not
therefore easily identifiable … It think it is obvious that Parliament intended the term
‘member’ to be given an unrestricted and broad interpretation.
J.S. Robertson, Judge, Federal Court of Canada (ruling in the Suresh case):
Those who freely choose to raise funds to sustain terrorist organizations bear the
same guilt and responsibility as those who actually carry out the terrorist acts.

II HOW TODAY’S TERRORIST GROUPS OPERATE
Terrorism has changed a lot since the 1970s, when it had more clearly
defined political objectives. Back then, when somebody hijacked a plane, there was
a goal: to get publicity for some revolutionary cause, or to negotiate the release of an
imprisoned leader. In the 1980s, there was a rise in religious terrorism in Canada,
beginning with the Sikhs and then radical Islamists, who saw terrorism as a religious
duty. It was God's will. And so terrorism got nastier, less strategic and bloodier. There
were fewer attacks, but they killed more people. Osama bin Laden is the embodiment of
this new era. He might have some objectives, as ill-defined as they are, but his principle
aim is to serve God by killing infidels, by which he means Americans, Jews and their
allies.
During the Cold War, terrorist organizations could rely on benevolent state
sponsors like Libya to give them money, weapons and safe have. But over the past two
decades, terrorist groups have been forced to evolve, to become more self reliant. Today
terrorist groups are like global corporations. Even those whose violence is focused in one

2
region, like Hamas, rely on global support networks to keep them going. They need a
network to keep them supplied with money, weapons and intelligence, and to disseminate
propaganda and lobby internationally for their cause. Fundraising happens in several
ways. Often it is done through front organizations that collect donations in ethnic
communities. These groups purport to be raising money for humanitarian aid but they
divert at least part of it to finance the purchase of weapons. In Canada, for example, we
have groups like the Tamil Rehabilitation Organization, which claims in its incorporation
papers that it is a relief group but that intelligence agencies have linked to the purchase of
weapons for the Tamil Tigers. Increasingly, fundraising is taking place through organized
crime as well. Hezbollah, for example, smuggled millions of dollars worth of cigarettes in
the U.S. and shipped money to Vancouver, where it was used to buy equipment for
Hezbollah units in South Lebanon. The RCMP says that auto theft in Ontario and Quebec
has financed Hezbollah as well.
Fundraising has been under scrutiny since 9/11 but it continues. While there have
been many large-scale investigations and convictions in the U.S., Canadian authorities
have done very little. A few dozen terror groups have been outlawed under C-36 but not a
single charge has yet been laid under the law's terror-financing provisions. Front
organizations remain one of the great untapped stories in Canada. Many of the groups
that have been accused of terror financing abroad have Canadian chapters that continue to
operate groups like the Muslim World League. Terror has become globalized. After the
Soviet War in Afghanistan, bin Laden sent his foot soldiers out around the world to
foment Islamic unrest and to act as sleepers who would infiltrate Western countries. It is
easy to travel around the world now. It is easy to communicate using the Internet.
Terrorists don't really need any Afghanistan anymore. They can do everything they need
to do within the comforts of the Western world.

III RESOURCES FOR COVERING TERRORISM
(A) SECURITY AND INTELLIGENCE
S&I Agencies
Canadian Security Intelligence Service — http://www.csis-scrs.gc.ca/
The intelligence branch of the Canadian government. Investigates threats to
national security but is not a law-enforcement agency. It only investigates and analyses
and reports its findings to the government, although it does sometimes work with the
RCMP and CIC in law-enforcement cases. Occasionally publishes background reports on
terrorism on its Internet site, but more details reports — even interview notes of CSIS
agents — are filed with the courts in security certificate cases. Internal studies can be
ATIPed.
Royal Canadian Mounted Police — http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/

3
The Immigration and Passport Branch, National Security Investigations Branch,
Criminal Extremism Branch and Criminal Intelligence Directorate deal with terrorism
issues. CSIS and the RCMP have liaison officers posted within each other’s departments
so they can share intelligence. Intelligence studies can be ATIPed.
Department of Solicitor-General — http://www.sgc.gc.ca/
The department that oversees CSIS and the RCMP. Keeps a list of terrorist
organizations that have been designated by cabinet under C-36.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada —http://www.cic.gc.ca/
Many terrorists operating in Canada are not citizens. CIC tries to find those
refugees and immigrants that may be inadmissible to Canada because they threaten
national security. The War Crimes Unit is also involved in the removal of suspected
terrorists on the grounds they were complicit in crimes against humanity.
Communications Security Establishment
Electronic eavesdropping specialists. Intercept phone calls and e-mails. Highlysecretive.

Other Departments That Deal with S&I
Canada Customs and Revenue Agency—http://www.ccraadrc.gc.ca/tax/charities/menu-e.html.
Keeps a database of registered charities, some of which may have terrorist links.
Returns and lists of directors are now on-line.
Immigration and Refugee Board —
http://www.irb.gc.ca/en/decisions/reflex/index_e.htm?action=search
Conducts admissibility hearings to determine if non-citizens can be removed as
threats to security. Also conducts detention reviews to decide if they should remain in
custody. These proceedings are often held in public.
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions — http://www.osfibsif.gc.ca/eng/
Maintains a list of terrorist organizations whose assets are frozen under United
Nations terror financing regulations Security Intelligence Review Committee —
http://www.sirc-csars.gc.ca/ The watchdog committee that audits CSIS and
investigates complaints against it. Its reports are available under ATIP. Also reports
annually to Parliament.
Privy Council Office —
Receives intelligence from CSIS and passes it along to PM, or others.
Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness —
http://www.ocipep.gc.ca/home/index_e.asp
New agency that prepares Canada for possible terror attacks.
Federal Court of Canada — http://decisions.fct-cf.gc.ca/fct/index.html
Decides whether security certificates are reasonable. Hears appeals of refugee and
immigration cases. FCC case files are a gold mine.
Department of Foreign Affairs — http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/
Deals with Canadians arrested abroad for terrorism. Also deals with Canadians
who are victims of terror attacks oversees.

4
NOTE: For an overview of Canada’s S&I community, see “Contemporary Threats,
Future Tasks: Canadian intelligence and the challenges of global security,” by Martin
Rudner, in A Fading Power, Canada Among Nations, Oxford, 2002, page 141.

Academia
Canadian Association of Security and Intelligence Studies – www.casis.ca
Canadian Centre of Intelligence and Security Studies —
http://www.carleton.ca/npsia/new_npsia/research_centres/cciss.html

Foreign Agencies
U.S. State Department — www.state.gov
U.S. Treasury — www.treas.gov
FBI — www.fbi.gov
Interpol — interpol.int
Foreign courts — indictments, affidavits regarding the prosecution of Canadian
terrorists and/or companies and charities with terrorist links.

Ethnic Communities
Extremist groups often work within ethnic communities in Canada. Many
members of those communities are not happy about this and are willing to keep you
informed. Ethnic newspapers, Internet sites, organizations and contacts can be invaluable
sources for journalists.

(B) TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
The Main Targets
Sunni Islamic Extremist Groups — Al Qaeda, Al Jihad, Jemaah Islamiyah, Armed
Islamic Group etc...
Shiite Extremists — Hezbollah.
Middle East Groups — Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade,
etc...
Homeland Conflicts — Tamil Tigers, Khalistan, MEK, PKK.
Domestics — Animal rights, anti-abortion, neo-Nazis, anarchists, anti-globalization,
militias, doomsday cults, fringe religions, radical environmentalists, aboriginal
extremists, etc…

Where to Find Profiles of Terrorist Organizations
Patterns of Global Terrorism — state.gov. The Bible. An annual report by the U.S.
State Department.
US Treasury designations — treas.gov
International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism — http://www.ict.org.il/
Canada’s Listed Entities — http://www.sgc.gc.ca/

Terrorist Support Websites
LTTE — Tamiltiger.net/eelamweb.com
HEZBOLLAH — hizballah.org

5
AL QAEDA — alneda.com Mohamed Harkat —
http://www.geocities.com/mohamedharkat/home.htm Adil Charkaoui — adilinfo.org

Terrorists
If you can find them, they will sometimes talk to you.

Examples to follow
Profile of a terrorist group: “In the party of God,” by Jeffrey Goldberg, New Yorker.
Examination of a controversial S&I issue: “The dark side of interrogation,” by Marc
Bowden, Atlantic.
Story of a terrorist plot: “The Terrorist Within,” Seattle Times.
Profile of a terrorist: “Sent to the front: How al Qaeda groomed a youth from Canada to
be a terrorist,” Wall Street Journal.
Story of a man wrongly accused: Francine Dube’s William Sampson series in the
National Post. Andrew MacIntosh’s stories about a nuclear scientist wrongly fired after
9/11.

Stories to WatchFor
Organized crime-terrorist connections
Terrorist links to charities
Terrorist links to business
Terrorist links to politics
Security certificates
Backlash against security certificates
First arrests under C-36
More arrests and prosecution of Canadians abroad

