1

BACKGROUNDING U.S. BUSINESSES
CAJ/IRE Workshop: Crossing The 49th
Montreal, Oct. 4, 2003
Erik Schatzker
Bloomberg News, Toronto
(416) 203-5726 or eschatzker@bloomberg.net
BEFORE YOU START
1. Educate yourself
- A little knowledge of finance or accounting goes a long way in business reporting.
- Before you find yourself trying to figure out what EBITDA means or make sense of a
stock-option plan, read up. Think like an investor (What do I need to know before I sink
money into this company?) or a banker (How do I know this company will repay the
money I lend it?). Also, there's nothing that makes a corporate executive more
uncomfortable and reluctant to talk than a reporter who hasn't done his homework.
- Two good primers for business and financial basics are: "The Wall Street Journal
Guide to Understanding Money and Investing" and "The Columbia Knight-Bagehot
Guide to Economics and Business Journalism."
2. Be prepared to spend some money, especially if you're on deadline
- While the Internet is as much a treasure trove of information on companies as it is on
just about everything else, there's often no way to vet the quality of what you get or
identify its source.
- U.S. federal and state Web sites are good sources of data, but searching them is
almost invariably time-consuming and tedious.
- Commercial search services and search engines are much faster and can actually
save you time and money by helping to pinpoint the information you really want faster.
However, they all charge a flat or usage fee, or combination of the two.
3. Exhaust the resources at your disposal first
- Before you rush off to create accounts at data compilers and document-retrieval
services, see what you already have in-house or perhaps through a friend or associate.
- Charges for retrieving documents can quickly add up to more than it would cost to
book a flight and physically dig up what you're after at the source.
- Don't be afraid of that Reuters or Bloomberg terminal sitting idly in shadowy corner of
the office. They're good for more than stock quotes. Each has a vast historical database
of news and prices and powerful analytical and charting tools to make sense of it all.
People who trade or invest in stocks and bonds for a living consider them essential.

2
WHERE TO START
1. News
- Read past stories to build a profile of the company you're researching and identify any
themes or trends to build context for your investigation. The names and numbers you
unearth will make a lot more sense if you understand how they fit into the company's
past.
- Limit your initial searches to features or stories of 1,500 words or longer to weed out
daily news. Your corporate librarian, if you work at a newspaper, magazine or wire, can
be of tremendous help here.
- Try the Web sites of financial magazines (Fortune, Forbes and Business Week),
newspapers (the Wall Street Journal) and newswires (Dow Jones, Reuters, Bloomberg,
Cnet) for recently published work and search services such as Nexis and Factiva to go
back further and cast a wider net. Don't forget about your public library's magazine and
newspaper indexes.
2. The Internet
- Too much of a hosepipe to be your first stop. Go here after you've read some stories
and have a better idea of what you're looking for.
- Any search engine is worth trying.
- Hotbot (http://www.hotbot.com) is a convenient one-stop shop for four engines.
3. Company's Web site
- See what the company says about itself.
- Company sites often contain press releases, securities filings, management bios and
product information, or direct links to them.
4. Annual report to shareholders (for public companies)
- Often provides a good, if slightly dated, overview of the business.
- Contains the chairman's letter to shareholders, information on the board of directors,
audited financials.
5. Trade publications
- Probably the best place to start looking for market intelligence on a given industry,
such as technological trends, names of competitors and regulatory obstacles.
- Drawbacks can include sloppy or unbalanced reporting, hidden conflicts of interest.
NEXT STEPS
1. Securities and Exchange Commission filings
- The single best repositories of information on public companies. Some private
companies also have to file with the SEC and many are named in public-company
filings.
- The SEC's Edgar database (http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/webusers.htm)
contains only electronic filings and its search engine is limited. But it's free.
- FreeEdgar (http://www.freeedgar.com) is a much better tool for SEC filings and is free.

3
Also limited to electronic filings only. Registration and e-mail address required.
- LivEdgar (http://www.gsionline.com) is the Cadillac of SEC filings sites. In addition to
electronic company filings, it contains scanned documents and reports to shareholders,
insider-sale filings and SEDAR filings. Expensive.
- See SEC section below for a list of useful filings and what they contain.
2. Regulatory agencies
- Most public and private companies that provide a public service (banking,
telecommunications, energy) are regulated by at least one federal or state organization
and may have to file reports with those agencies. The Food and Drug Administration
(http://www.fda.gov), for example, regulates the food supply, drugs, medical devices,
biologics such as vaccines, animal feed and medications, cosmetics and radiationemitting products such as cell phones, just as the Federal Communications Commission
(http://www.fcc.gov) polices the public airwaves in the U.S.
- Others include the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (http://www.ferc.gov),
which oversees the interstate transmission of natural gas, oil, and electricity, and the
U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Health and Safety Administration
(http://www.osha.gov), which is responsible for ensuring safe working conditions at 6
1/2 million U.S. employers.
- Louisiana State University maintains a list of all U.S. federal agencies
(http://www.lib.lsu.edu/gov/fedgov.html).
- The National Association of Securities Dealers (http://www.nasdr.com) and the New
York Stock Exchange (http://www.nyse.com) have some responsibility for regulating
public companies and brokerages.
- State securities regulators can and have acted independently of the SEC. Links can be
found at the North American Securities Administrators Association
(http://www.nasaa.org/nasaa/abtnasaa/memberweb.asp).
3. Court filings and legal actions
- Lawsuits, exhibits and court decisions can be rich sources of information on
companies and individuals. Finding what you're after can, however, can be painstaking
and expensive. Executives aren't necessarily named in suits against companies and a
claim may be filed against a subsidiary whose name offers few clues as to its
connection to the parent.
- Before looking for court documents, narrow down the list of names you want to search
under as much as possible. Start at the top of the corporate hierarchy and work down.
Save yourself time by asking the defendants or plaintiffs in cases you already know
exist to furnish you with copies of the court filings. They may be willing to do so.
- If you can't go to the courthouse yourself, try:
- Pacer (http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov), a U.S. Courts service for electronic case and
docket information from federal appellate and state district and bankruptcy courts. No
paper filings. Inexpensive.
- Lexis (www.lexis.com), a powerful, searchable database of case law, lawyers,
congressional actions, etc. Can be costly, though many news organizations have a
corporate account.
- Investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice (http://www.usdoj.gov) and state

4
attorneys general, such as New York's Eliot Spitzer (http://www.oag.state.ny.us), can be
great sources of information about companies and executives.
4. Analyst reports
- Any large U.S. public company is covered by analysts whose job is to form opinions
and prepare reports for investors on whether or not its shares or bonds are worth
buying. These analysts are employed by securities firms, though many are still very
close to the management of the companies they follow.
- The biggest investment banks, such as Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, have the
broadest company coverage, though their role as financiers for the same companies
creates the potential for conflict. As a result, independent research firms are springing
up everywhere. Their reports may be more balanced.
- Investors are the best place to get a sense for whose reports are worth reading and
whose aren't. A company's biggest investors are listed in its proxy filling (see SEC
filings) and the PR offices of many big mutual-fund companies, such as AIM or Loomis
Sayles, may be willing to connect you with a portfolio manager or in-house analyst who
follows a given stock. Those fund managers themselves can be superb, balanced
sources of information, too.
- Daily reports can often be too detailed and immediate to be of use to an investigative
reporter, though the industry overviews that some analysts prepare can run into the
hundreds of pages and be among the more definitive documents available on the
subject.
- Company Web sites often list the analysts who cover them and their firms. A securities
firm's PR department can provide you with the names and contact numbers of analysts
and the stocks or bonds they cover. Many analysts have been prohibited from talking to
reporters or have to get clearance from PR.
- Many of these reports are available from Thomson's First Call service or on products
like the Bloomberg terminal.
- Debt-rating agencies evaluate a company's creditworthiness. The reports they produce
can be more sober and less cheerleading than what some equity analysts write. The
subject matter is, however, often complex and the language arcane. Standard & Poor's
(http://www.standardandpoors.com) and Moody's Investors Service
(http://www.moodys.com) are the biggest.
5. Commercial profiles
- Dun & Bradstreet (http://www.dnb.com) and Hoover's Online (http://www.hoovers.com)
maintain profiles on thousands of companies, both public and private, that include
everything from corporate histories to number of employees to sales estimates.
OTHER PLACES TO LOOK
1. Internet chat sites and bulletin boards
- As likely to send you on a wild-goose chase as provide you with solid information.
- Try Yahoo finance (http://finance.yahoo.com), Silicon Investor
(http://www.siliconinvestor.com) and Raging Bull (http://www.ragingbull.com).

5
3. Pension plan records
- FreeErisa.com (http://www.freeerisa.com) contains records of corporate pension
plans.
4. Links to non-profit organizations
- Guidestar (http://www.guidestar.org) is the National Database of Nonprofit
Organizations.
USEFUL SEC FILINGS
10-K – Annual report. Business overview & history, strategy, competition, legal
proceedings, audited financials, liquidity, risks, auditor’s letter.
10-Q – Quarterly report. Similar, though less exhaustive than 10-K. Unaudited
financials, recent events, MD&A.
144 – Notice of stock sale by company insider.
3 – Insider’s stock holding in company.
4 – Change in insider’s holding.
14A – Proxy statement. Board composition and biographical information on directors,
executive compensation, auditors, corporate governance standards, matters up for
shareholder vote.
8-K – Disclosure of information or events that may be of immediate importance to
shareholders.
S-1 – Registration statement. History, financials as a private company, insiders, earlystage investors.

