TIPSHEET
How to dissect a business
Investigative Reporters and Editors Inc. Watchdog Workshop
Cal State Fullerton, Feb. 6, 2004
Tony Palazzo
Assistant Managing Editor
Los Angeles Business Journal
323-549-5225, ext. 223
tpalazzo@labusinessjournal.com

James V. Grimaldi
Investigative Reporter
The Washington Post
202-334-6000
grimaldij@washpost.com

WHERE TO BEGIN
•
•
•

•
•

COMPANIES. Get the company’s own information: company web sites, brochures, annual
reports, press releases (found on Businesswire, PR Newswire, Marketwire, Primezone).
SEARCH ENGINES. Do a basic search – on Google, Yahoo, etc. – for the company.
MEDIA. Archived articles (cost). Interactive WSJ (30 days w/subscription, $2.95 each for older
articles), www.Factiva.com, Dow Jones’ database (expensive), LexisNexis at www.nexis.com
(expensive). Free news sites: http://news.google.com/ and http://news.yahoo.com/. Publication
web sites (free/cost) Businessweek, Wired, NY Times, Forbes, Fortune etc.
TRADE PRESS AND NEWSLETTERS. Most industries have a trade magazine, newspaper or
newsletter covering them and the regulators that regulate them. From Women’s Wear Daily to
Inside EPA.
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS. Nearly every industry has a trade group or professional
association, often based in Washington and state capitals, to represent the industry’s interests.
Find the group and get their publications. Now, many are online. Get the information: If you
can’t get someone to identify the industry association, try the Encyclopedia of Associations,
available in libraries. It is online, but not free, at www.galenet.com. The American Association of
Association Executives has a Web directory of associations at
http://info.asaenet.org/gateway/OnlineAssocSlist.html. It just takes you to the site of each
association (about 6500 of them), but does not provide that neat blurb with info about each
association like the Encyclopedia of Associations does.

PRIMARY PUBLIC SOURCES
•

•

CITIES. For local businesses that are privately held, you can find contact and ownership
information with your city business license office, city consumer affairs office and in the local
courthouse. There are free directories of local and state government web sites with records
available at BRB Publications www.brbpub.com and www.searchsystems.net.
COUNTIES.
Fictitious name statements often are on file at county clerk-recorder offices, or in your local
courthouse. Los Angeles County publishes a list on its web site, but you cannot pull up the
filing to see who has registered the name of a business. Go to
http://regrec.co.la.ca.us/fbn/fbn.cfm (or, go to http://regrec.co.la.ca.us/ and click on
‘naming your business’).
Lawsuits (see below).

•

•

•

STATES. Corporations are required to file with states a variety of documents, including
corporate registrations, Uniform Commercial Code financing statements, professional licensing
applications and other legally required special filings. These are a good starting point to find
basics such as executives, addresses, and dates of incorporation.
The National Association of Secretaries of State has a list of links access to state business and
corporations divisions http://www.nass.org/busreg/busreg.html. California Secretary of
State: www.ss.ca.gov. New York: http://www.dos.state.ny.us/corp/corpwww.html.
Nevada: http://sos.state.nv.us/default.asp.
Lots of public companies register in Delaware, which has a private contractor running its site,
so it’s costly. Listing of firms handling searches is at
www.state.de.us/corp/directweb.shtml. Other states can be found on Virtual Gumshoe
www.virtualgumshoe.com, a handy site that carries links to lots of state corporate registries
and bar associations.
FEDERAL – SEC Filings: There’s a certain amount of information companies have to produce,
but you often have to look in nooks and crannies. SEC documents can be intimidating but are
actually pretty easy once you know what to look for. (See Bloomberg handout). You can find
company financials, management’s analysis of competitive threats, company histories, board
information, bios, executive pay and so-called “risk factors,” lawsuits that could threaten the
business model.
Where to find the SEC filings: www.sec.gov, is pretty easy to use. Its guide to forms is at
www.sec.gov/info/edgar/forms/edgform.htm#table1. Some reporters prefer Edgar Online,
which costs $57/year and up, and parses the information in easier to use bites.
Other sources using SEC info: www.Lanceranalytics.com, for insider selling. Owned by
Thomson Financial, costly but will generally provide access to journalists – along with analysis
of company stock sales. Thomson Financial has lots of info but is expensive.
LAWSUITS. Key documents to find out a company’s disputes with creditors, employees, rivals,
etc. Can be windows into a company. Get the information:
Counties. Check your local courthouse if it is a local company. Increasingly, counties are
posting civil suit indexes online. At L.A. Superior Court, check www.lasuperiorcourt.org,
but the searches are expensive (around $4 a pop). Other examples: Riverside County Superior
Court www.co.riverside.ca.us/depts/courts/ and Santa Clara County
http://www.sccsuperiorcourt.org/.
National searches. Well-publicized complaints often end up on www.findlaw.com, a site
with lots of legal information. There are direct links to rulings in all state courts and federal
courts. The rulings include non-published as well as published. It’s fairly extensive and it’s
free. It also has listings of all judges of the appellate courts. Also, there are local court search
services that can be found in yellow pages, or www.switchboard.com, or the like. BRB
Publications www.brbpub.com has a directory of local public record retrievers to find
professionals to go out and search/retrieve documents at courthouses as well as other
government agencies. Other courts: LexisNexis Courtlink www.lexisnexis.com/courtlink.
Federal lawsuits can be found on Pacer http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/ The civil index
search is easy and free, but there is a charge to obtain documents, which cost 7 cents a page,
with a dollar cap on large documents. Once you get a Pacer password (free, but you have to
wait forever to get one), you can get into any of the federal court Web sites. Pacer doesn’t bill
you till you get to around $20 or so in charges. Due to current changes in law, criminal case
documents cannot be retrieved online, but most new civil cases can, where documents are
available online.
Bankruptcy. Pacer covers bankruptcy court (except for a few courts not included on their
Web search). For overall statistics on the number of filings, each court keeps the stats. The
best site to obtain global data is through the American Bankruptcy Institute’s Web site at

www.abiworld.org, which tracks quarterly data and divide information by type of
bankruptcy and region.
Securities lawsuits. Securites Class Action Clearinghouse can be found on Stanford Law
School’s site, http://securities.stanford.edu/, by clicking on “index of filings.”
HUMAN, AGENCY AND LEGISLATIVE SOURCES
•

•
•

•
•

•
•

•

COMPANY OFFICIALS . The company’s public affairs officers and public officials. Outside
public affairs officials who represent the company. Use discretion depending on the angle of the
story. If you can’t reach them at work, you can call them at home. Get company official names
from web sites and from SEC (see below). Also, Leadership Directories, publisher of government
“Yellow Books,” public executive listings. The web site is http://ldi.bvdep.com and lists the
executives at every company. It’s expensive but worth it if you can afford it.
FORMER EMPLOYEES AND RIVALS. Employees who have sued the company, though they
have an ax to grind, can often provide inside information. Check lawsuits, get internal directories,
get names off web sites and Google searches.
ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRY SPECIALISTS. Finding true “experts” is always
problematic, but searching university web sites and databases that have peer-reviewed research is
a good start. Medline and law reviews are good places to vet specialists. One place to find selfdescribed experts is through www.profnet.com, which is run by PR Newswire and sends emails
to public-affairs offices looking for experts. Take this service with a grain of salt.
LABOR UNIONS. Often know more about a company than the company officials, where the
bodies are buried. But they also sometimes have an interest to keep the secrets secret. Union
officials can put you in touch with employees.
REGULATORS. Rule-making, fines, citations, policy agendas – often everything important runs
through the federal, state and local agencies that regulate industries. Check rule dockets, warning
letters, enforcement actions, file public-record requests for meetings with officials – e.g., EPA,
USDA, OSHA.
LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES. Find out which legislative and congressional committees
have jurisdiction over the industry. Look at legislation, appropriation bills, hearing reports,
investigative reports. FOIA lawmaker correspondence with regulatory agencies.
LOBBYING. Look at lobbying reports for your company and industry to determine what issues
are important. Federal lobbying reports can be found at http://sopr.senate.gov/. DOJ’s Foreign
Agents Registration Act (FARA) web site. The bible for federal lobbying is Washington
Representatives, which also has a web site, www.lobbyists.info, which is a paid site but offers
free, limited trials. Save your trial for when you really need it.
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS. Also, track federal campaign contributions by company
officials at www.opensecrets.org, the site of the Center for Responsive Politics. It is free and
accurate. CRP codes donations to make them more accessible than they are on the Federal
Election Commission site, www.fec.gov. Another site, http://www.fecinfo.com/ requires paid
registrations. Organizes material a little differently than CRP. Appears to do less enhancement of
data than CRP. Generally charges for information, but might give free pass or special deal for
smaller news organizations. FECinfo also has reliable lobbying information.

MARKET DATA
•

WEB SITES. Yahoo Finance (stock quotes, press releases, news); Business.com (Reuters,
Financial Times, various trade publications, sorted by industry category or keyword search);
www.CBSMarketwatch.com; company web site; www.Hoovers.com – company description,
financials, competitors; Bloomberg.com.

•
•

BLOOMBERG MACHINE (costly) trove of information about companies, government debt,
markets, contact info for executives & board members, trends, news etc. Most company coverage
is public but some private company coverage, esp. if they have issued debt to the public.
INVESTMENT PUBLICATIONS such as Standard & Poors, Dun & Bradstreet and Moody’s
(expensive) will give you a good sense of whether and how fast a company has been paying its
bills. Both public and private cos.

MARKET SOURCES
•

•

•
•

•

•

•

SELL-SIDE ANALYSTS and reports (free). Lots of information and analysis about the
company, its strengths and weaknesses, strategies, competitors, market position, important
products etc. Tend to be boosters. Get the information: Bloomberg machine (if you have access),
Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research (library), company Web sites, research department or
Web site of brokerage.
BUY-SIDE ANALYSTS & PORTFOLIO MANAGERS. Harder to reach, but often worth the
effort. Get the information: Bloomberg machine, www.buyside.com, www.capital-access.com,
looking for names in clips; Nelson’s; Investment Company Institute www.ici.org has data on
money managers; Institutional Investor magazine www.institutionalinvestor.com does annual
ranking on largest money manager firms.
DEBT ANALYSTS. Often more measured and with a longer-term perspective than sell-side
equity analysts. Get the information: Get these names from the same sources as sell-side. Fitch,
S&P and A.M. Best (especially for insurance cos.) have good ones.
CONFERENCE CALLS. Most companies hold calls after release of their quarterly earnings.
This is a good place to hear it straight from the CEO’s mouth, so to speak. Especially useful for
companies that aren’t talking. Sometimes analysts or investors on the call will challenge the
company management's point of view. Get the information: Companies disclose them on their
web sites that sometimes have email sign-ups to notify you when they will occur. Also, most
companies keep the calls archived on their web sites for a period of time. Yahoo finance and
www.TheStreet.com, carry conference call calendars. Also paid services such as
www.bestcalls.com, Fair Disclosure Network and www.callstreet.com are reasonably priced.
Some provide transcripts.
SHORT SELLERS. These are investors who place a negative bet on a company by borrowing
stock and selling it, in hopes that it will go down. They buy the stock later and replace the
borrowed shares, pocketing the difference if the price falls. Some short sellers do incredibly deep
research and often are the first to find problems that surface months later. Enron is an example.
They are biased, though, so be sure to check the information out. Get the information: Start with
archive searches. There aren’t a whole lot of them, and they tend to be shy, so the same ones
often get quoted. They often are described as hedge fund managers. Some of the more prominent
are Jim Chanos, Manuel Asensio, David Rocker. There are also a few research firms out there
that make “sell” calls such as Avalon Research.
MESSAGE BOARDS. As they draw more use, they’ve become less useful. Started out with
good debates of pros and cons of a stock but many have degenerated into lots of flaming. They’re
still good for getting a feel for the street action - the passions on either side of a stock. Yahoo’s is
of little use but Raging Bull, www.ragingbull.com, and Motley Fool, www.fool.com, are
helpful.
PRIVATE EQUITY. Investors in private companies, similar to venture capital investing; but
dollar terms are often much higher. Investments could be new companies or older companies that
have gotten into trouble or gone bankrupt. Get the information: www.privateequitycentral.net;
Capital IQ at www.capitaliq.com.

•

HARD MONEY LENDERS. General information from the Commercial Finance Association,
the trade group for the asset-based lending industry (lenders that provide a company with cash by
lending on fixed assets, accounts receivable and inventory or engage in, say, real estate financing)
http://www.cfa.com.

INDUSTRY SPECIFIC SOURCES.
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

BANKS & BANKING. One place to start is the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, a quasigovernment agency that overseas banks and S&Ls. Get information on total deposits, branches,
etc. at www.fdic.gov. Another good resource is the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
which maintains records on banks they supervise. http://www.occ.treas.gov/pubinf.htm.
Findley Report www.findley-reports.com lists bank M&A activity. Bauer Financial Inc.
www.bauerfinancial.com has bank rating and research (star rating).
ENTERTAINMENT. The Hollywood Creative Directory is a good source of names in the
business while Variety and Hollywood Reporter list all the productions worldwide each week,
including who is funding the deals.
INVESTMENT BANKING. Capital IQ www.capitaliq.com compiles data on financial
segments like investment banking and private equity, generally required to pay but will send to
media for free. NASD (formerly called National Association of Securities Dealers Inc.)
www.nasd.com data on brokers and news in security biz, including individual licensing and
reprimands.
NON-PROFITS. Wealthy individuals, families and companies often set up non-profits. The 990
tax forms for tax-exempt, nonprofit organizations are available on Guidestar at
www.guidestar.org (free, registration required). Guidestar’s arrival in many ways superceded the
widely used California AG’s Registry of Charitable Trusts site at
http://caag.state.ca.us/charities/. It is still good at some of the harder-to-find stuff. The
Foundation Center www.fdncenter.org has tax returns and financial info on charities/trusts.
Click on Foundation Finder, http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder.html, which has details and tax returns
on 70,000 private and community foundations, or to the 990 search engine,
http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder_990.html.
VENTURE CAPITAL. Venture One www.ventureone.com venture capital research
information. PwC MoneyTree report www.pwcmoneytree.com quarterly report on venture
capital investing in US and broken down by regions. Also Growthing Research at
www.growthinkresearch.com.
LAW FIRMS. Law firms are private and rarely report financials. The nation’s top firms
voluntarily report financials annually to American Lawyer magazine for publication in July.
These filings with the magazine are not independently audited, are hard to verify and subject to
exaggeration, though AmLaw works hard to catch cheaters. American Lawyer Media’s sister
papers, including National Law Journal and Legal Times in Washington, reports versions of this
list. Includes profits per partner, American Lawyer also has annual revenue and revenue per
partner. You can buy the July, or you can subscribe to the magazine, though it is pricey at about
$500 annually. The list itself is available on Factiva, but is messy to read. You can get the list at
the publication's Web site, www.law.com, on the month it’s released, but then it costs after that.
LAWYERS. For a nationwide search, try Martindale-Hubbell at www.martindale.com, the
useful search engine by the publisher of the old Martindale hardbound books. If you want list of
clients, and they aren’t on the law firms’ own site (often they are, so do a thorough search of a
firm’s web site), you can get them in the Martindale print copy found in law libraries. Martindale
charges to be listed, but also runs an ABA lawyer listing that includes lawyers who have not paid
to be in Martindale: http://lawyers.martindale.com/aba. Many state and local bar associations
have search engines. Bar associations often have very good search engines. For example, the

State Bar of California www.calsb.org lists every lawyer practicing in the state, along with
location, phone number, law firm and disciplinary background.
Tony Palazzo
Assistant Managing Editor
Los Angeles Business Journal
323-549-5225, ext. 223
tpalazzo@labusinessjournal.com

James V. Grimaldi
Investigative Reporter
The Washington Post
202-334-6000
grimaldij@washpost.com

