Eight Simple Rules For Data-ing Census 2000
I

The census has two parts
♦ Short form, a true census because every household was asked to participate.
Sex, age, race, Hispanic/Latino ethnicity, household relationship and residence tenure (owned
or rented).
Products: PL94-171, for election redistricting; Summary File 1, and Summary File 2
♦ Long form, a huge survey sent to about 16% of households.
Family and personal demographic and housing details. Ancestry, birth place, citizenship,
languages, education, employment, income, poverty, transportation, dwelling details.
Products: Summary File 3 and Summary File 4.
II Census race categories are too complex, but can often be combined to simplify.
♦ Hispanic is an ethnicity, not a race. Hispanics usually gave their race as “White” or “Other”.
♦ Some tables provide separate “Hispanic” and “White alone Not Hispanic” data.
♦ (See reverse side for detailed discussion of race and ethnicity issue.)
III The more detailed the table, the less detailed the geography, to protect privacy.
♦ Detailed long form demographics available down to the census tract.
♦ Some details available at the block group level.
♦ Race/ethnicity, including detailed multi-race categories available to the block level.
IV Download and print a library of technical documentation for all the products you use.
♦ Valuable even if you only use American FactFinder to obtain Census Data.
♦ Tech Docs explain the tables and the geography. Helps you find what you’re after.
♦ Huge PDF files. Print on pre-punched 3-hole paper. Use 3-inch binders.
V Census geography is complex.
♦ Master concepts of Summary Levels and the “Geocomp” variable if making own tables.
VI Few Census 2000 tables compare directly with tables from the 1990 Census.
♦ 2000 tables are much more detailed and complex than 1990 tables.
♦ The geographies are different. Many 1990 blocks, block groups and tracts changed in 2000. Few
“places” have the same boundaries in 2000 as in 1990. But comparisons at the place level are
commonly made despite those differences.
♦ All California counties are the same in 2000 as they were in 1990. Only a few changed nationally.
VII There is a right way and a wrong way to combine Census data.
♦ Data from different tables cannot be combined to create new “details” not provided by the Census
Bureau.
♦ Data from the same table can be added together to “collapse” categories and geographies.
Detailed education attainment categories can be added up to create simplified comparisons, for
instance.
Tables for census blocks can be added together to create neighborhoods. Tracts can be
combined to create planning areas or zones or regions.
VIII Anti-Error Vaccine: If you make your own census tables from downloaded data files, do spot check
comparisons with American FactFinder.
Richard O’Reilly, computer journalism editor, Los Angeles Times

Race and Ethnicity in Census 2000
Census 2000 allowed persons to specify more than one race and more racial categories were tabulated
than in previous censuses. It again tinkered with the only ethnicity category it recognizes, this time
labeling it “Hispanic/Latino” In 1990 it was just Hispanic and in 1980 it was “Spanish origin”.
As in 1990, most people who identified themselves as Hispanic/Latino, categorized their race as either
White or Other.
The Census bureau does not combine race and ethnicity in the same table, even though society seems to
treat Hispanic ethnicity much as if it also were a racial characteristic. In California, neither concept is
particularly descriptive of the multi-cultural world in which we live.
The most obvious impact of race-only tables is that they combine Hispanic and Non-Hispanic Whites as a
single group, White, which doesn’t truly reflect either group. The Other race is nearly all Hispanic, but
that isn’t reflected, either. In some cases the Census Bureau provides parallel tables for racial groups and
also includes an Hispanic/Latino group and a White non-Hispanic group. But even if you subtract the
White non-Hispanic count from the White count, you still end up with more than 100% of the population
because other Hispanics also are being counted in a racial category.
Most of the time you are stuck with a table of 100% of the population by race category plus a separate
table of the Hispanic/Latino population. A footnote explaining that Hispanic/Latino is an ethnicity, not a
race, should be included.
In Public Law 94-171 data, the redistricting file, the Census Bureau provided 63 separate racial and multiracial categories. It also provided parallel Hispanic by race tables, so it is possible to create your own
combined Hispanic and non-Hispanic by race count of just 100% of the population. You can make those
tables for the total population, under 18 population and adult population for most geographic units down
to the census block. There is no ZCTA (zip code equivalent) geography in PL 94-171, however.
The least number of race categories that the Census Bureau uses to summarize population by race is
seven:
White, single race
Black or African American, single race
American Indian and Alaska Native, single race
Asian, single race
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, single race
Some Other single race
Two or more races.
In 1990 there were five race categories. There was no multi-race category and Asian and Pacific Islander
were combined.
The least-used data files, Summary File 2 and Summary File 4, provide a wealth of characteristic tables
for each race and multi-race group, plus specific Hispanic origin groups, such as Mexican, and nonHispanic race categories, plus many Indian tribes.

