Five Ways You Can Look Good on the Health Beat
Investigative Reporters and Editors
October 18, 2003
Northwestern University Medill School of Journalism
Patricia Simms
Health and medical reporter
Wisconsin State Journal
1901 Fish Hatchery Road
Madison WI 53713
608/ 252-6126
psimms@madison.com

1

Let your email do the walking. LISTSERVS, also called mailing lists,
are email chat groups on particular topics. Emails are sent to a mailing list,
then forwarded to everyone else on that mailing list. Join a lot of listservs
even if it means handling a ton of emails every day.

To search for a particular topic there is CataList, the catalog of LISTSERV lists or
Liszt: Directory of E-Mail Discussion Groups. Sometimes an web site will link to a
listserv on a particular subject. The process is like eavesdropping at the dinner table.
Many mailing lists archive their posts.
Sign up for mailing lists that deliver news to your inbox with regularity. Search for
listserv groups according to topic by sending an email to this address:
listserv@listserv.net. Leave the subject line blank and in body of message type: list
global topic (instead of the word topic--type in your choice of topic , for example,
cancer). So you would type list global ebola and you will get a list of known ebola
listservs.
My personal favorites:
The Scientist
http://www.the-scientist.com/http://www.the-scientist.com/
ProMed
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org
EurekAlert! [webmaster@eurekalert.org]
EurekAlert! Experts Database at http://www.eurekalert.org/experts.php

Institute of Medicine News
IOMNews@NAS.edu
American Medical News
AMNewsHTML [AMNewsHTML.UM.A.6.1907@unity.ama-assn.org]

Watch That Page
In a similar vein, free services like Watch That Page can monitor specific web sites,
including medlogs, government websites and CNN and let you know when something
new is added.
http://www.watchthatpage.com

2

Use credible organizations to find credible sources.
Association of Health Care Journalists
http://www.ahcj.umn.edu/

“Covering the Quality of Health Care”
http://www.ahcj.umn.edu/qualityguide/index.html

3

. Think beyond the disease-of-the-week.
Web sites that can help:
Public Citizen Org
http://www.citizen.org/index.cfm
Questionable Doctors
http://www.questionabledoctors.org/

Finding and Using Health Statistics: A Self-Study Course
Outreach and Training Activities in NICHSR--National Information Center on Health
Services Research and Health Care Technology (NICHSR) at the National Library of
Medicine http://www.nlm.nih.gov/nichsr/outreach.html

The Leapfrog Group for Patient Safety
http://www.leapfroggroup.org/index.htm

National Institutes for Health/News & Events
http://www.nih.gov/news/

45

. Be very careful. More careful than you’ve ever been before.

Get lucky

Take tips seriously, even when they sound … well … odd.

SECTION: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. B1
LENGTH: 504 words
HEADLINE: JAILED MAN'S DEATH RAISES SUSPICIONS;
FAMILY MEMBERS SUSPECT THE MAN WAS DENIED HIS BLOOD-THINNING MEDICATION.
BYLINE: Patricia Simms Health reporter
BODY:
A 44-year-old Wisconsin Rapids man started serving a short jail sentence in Wood County April 28 for
drunken driving-related misdemeanors.

Less than six weeks later, Douglas Horan died, and Wood County officials have launched an investigation.
Family members say jail medical staff denied Horan access to blood-thinning medication he'd been
required to take since he had an artificial heart valve implanted more than 20 years ago after being nearly
electrocuted.
Horan, who left no wife or children, died at Madison's Meriter Hospital June 12 after being rushed for heart
surgery from the Adams County Jail in Friendship, where he'd been transferred because of crowding.
His surgeon at Meriter, Dr. Haywood Gilliam, said a lack of blood thinners caused Horan's stroke -- anyone
with a mechanical heart valve has to take blood thinners to avoid blood clotting, he said. "It's a ticking
clock," Gilliam said. "His stroke was directly related to not having taken blood thinners for at least a
month."
Josephine Boss, Horan's fiancee, said she brought his prescription vials to the jail in Wood County in
Wisconsin Rapids but was told inmates could not bring their own medications inside.
"When he got to the jail, Dougie told the jailors he needed to go home for an hour and get his prescriptions,
that he needed them," Boss said. "They said no."
Boss said she was told a jail nurse would get him the Coumadin, a form of Warfarin. At the Adams County
Jail, Horan sickened and asked to see a doctor -- Boss said he was told it was a holiday and he would have
to wait until Tuesday.
Wood County Sheriff Kurt D. Heuer Wednesday declined to answer questions about Horan's death.
"Because the coroner is conducting an investigation into this death, I am unable to comment at this time,"
he said Wednesday. "We are currently giving all information to the coroner's office for their review."
Heuer said Wood County has a contract with a Peoria, Ill.-based company, Health Professionals, LTD, for
medical care in the jail.
Arnold Horan of Janesville, the inmate's older brother, said Wednesday the Dane County Coroner's Office
had to retrieve the body from the funeral home for an autopsy.
Horan, a lumber truck driver, said his brother was vigilant about his medication.
Arnie Horan acknowledged his younger brother, who received disability payments from Social Security,
had problems with drinking and driving -- he'd spent time in both the Dane and Rock county jails.
Now Arnie Horan said he's requested his brother's medical records to answer questions about the death.
"Now that the (Wood County) coroner ordered an investigation, it just makes me wonder even more. I just
want some final chapter in his story, and I want to know exactly what did happen."
Boss said she has been trying to get Horan's property, including empty prescription vials, returned to her.
She's been going back and forth between Wood and Adams counties.
"All I got was his clothes -- orange pants and a pair of socks," Boss said.º

