Mark Skertic/Chicago Tribune
Mskertic@tribune.com
312/222-4840

Corporate documents
Where to start
Familiarize yourself with the Securities and Exchange Commission’s web site. It has
the same access to corporate filings that regulators and top analysts get. www.sec.gov
If you don’t use it already, learn how to use Edgar, the SEC search engine that gives
access to the various reports filed by publicly traded companies. A good tutorial for learning
Edgar is on the website.
There are several other good sites for financial information. Some of these require a fee
or subscription to get access to some or all information.
www.bloomberg.com
www.thestreet.com
http://finance.yahoo.com
www.10-Kwizard.com
www.morningstar.com

SEC filings
There are dozens of forms companies file with the SEC. A complete list is on the
commission’s website. Those you are most likely to use the most are noted here.
Form 10-K and 10-Q
The 10-K is the form publicly traded companies are required to file once a year. It
includes information on the last quarter of the year and the entire year. Every three months, the
10-Q is submitted. This is the quarterly version of the same report.
Foreign companies file a form 20-F
Don’t confuse the 10-K with the slick, glossy, picture-filled annual report sent to
shareholders and distributed to the media. This version lacks the pretty pictures, but it includes a
detailed snapshot of a company’s finances, along with information about the performance and
factors that could affect the operation. Among the things to look for:
• Financial statements
• Management’s discussion and analysis
• Disclosure of lawsuits, updates on on-going litigation and revelations on investigations the
company has been notified about
• Ownership statements detailing who owns more than 5 percent of the company’s stock
• Footnotes – just because this information is in tiny print doesn’t mean it’s not important!

Form 8-K
This is the form companies file whenever “materially important” events occur. When
there is a change in management, an auditor resigns, a major court judgement is rendered or the
company is hit with a big fine from a regulatory agency, it will be disclosed in the 8-K.
Don’t be surprised if you check 8-Ks but often find little news there. Some companies
file them at the same time they send out a news release with the same information. But checking
them regularly will eventually pay off with a story.
Schedule 13-D
This is filed when an individual or institution acquires 5 percent or more of a public
company. It will also detail the date the stock was purchased and the price. This is also where
details about a shareholder exerting control over a company will be disclosed.
Form S-1
When a company is making an initial public offering (an IPO), they will file this form. It
will include a history of the company, financial statements, risk factors investors should be aware
of and the names of investors who have already put money into the company.
In short, this is a goldmine, and often the first glimpse inside a private company.
Companies that have been public less than three years also file S-1s. So, if there is a
second round of stock being offered, another S-1 will be filed.
Companies that have been public more than three year file an S-3. These detail the sale of
stock and other tradable securities.
Proxies (form DEF 14-A)
These detail issues that shareholders will vote on. Proxies include information on how
much top executives are paid, including stock options, and how much stock they hold.
You will also find detail about business ties between executives and shareholders,
information about board members, their compensation and terms of service, and information on
who the largest shareholders are.

Other documents
Don’t neglect other public records that can show what’s happening behind the scenes at a
business. Among those to check regularly:
Court records in both state and federal courts: With PACER, you can get an account to check
the dockets of most U.S. District Courts. Many court filings are also archived here, and are
available to print for just 7 cents a page. See http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/ for information about
setting up an account.
If you local courts are online, make it part of your weekly beat checks to see what
lawsuits have been filed involving companies you. If access to the courts is not online, plan to
stop by the courthouse regularly to make checks in person.
Political Action Committee spending and lobbyist reports: Many companies have their own
PACs, they hire lobbyists and join trade organizations that lobby. Be sure to check sites such as
www.opensecrets.org so you have an idea of where they are spending money in Washington and
who they are trying to influence.

Taken from the IRE handout Adam Levy of Bloomberg News prepared for the IRE’s 2002
conference

