American FactFinder
A Guide for Journalists
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
(714) 796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
Once upon a time, journalists seeking census information had two ways to find it.
They could read massive volumes filled with very small print. Or they could learn
computer-assisted reporting skills and, so armed, wrestle with clumsy 9-track
tapes the size of steering wheels.
No more. The census gods have discovered the Internet in a big way. The
Census Bureau’s American FactFinder site is easy to navigate and packed with
information. To get there, go to the Census Bureau home page
(www.census.gov), scroll down the left side and click on American FactFinder. Or
go there directly at factfinder.census.gov (no “www.” necessary).
Here is what you’ll see when you get there:

Let’s start with the Fact Sheet. That’s the fastest way to get quick answers to
everyday questions like these:
• How many people live here?
• What’s the racial composition of the area?
• How well off are they?

-1-

Click on Fact Sheet, either in the left-hand navigation bar or in the center of the
home page. This is what you’ll see.

Scroll down to the number 2 and you’ll see dozens of national statistics. But let’s
stick with the top for now because it can provide amazingly detailed, amazingly
localized information. You can be as specific or as general as you like. Select a
state to get statewide statistics; dig down a layer by adding a county or Zip code;
dig still further by specifying a city or town.
And don’t think your town is too small for the census. The Census Bureau
collected information for well over 1,000 California cities and “census-designated
places” in 2000. I can drive through some census-designated places in under a
minute if the CHP isn’t paying attention.
Every census fact sheet provides several layers of information:
• General characteristics such as sex, race, age, family and household types.
• Social characteristics such as educational attainment, disabilities, language
spoken at home, whether foreign-born and whether a veteran.
• Economic characteristics such as income (household, family and per capita),
poverty and daily average commute time.
• Housing characteristics such as median value and monthly housing costs.
And there’s one other thing. Just to the side of the characteristics label, there’s a
link saying, “Show more.”

-2-

Click on “Show more” and a whole new world opens up.

By clicking on the Print/Download button near the upper right, you can download
your results to an Excel spreadsheet or to a database. By clicking on Tables (in
the top locator row), you can select any of 41 “quick tables.”

-3-

And you can put together quick maps to show your results. Let’s take another
look at the Fact Sheet for Santa Ana.

Most adult Santa Ana residents have not graduated from high school. By clicking
on a map, we get a breakdown by census tract. Each census tract is home to
roughly 6,000 to 8,000 people. As you can see, there is a strong geographic
pattern to poor education in Santa Ana.

-4-

Want to send this map to the art department? No problem. Go to the download
button at the top of the page and click on the option to download to an Adobe
Portable Document Format (PDF) file.
You also can change the census geography from census tract to block group. A
typical block group has less than 2,000 residents. We are talking really local
here.

-5-

The Census Bureau has just told you the exact neighborhoods to walk if you
want to document a serious social problem. And it’s given you a pretty good map.
And it hasn’t charged you a dime, if you don’t count the $8 billion in tax dollars
the United States spent on Census 2000.
Oh, and one other thing. You may have noticed that several of the characteristics
listed on the Fact Sheet include the word “Brief” next to the word “Map.” Click on
Brief and you’ll get a Census Bureau brief on the subject. The brief on
educational attainment is 12 pages long; it includes the exact wording of the
question asked on the census as well as national, regional and state-by-state
comparisons of educational attainment. If you want to do a story on the high
school dropout problem in one part of town, this is the place to go for the allimportant “perspective” paragraph in your story.
But the truly cool thing about Fact Sheets is that you can zoom into a
neighborhood. Go back and look at the original results screen on Page 2. You’ll
see under “Results” a locator bar that reads something like this:
United States | California | Orange County | Santa Ana city | 92701
Those are all “geographies” in census-speak. Click on any of them (except Santa
Ana city, which is displayed in our example), and you’ll get a list of demographics
similar in style, if not in content, to the one we just viewed. This means you can
quickly get demographics for any Zip code (or Zip Code Tabulation Area in
census-speak).
You can get a lot more local than that. Return to the first results page, click on
“Show more” and then click on the “Geography” tab.

FactFinder now lets you select demographics based on a street address.

-6-

Click on “Address search,” fill in the street address, Zip and, optionally, city and
county, and -- drumroll, please -- FactFinder displays all the many layers of
information available for that address.

Here is a quick lesson in Census geography. The basic unit is a block -- literally a
city block. You can get pretty accurate head counts at the block level. For the
headier stuff like median income and education levels, the lowest available unit is
the “block group” -- literally a group of several adjacent blocks. Add two or more
block groups together and you have a census tract. Add many census tracts (Los
Angeles County has 2,054, San Diego 605, Orange 577), and you have a county.
“Places” can be cities or unincorporated towns; census tracts can and often do
overlap two or more places. In many states (not California) places may overlap
counties.
Knowing this, you can decide pretty quickly just how to localize your information.
In the example above, the Census Bureau has just told us that 625 N. Grand in

-7-

Santa Ana, the office of The Orange County Register, is located in Block Group 2
of Census Tract 744.06. Choosing the tract, here’s what we get.

So here’s a potential lead:
One of the most poorly educated neighborhoods in Southern California is home
to the nation’s 25th largest newspaper. Two of every three adults in the
neighborhood surrounding the Orange County Register have never completed
high school.
There is more -- much more -- for journalists on American FactFinder. But this
will get you started.

-8-

