COURT RECORDS: MINING FOR GOLD
IRE Better Watchdog Workshop, Fullerton Calif./Feb. 7, 2004
Kim Christensen, Investigations Editor, The Oregonian
kchristensen@news.oregonian.com

Court records are an invaluable source of information on the people we write about every
day – the famous, the infamous, the affluent, the down and out. Whether you’re profiling
an ax killer, backgrounding a political candidate or trying to find out what the cops seized
in a search of your friendly neighborhood crack house, much of the information you seek
is in court records. Yet many reporters, even some with years of experience, don’t know
their way around their local courthouses.
Municipal, county and federal courthouses are repositories for both civil lawsuits and
criminal cases. In Oregon, basic information such as parties’ names, filing dates and
dispositions are available online to subscribers of a state justice database, and
commercial information services such as Nexis and Pacer also offer limited access to
electronic records. But there is no substitute for going to the courthouse, checking the
indexes in the clerk’s office and pulling the files you need.
Where to look and (a smattering of) what you’ll find:
County/State Courts
Some states have both county courts and municipal courts, or courts of limited
jurisdiction. While there might be some variation from county to county or state to state,
most court systems generally use the following structure. So where you look for records
depends on the type of case:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Criminal Court: Felony offenses punishable by death or state prison sentences
Civil Court: Lawsuits claiming damages of at least $25,000 (in California) – personal
injury, contract disputes, etc.
Family Court: Divorce, paternity, custody disputes
Probate Court: Estates of deceased persons; guardianships and conservatorships of
estates of living people unable to care for themselves.
Juvenile Court: Minors accused of crimes; abuse and neglect cases of minors
Appellate Courts: Handles appeals
Limited Jurisdiction Courts, Municipal Courts: Misdemeanor crimes, traffic offenses,
lawsuits up to $25,000 (in California); small claims cases (up to $5,000 in California,
no lawyers allowed).

Federal Courts (U.S. District Court, Appellate Courts)
•
•
•
•
•
•

Federal crimes such as kidnapping, bank robbery, interstate drug trafficking
Lawsuits in which citizens sue the federal government
Lawsuits in which individuals from different states sue each other
Disputes between states, or between U.S. and foreign governments
Bankruptcy cases
Immigration cases

So when do I use these things?
All the time. If you’re a beat reporter, you should regularly check for lawsuits involving
the agencies, institutions or people you cover. No matter how good your paper’s courts
reporter is, he or she isn’t going to catch every filing that affects your beat.
If you’re profiling the new school board president, terror suspect, televangelist, animal
rights activist, dogcatcher – whoever – it might be good to know if he or she has ever
murdered anyone, or has a string of DUIs, or is a deadbeat with six ex-spouses and a
serious methamphetamine habit. All of that and more can be found in court records.
Why do I have to actually pull the file if I can get the basic information online?
For a lot of reasons, including that electronic records aren’t always accurate or up-to-date
and, hey, who needs a career-ending libel suit? It’s more likely, though, that you’ll miss
something really tasty buried in even the most seemingly innocuous of files. Divorce
cases often have valuable financial information collected for alimony or child-custody
determinations, not to mention the name and address of an ex-spouse who might be very
helpful to your story. A civil lawsuit might have adoption records, confidential
settlements or other crucial documents attached as exhibits – non-public records dropped
in your lap that you couldn’t have gotten through conventional channels. A bankruptcy
file might list dozens of people who are owed huge bucks by the guy you’re writing about
and are just dying to dish on him. A criminal case can reveal important details about your
subject’s past and character.

OK, I’m sold. So how does it work?
• Look up all of the civil and criminal cases involving your subject and then request
the files, including exhibits.
• Read the files, copy pertinent portions and glean the names of all parties,
including lawyers, witnesses, investigators, medical experts and anyone else you
might interview to flesh out your story.
• In civil suits, always ask lawyers for both sides to share depositions and other
discovery materials that weren’t filed with the court. Depositions often are rife
with details, background information and quotable testimony.

•
•
•
•

In criminal cases, make sure you get the specifics on charges filed, disposition of
the case and sentence imposed. Check with Corrections Department to see how
much time was actually served.
In both civil and criminal cases, check for the outcome of appeals.
Be persistent in the pursuit of files: if the clerk says the one you’re after is in a
judge’s chamber, go talk to his or her clerk about seeing it.
Find out how search warrants are filed in your county court and learn how to use
them. Ditto for federal search warrants.

So what do I do with this big ol’ stack of paper, anyhow?
Here a few tips that apply not only to court records but to just about any documents you
gather for a story.
• Keep your copies clean. Don’t mark them up with lots of underlining or exclamation
points or comments such as “WE’VE REALLY GOT THE BASTARD NOW!”
because you just might end up having to show them to the bastard during an
interview.
• Organize your documents; put them in binders or file folders or scan them into your
computer and keep the originals in a safe place. Whatever your method, you’ll need
to be able to put your hands on them in a hurry when it comes time to edit and fact
check your story.
• Summon your logic as you read records because it’s often a connect-the-dots process.
Bear in mind as you go along that this document might lead you to another and that
one to another, etc., until you’ve got the whole picture.
• Make sure the records say what you think they say. If you’re not sure, find someone
who can help you decipher them.
• Don’t think of records as an end unto themselves, but rather as a road map to where
you need to go. Rarely will you find the Rosetta Stone, the proverbial smoking gun,
the one perfect document that makes your story. More often than not, it’s a matter of
putting the pieces together from a variety of records – and talking to real, live people.
• Always have money or a checkbook for copies, and bring a tape recorder: If you’re
scrambling to get through a file before the courthouse closes, it’s a lot easier to dictate
what’s on the document, and transcribe it later, than it is to take notes.

