How to do a story using social network analysis
(Panel: Visualizing relationships: The potential of social network analysis to track influence and power)
Hand-out by
Journalist Kaare Gotfredsen
Danske Kommuner (a Danish magazine)
Weidekampsgade 10, DK-2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark
Email: kag@kl.dk, website: www.dk.kl.dk
Member of IRENE (Investigative Reporters Network Europe)
Website: www.investigative-reporters.net

Keep it simple, it’s complex enough already:
1. Select a limited group of people to research. If you start investigating the networks of too
many people, you will never finish.
2. Define which networks you want too include. Do family ties count? High school friends?
Drinking buddies? I only accepted formal networks - membership of formal political,
professional or social networks. First of all it’s easier to research, secondly it’s harder to
deny these ties.
3. Get to know a program that can analyze social networks, for example UCINET. Try doing
different calculations and see what happens. Just for fun.
4. Put the data into the program. Don’t despair when you see the visual result of your data as a
hairball. Try excluding the unimportant people to make the hairball less dense.
5. Have the program do the simple calculations of degree centrality, closeness and
betweenness. Do the story based on these results.
6. Illustrate the story with the networks of the most central persons, not the whole network
(nobody can conclude anything from the hairball)
Degree centrality: Shows how many other people in the network an individual knows. The higher
the number, the more central a person is. A person with a high degree centrality is theoretically
“where it happens” in a network.
Closeness: Shows how fast a person can get into contact with the whole network. A high score here
indicates that a person is in a good position to monitor the flow of information in the network.
Betweenness: Shows to what degree a person is placed as a gatekeeper between two subgroups in
the network. A high betweenness gives a person a great power over what flows through the
network.

CAR-conference 2004 in Cincinnati

