Networks for the Newsroom
Putting Social Network Analysis to use

Cincinnati 2004
Jaimi Dowdell IRE and NICAR
Jaimi@nicar.org
You’ve heard it many times: It’s not what you know, but who you know that makes all
the difference. Used as a reporting tool, social network analysis can help investigative reporters
test the validity of this phrase. Analyzing relationships in your community can help you see how
connections can translate into avenues of communication and possible sources of power for
individuals within the network.
But just like other methods of computer-assisted reporting, social network analysis is just
a tool. It isn’t going to tell you the whole story, but used as a reporting tip it can be a great place
to start. By seeing relationships in new ways you might uncover possibilities within your
investigation that you never imagined.
The real question you might have about social network analysis probably doesn’t involve
software. What you’re probably wondering right now is how you can make all of these nodes and
lines work for you and your newsroom. What if you don’t live in a big city and the most powerful
board members in your community belong to the local school district? One of the wonderful
things about social network analysis is that it can be tailored to suit many projects. Here are some
ideas for just about any beat in all types of communities:
•

Local government power—which city council members are connected to others outside
of government via business or organizations? How might these relationships affect
important decisions being made in your community?

•

Campaign contributions—which candidates are getting all of the money and from
whom? Are there special interests that the donors are trying to promote? Are there any
political action committees in your community? How is everyone involved?

•

Crime—criminologists have used social network analysis to track the criminals at the
heart of many problems within inner cities. Police can then take that information to target
the sources of the problems.

1

•

Public health—Researchers have used this method to track the spread of HIV and
SARS. Reporters could look at the spread of West Nile and other diseases throughout the
nation.

•

Contracts and bids—Who is getting public money for performing services in your
community? Who are the winners and losers in the contract game? Are there any
connections between local businesses and government officials that might have an
influence on which companies are awarded contracts? How is the public being served
through this process?
Another bonus of social network analysis is many of the sources of information you

might use to build models of networks are already public records. Here are some document
sources that might help you build a network:
•

Local Government Web sites—Usually these will list members of city council, board of
adjustment, planning and zoning, etc.

•

Secretary of state corporate filings (state level)—Find out what companies and
nonprofit organizations and individual is a registered agent for. If you already know the
names of businesses an individual is involved with, find out who are the organizers and
board of directors.

•

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Filings—Corporate 10-K filings list the
board of directors. Find the filings online at http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml

•

Form 990s—Nonprofits are required to list their board of directors. Many highlyinvolved individuals in your community will turn up on these lists. Find filings online at
www.guidestar.org

•

Newspaper Archives—Search for an individuals’ name in electronic newspaper
archives. Some researchers have used the “society” sections of newspapers to conduct an
analysis on community involvement.

•

Corporate Web sites—Publicly traded companies list board of directors and top-level
executives on their Web sites.

2

•

Property Records—Help to uncover who a person is doing business with and under
what names.

•

Court Records—When researching a business or individual, these records can help you
uncover which business deals have gone sour and who is strongly connected to an
individual.

When analyzing networks, remember that your results will only be as good as the data and
information you collect. While there is a lot of public information available that will help you
build network models, in most cases you’ll be the one who has to find it and compile it. Be sure
to exhaust your sources and double check your information.
These are just a few ideas that might help you get started with social network analysis. If you
don’t limit yourself, you just might find that the possibilities are endless.

3

