Investigating Health Care: How to Find Out What’s Going On Inside
IRE Better Watchdog Workshop, Fullerton, CA - 2/7/04
Tracy Weber, Los Angeles Times
tracy.weber@latimes.com, 213-237-4628
Public health is one of the richest, and often most unexplored,
areas of reporting. Beyond the stories of heroic life-saving efforts or the
latest strain of flu are mountains of public records that reveal
devastating tales of negligence, medical mayhem and the effects of costcutting on patient care. These records can, with limitations, tell you if
nurses at a local hospital care for too many patients, follow doctors’
orders or even meet basic competency standards. They can tell you if the
floors are dirty or the medical records are in disarray or if a patient has
been left to bleed to death in the lobby. They can help you show readers
how a medical misstep unraveled a family’s life.
Here are some sources of local and national public records—
certainly not all--that can help you get inside the health care system.
Source: California Department of Health Services, Licensing and
Certification Division (similar agencies exist in other states)
(www.dhs.ca.gov)
What it does: Licenses and inspects public and private hospitals and
nursing homes; investigates complaints involving deficiencies of safety
and health standards.
What it does NOT do: Examine the care provided by doctors.
Records: State inspectors do both full institutional surveys and narrow
investigations based on complaints. Once an inspection is complete, the
hospital or nursing home is given a report detailing the problems found.
The institution then files a “plan of correction,” which often is as
interesting as the inspection findings. Make sure the copy you get
includes the facility response.
How they’re kept: The inspection reports are kept in regional offices by
the name of the institution. You can look through them there (and make
copies with your personal copier) or request a specific copy via public
records request.
What to look for: The reports encompass everything from nursing
shortages and broken chairs to negligent death. A review of several years
can show patterns of medication errors or nursing lapses etc. or
highlight one horrific case. Note: If someone dies, these reports
sometimes (irritatingly) leave it out.
What else: If you find a report that interests you, file a public records
request for the back-up investigative notes, an often blunt and detailed
account of what went wrong.
Fines: Nursing homes in California can be fined for violations (but not
hospitals). The state keeps these numbers, but also check with

calnhs.org which compiles lists of nursing homes fines, ownership
records etc.
Where to file requests or ask questions: Office of Public Affairs, P.O.
Box 942732, Sacramento, CA 94234, 916-440-7660
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers of
Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) (www.cms.hhs.gov)
What it does: Certifies that hospitals and nursing homes meet
standards to receive Medicare and Medicaid funding; uses state health
inspectors to investigate more substantive complaints; also investigates
whether hospitals illegally dump (uninsured) emergency room patients
on other hospitals before they’re stabilized (called EMTALA violations).
Records: Inspection reports, compiled by state inspectors, similar to
state reports. Reports of EMTALA violations. If CMS finds a hospital is
out of compliance it can threaten to withhold funding—which virtually
never, ever happens.
How they’re kept: You’ll typically need to file a public records request to
the regional office that encompasses your facility. The state regional
offices also often have copies.
What else: If the federal government orders up an inspection, the report
almost certainly is more serious. Often state inspectors will ask for the
more extensive review.
Where to write those record requests: San Francisco Regional Office,
4th Floor, 75 Hawthorne St., San Francisco, CA 94105 or through the
media affairs office at www.hhs.gov.
Other places to look:
For medical equipment screw-ups:
MAUDE – Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience database.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfMAUDE/search.cfm)
Records: Computerized data that shows reports of adverse events
(including deaths) involving medical devices, such as faulty cardiac
monitors, defective heart stents, etc. (note: these are “supposed” to be
reported…)
What to look for: The reports show interesting and dangerous trends,
but they also show when a doctor or a nurse simply didn’t know how to
use a product.
For adverse drug reactions: (www.fda.gov/cder/aers/default.htm)

Some places to check whether a doctor or nurse etc. has been in
trouble (these are California websites, but similar sites exist for
every state):

Medical of California (www.medbd.ca.gov)
Board of Registered Nursing (www.rn.ca.gov)
Board of Vocational Nursing and Psychiatric Technicians
(www.bvnpt.ca.gov)
California Board of Pharmacy (www.pharmacy.ca.gov)
Medicaid Exclusions/Sanctions Database
(http://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/exclusions/database.html)
Civil courts
Where to check the status of a teaching hospital’s training
programs:
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (www.acgme.org)

