From pawnshops to payday loans:
Investigating the poverty industry
2004 NICAR Conference, Cincinnati
Holly Hacker, IRE & NICAR – holly@nicar.org
“Anyone who has ever struggled with poverty knows how extremely expensive it is to
be poor.”
-- James Baldwin, Nobody Knows My Name, 1961
Payday loan stores, pawnshops, check-cashing outlets . . . Many poor and workingclass people turn to these businesses instead of conventional banks. Maybe they can’t
afford a bank account. They could have bad credit. They might need instant cash to
pay rent or bills. No matter the reason, these “fringe banks” charge excessive fees
that can trap customers in a muddle of debt. Some businesses are downright
predatory, charging hidden fees and using aggressive sales and collection tactics.
I looked into the poverty industry for a series by the Missourian on the lack of
affordable housing in Columbia, Mo. Most homes priced under $80,000 are clustered in
one area, and we wanted to show how that Columbia differs from the pleasant
college town that most readers know. Using ArcView 8.3, I mapped the locations of
payday lenders, pawnshops, check cashers and title lenders. Then I overlaid our
housing data, plus Census data on poverty and household income. Sure enough, the
poverty industry thrived near poor people and affordable homes. (I excluded areas
where at least half the residents were college students because they face a different,
temporary kind of poverty.)
To quantify the relationship between poor areas and payday lenders, I used a
statistical tool called logistic regression. It allowed me to predict, based on household
income and poverty rates, the likelihood of a neighborhood having at least one fringe
bank. In Columbia’s case, there’s a 7-percent chance for block groups with a median
income of $80,000, compared to a 46-percent chance with a median income of
$40,000, and a 73-percent chance with a median income of $20,000.
We also wanted to see what’s not in poor neighborhoods. I mapped banks and found
more in affluent areas, fewer in poor areas. The same pattern held for grocery stores.
Our series showed how Columbia has more social and economic disparities than folks
in this progressive (well, by Missouri standards) city would like to admit.
As for Missouri’s fringe banks, some lawmakers now want to place more restrictions
on payday lenders and the interest rates they charge.

Exploring the poverty industry
Fringe banks fall into several categories. Regulations and fees vary from state to
state, but here’s a general description of them:
Payday lenders – Typically, the customer writes a post-dated check and
receives a cash advance, minus a fee. Come payday, the customer can either
repay the loan or roll it over and pay more fees. One survey found that
payday lenders charge an average APR of 474% -- that works out to $36 on a
two-week loan of $200.
Check-cashing outlets – The customer cashes a check and receives the money,
minus a fee. Someone earning $12,000 a year would pay $250 in fees to cash
paychecks at check-cashing outlets, the Treasury Department found.
Title lenders – To get a loan, customers sign over the titles to their car. They
get to keep driving the car but may ultimately lose it when the fees and
interest rates get too high. Sometimes, the title lender sells the car at a
profit above and beyond the loan amount, but the customer gets nothing.
Tax refund anticipation lenders – Customers get a cash advance against their
income tax refunds. They pay as much as 300% APR when they could file
electronically and get their refund in 10 to 14 days, if they can wait that long.
Rent-to-own stores – Customers rent furniture by the week or month, with the
option to buy later. Stores mark up the merchandise up to 300 percent. If
customers don’t buy the items, the store can rent them to someone else and
rack in more money.
Pawnshops – Customers pawn their items and receive about half their value in
cash. They can pay the money back and reclaim the items. Otherwise, the
items get resold.
Subprime mortgage lenders – Homebuyers who don’t qualify for a
conventional home loan end up paying much higher interest for a subprime
loan.

Getting the data
•

See if your state regulates payday lenders, check-cashing outlets and the like.
If so, get a list of them. In Missouri, the Division of Finance regulates payday
and title lenders. The agency’s Web site contains PDF files with business names
and addresses, which can be coaxed into a spreadsheet or database. Missouri’s
pawnshops are regulated by the Division of Securities.

2

•

If your state doesn’t track fringe banks, check the Uniform Commercial Code
filings with your secretary of state to find out the banks from which banks
payday lenders and check-cashing outlets have gotten loans.

•

Research district court records to see if businesses have sued, or been sued by,
customers. This is a great way to find sources and examples of costly loans.

•

You can download an Excel file of subprime mortgage lenders from HUD at
http://www.huduser.org/datasets/pdrdatas.html That information can be
linked to Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data (available from NICAR at
http://www.nicar.org/data/frb/) to see which loan applications involve
subprime lenders.

•

Where are fringe banks located in relation to conventional banks? Download a
list of bank branch locations from the FDIC at
http://www.fdic.gov/quicklinks/analysts.html. Look under Summary of
Deposits.

•

To gauge how well conventional banks serve poor customers, look at
Community Reinvestment Act records, available at
http://www.ffiec.gov/cra/ratings/htm. Banks are evaluated to see if they
make loans and operate branches in low- and middle-income neighborhoods.
Nearly all banks get ratings of Outstanding or Satisfactory, which doesn’t make
for exciting analysis. More intriguing details lie in public CRA reports, called
Performance Evaluations. They show, by income level, the distribution of
loans, branches and ATMs in a bank’s coverage area. That information can be
compared to the economic makeup of the community, also in the reports.

•

Don’t forget to use Census data to help describe the areas where fringe banks
are (or aren’t) located.

Resources
Banking the Poor, by Michael Barr (July 2003)
www.brook.edu.es/urban/publications/20030715_barr.htm
Consumer Protection: Federal and State Agencies Face Challenges in Combating
Predatory Lending, from the U.S. General Accounting Office. Look up report GAO-04280 at www.gpoaccess.gov/gaoreports/index.html
Fringe Banking, by John P. Caskey (1994)

3

Merchants of Misery: How Corporate America Profits from Poverty, by Michael
Hudson (1996)
Show me the money! by Public Interest Research Group and the Consumer Federation
of America (Feb. 2000)
http://www.pirg.org/reports/consumer/payday/
Unequal Burden: Income and Racial Disparities in Subprime Lending in America, from
HUD (April 2000) www.huduser.org/publications/fairhsg/unequal.html
Mortgage Bankers Association
www.mbaa.org/resources/predlend/
Includes federal and state legislative updates on predatory lending.
Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN)
http://www.acorn.org/index.php?id=39
Has a section on predatory lending.
The Center for Responsible Lending
http://www.responsiblelending.org/
Based in Durham, NC.
Woodstock Institute
http://www.woodstockinst.org/predatory-lending.php
Community Financial Services Association
http://www.cfsa.net/
A trade group that represents payday lenders.
Financial Service Centers of America, formerly the National Check Cashers
Association.
Www.fisca.org
Represents check cashers and payday lenders.

4

