Tactical considerations when applying for
access to documents and data
By executive director Nils Mulvad, Dicar. nils.mulvad@dicar.dk

The rules are different – but similar way of working to get data in
countries
Many US journalists know how to work for data in US. We have experienced in Denmark that
the rules of access may be different round the world, but the methods for working are the
same. These advices are from Denmark, but we think it’s possible to use them in all countries.
Some of them need perhaps to be refined a little. I’ll be happy to hear suggestions.

What is the purpose of applying - consider
For example it can be:
1 A long-term case, which for principle reasons must be carried out.
2 Not concrete searching, but keeping an eye open.
3 A part of long term cooperation between a journalist and an authority - a single
document.
4 Alibi for public employees.

Visit homepages about media law
Many countries have web-sites on rules for access. In Denmark the media law’s homepage is
mediejura www.cfje.dk/mediejura (in Danish). Here you will find rules which contain examples
and advices. If you have questions or will ask for access make use of the media law experts in
your country.

Be curious
Always assume that you can get the data and documents. Don’t come up with reasons why
you should not be able to get them.

Find out how and where data are
Ask how the practical administration works, especially how they file standardized reports,
especially complaints and errors at the authority. Get an overview on how the IT-system
works. Design of the database is normally a part of the reporting to a committee of registers or
another legal body. Use all this to concretize an application.

Find out who they pass data on to
Often data has to be passed on to an authority on a higher level or to an archive. Ask for
access to these transactions.

Get to know someone inside
Talk to staff and employees who work with data. Talk about your project. Tell them their data
is interesting. Ask for advice on, what’s the data about and how should you write your
application. They might want to help.

Talk to the employees before you send the application

Tell the employees that you are happy if they help with the necessary information and access
to documents and data.
Be aware that your application often is handled by a legal person and not by a administrative
person.

Visit the authority
It is often an advantage to visit the authority to look on a case or certain documents. They
may have forgotten to remove an important document. You can also talk to the personal and
try to understand and get background-information. They often tell you exactly where the story
is. And it increases your chances to get good internal sources.

Accurate description
Make sure that your description of your application is accurate as possible, because it’s
handled by legal personal.
Read your application through the eyes of the authorities and find out if words can be
misunderstood.

Ask concrete and general
Make sure to be as precise as possible to describe cases and documents, but remember also to
ask for general access. Important documents might be posted as a parallel case or related
case. Ask also to get access to parts of documents as soon as it is ready to be sent. In that
way you do not need to wait until the full request is handled. Point out that the case is relevant
and urgent and that it is important for you to get the information as soon as possible.

Ask for lists of all documents in a case
Ask for lists of all documents in a case - including those which authorities consider internal.
This will give you an overview and you can try to get access to these documents. The lists of
documents also include dates.

Take care about lists of incoming and outgoing mail
An application on access to documents is sometimes posted on lists of incoming request to
public authorities in Denmark and also some other countries with access-laws. Other media
might find out what you are looking for. Therefore phone the authorities and suggest that they
do not put you on the list until you have received the documents. It will give you an
advantage.

Use these lists
On the other hand you can use these lists of incoming requests to public authorities to see
what colleagues apply for.

Apply for access to cases of access to documents
All documents which have been subject to an application have been carefully considered by
authorities. Therefore it might speed up the process if you apply for something, which already
have been applied for.

Ask for written rejection
It is more common today for authorities to send written rejections. Ask always for written
rejection since they can be used if complaints are to be sent.

Do not provoke
Ask only for access to documents and data you need. Be careful about big fishing-expeditions,
because they might create great resistance internally at the authorities. They give you and the
Press a reputation which does not make it easier to get documents in the future.
Write applications and complaints objectively and precisely. Consider it’s a legal matter and
not a political question.
For some authorities it’s not considered as a legal question, and a legal approach to them is
normally a big advantage.
On the other hand try to take principle cases to the Ombudsman or where such complains are
concluded legally in your country. Go only for what you consider as winners, because of the
precedence.

Be nice – but only to a certain degree
Give authorities time to handle the application. But respond immediately any time limit is
passed (for instance there is a ten-day rule in Denmark). And keep requesting, including
phoning, and remember to note down all your requests.
Tell the authorities that you need the documents or files to a story. Make it clear that you
often in your stories describe how you received the information by Freedom of Information and
a part of this is a description of the time spent on getting the information and how the
authority has acted in general.

