DOING CAR IN SMALL- AND MEDIUM-SIZED NEWSROOMS
By Laura Ayo
ayol@knews.com, 865-342-6341
News Sentinel, Knoxville, TN
2004 CAR Conference, Cincinnati
You don’t have to spend a lot of money to do computer-assisted reporting.
WHAT YOU NEED:
Some kind of spreadsheet software is all you really need to do many CAR stories.
- Microsoft Excel, Quattro Pro for Windows or Lotus 1-2-3
But database managers and online resources are often necessary.
- Microsoft Access, Microsoft FoxPro and Paradox for Windows
MySQL, OpenOffice/StarOffice offer spreadsheet applications and database capabilities
comparable to Microsoft’s products (often at a cheaper cost).
If you can afford it, mapping software and statistical software give you the ability to
produce more sophisticated stories using CAR.
- Mapping: ArcView, MapInfo or Maptitude
- Statistics: SPSS and SAS
Also good to have are:
- Text editors, such as Ultra Edit or Vedit, allow you to clean up and organize
data.
- Parsing software, such as ParseRat, allows you to break up or consolidate pieces
of data.
- Text organization/information management software, such as AskSam, allows
you to store, organize and search paper documents or notes.
- Adobe Aerial also allows you to convert “pdf” files to text files.
- Some kind of application to unzip compressed files is usually needed to
download data from the Web. Popular programs are WinZip, PKZip and
BitZipper.
HOW TO GET DATA WHEN MONEY IS TIGHT:
Use the Web. The Internet has tons of data that can be downloaded for free if you know
where to look. Web sites maintained by your local, state or federal governments often
have features that allow you to download what you’re looking for at no cost. Look for ftp
sites they maintain. Search government home pages with the phrases “downloadable
reports,” “statistics” or “downloadable data.” Try “www2” before your government’s
home page URL.

Know your state law. Know what they can charge you for and what they can’t. Always
argue that the data should be provided to you free of charge. But if they insist on charging
you, ask for an itemized invoice showing how they came up with the final cost. Then
haggle. To find out what your state’s law is, visit the Reporters Committee for Freedom
of the Press at http://www.rcfp.org/tapping/index.cgi?function=browse
Go elsewhere. Local data often has to be reported to the state. State data often has to be
reported to the feds. Find out who has to report what to whom.
Learn about forms. Find out what kinds of forms government agencies require patrons,
clients, vendors, etc. to fill out. The information filled out on those forms is almost
always entered into a database somewhere. By having the form, you’ll know what
information they have and then you’ll know how to ask for the data. Be sure to pay
attention to the form’s name or number.
Find out what you’re already getting. Many news organizations already get birth
announcements, marriage licenses, real estate transfers, new business licenses, building
permits, obituaries, jail logs and other information on a daily or weekly basis from the
agencies that maintain those records. Find out who gets that information in your
organization. If it’s already being provided in electronic format, have the source or the
person within your organization copy it for you. Then maintain those databases for future
use. If it’s being provided on paper and someone is entering the information by hand for
publication, try to negotiate with the source to start providing the information
electronically. They’re already giving it to you for publication, so that can’t be used as an
excuse. If they still balk, make the argument that not having to rewrite the information
eliminates errors.
Share. Consider asking another media outlet or news service to split the cost of the data.
Then make a copy of the data for them when you get it.
See who else already has it. Look to news services. Many have their own CAR reporters
who maintain databases for their subscribers at no extra cost. Find out if another media
outlet has done a similar or related story and ask if they’re willing to provide you with a
copy of the raw data. Check out the local university to see if a researcher obtained the
data for analysis. Then ask if they’d be willing to provide a copy of the underlying data.
The same approach can be taken with government agencies, particularly the chamber of
commerce or metropolitan planning commission.
Use IRE. NICAR maintains several searchable data sets that have already been cleaned
up for you. The costs are based on the size of your organization. For more information
about the available databases, visit http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/
Convince the editor. Convince your editor that obtaining the data is worth the cost. Show
him what you can do with it. Be specific and persistent. Giver her examples of stories
other papers have done with the same data. Then follow through.

Get other staffers on board. If an editor can see how more than one staffer will benefit
from the data, he/she might be more inclined to allow the purchase. Then, once you get
the database, figure out a way to get it on your Intranet or in your library so everyone in
the newsroom can use it.
HOW TO GET WHAT YOU NEED WHEN MONEY’S TIGHT (SOFTWARE):
Look in-house. People in other departments often use software you can use to do a CAR
project. See if they’ll let you use their computers when they’re in a meeting or before or
after work hours. If permissible, have a copy installed on your terminal.
Who Uses What
Accounting, Circulation, Human Resources – spreadsheets, database managers
Marketing – mapping software
Information Systems/Tech Services/Online – just about any program
Free trials. Take advantage of free trial versions offered by software companies. Thirtyday free trial versions are often long enough to complete a project. At a minimum, they
can be used to demonstrate to an editor that the software is worth the investment.
Make the argument. Show your editor how not having the software will cost him/her
more money in the long run than buying the program. In other words, convince the editor
you’ll be more efficient with the software than without it.
Look for “viewer” alternatives. Many programs have “viewer” versions that are free.
While you can’t manipulate data in many of these viewer applications, you don’t always
need to do any number crunching on your own for the story you’re working on.
HOW TO LEARN HOW TO USE THE SOFTWARE WHEN MONEY IS TIGHT:
Again, look in-house. Those same people in other departments that use software you’re
trying to learn obviously know how to use the applications. Ask them to give you a quick
tutorial of the software so you have an idea of what it can do. See if they’ll let you play
with the software when they’re in a meeting or before or after work hours. Keep their
phone numbers handy for help when you get stuck. In addition, the online department is
proficient at downloading data from the Web and importing it into spreadsheets or
database managers. Have them show you how it’s done. Find out who does in-house
training and sign up for the next course.
Go back to school. Most colleges and universities offer classes that teach basic, and often
advanced, spreadsheet and database skills. You’ll often find these classes in the personal
and professional development programs offered at major universities. Most courses are
one-day deals or a few hours each night over a few days. Some are held online and you
don’t even need to leave your work or home computer. The registration fees are usually
reasonable (<$200). Find out the instructor’s e-mail address/phone number and you’ll
have a local expert to contact when you need help. Be sure to ask whether your company
will foot the bill. Many will.

Befriend data crunchers. City and county governments have employees who maintain
government Web sites and databases. The same goes for colleges and universities.
Become their friends. Metropolitan planning commissions, the chamber of commerce,
government finance departments and census data centers often have the best data
crunchers in town and they usually know one another.
Surf the Web. There are many free software primers or tutorials on the Internet. A quick
search on Google or similar search engine will yield plenty of places to get the basics.
Seek peer advice. There’s no better source for how to do computer-assisted reporting than
fellow CAR reporters. The best way to link up with them is by joining one of the listservs
offered through IRE. It doesn’t cost anything to subscribe. You can unsubscribe any time
you want.
NICAR-L is the listserv dedicated to CAR.Visit
http://www.ire.org/membership/listserv.html to learn more about it or to subscribe.
Take a tip. IRE’s Resource Center is full of tip sheets like this one and links to helpful
resources. More times than not you’ll find the solution to the very problem you’re having.
Visit http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/ for more information.
Read. “Uplink,” NICAR’s bimonthly newsletter about CAR, is a must-read. Head to the
library or see if your tech people have user-guide books for the programs you’re using. At
the least, they’ll help you troubleshoot. Books about CAR by reporters who do CAR are
also a wealth of information.
Get formal training. If you can afford it, attend one of the boot camps, training seminars
or conferences offered through IRE.
DOING CAR:
Always think CAR. Ask yourself if there’s data available that can make the story you’re
working on even better. Review the daily budgets and planned projects to see how CAR
might enhance the stories already being done.
Educate the staff. Conduct a brown-bag session to explain to the staff what CAR is and,
more importantly, what it isn’t. Offer your assistance in teaching others the skills they
need to do CAR on their own. Have them ask for data in electronic format, rather than
paper, when they’re already asking for information from their beat sources. That way you
can build your database library.
Make time for CAR. In today’s day and age, bodies in the newsroom are few and far
between. Editors are seemingly more interested in having meetings covered and daily
deadlines met. But CAR doesn’t have to take a lot of time. It can be done on deadline if
you know where to look and have a database library on hand. Use your down time (I
know, ha, ha) to read about CAR, talk with others who do CAR and incorporate CAR
into your everyday routine.

