Twelve Easy Census Pieces
National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
Cincinnati, Ohio
March 11-14, 2004
There may still be a few stories from the 2000 Census, but it’s safe to say that editor
interest in the subject is rapidly approaching endgame. Does this mean it’s time to start
talking about 2010? Not for another five or six years.
Time to begin praying that your editor hasn’t been paying attention to budget issues and
doesn’t know that full funding for the American Community Survey isn’t a done deal?
No more so than usual.
Time to explore other career options? Let’s hope not.
Instead, it’s time to look at the data put out on a regular basis by the Census Bureau. They
may be based on the decennial Census, but they’re regularly updated, and these numbers
generally qualify as news.
Here is a list of a dozen data releases from the Census Bureau during 2003 that you can
reasonably expect to see on a recurring basis. The releases are taken directly from the
bureau’s tip sheets, which can be found at www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/tip.html

County Population Estimates and Rankings: 2002 — Internet tables showing July 1,
2002, population estimates, rankings and components of change for the nation's 3,141
counties. (Tentatively scheduled for release the week of March 16.)
2001 Public Education Finances — Internet tables with revenues, expenditures, debt
and financial assets for individual, public elementary and secondary school systems.
Also, state rankings of revenues and expenditures per pupil. (Scheduled for release March
11.)
2001 County Business Patterns — Data for states and counties on business
establishments, employment and payroll broken down by the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) for major economic areas, such as construction,
manufacturing, retail trade, services and wholesale trade. (Tentatively scheduled for
release the week of March 30.)
2001 State Government Finances — Detailed revenue by type and source, such as
taxes, charges and federal aid; expenditures by function (e.g., police, fire and education);
and cash and security holdings for the nation and states and other levels of government.
(Tentatively scheduled for release the week of April 13.)
2002 State Tax Collections — Tax collections by category, such as severance taxes,
occupation and business licenses, individual income taxes, general sales taxes and

property taxes, for the nation and states. (Tentatively scheduled for release the week of
April 13).
Consolidated Federal Funds Report for Fiscal Year 2002 (State and County Areas)
— This report is the only consolidated source of state and local area data on the majority
of direct federal expenditures, as well as data on federal loan and insurance programs.
(Tentatively scheduled for release the week of May 4.)
Estimates of State Populations by Age, Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin: July 1, 2002
— Population estimates for states by these demographic characteristics. First such
estimates for states since Census 2000. (Tentatively scheduled for release the week of
Aug. 24.)
Estimates of County Populations by Age, Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin: July 1,
2002 -- First such estimates for counties since Census 2000. (Tentatively scheduled for
release the week of Sept. 7.)
Income and Poverty in the United States: 2002 — Separate reports providing the latest
national and state findings on income and poverty levels. (Scheduled for release on Sept.
26.)
Health Insurance Coverage: 2002 — Annual report on those who have health insurance
and those who do not and their characteristics. National and state data. (Scheduled for
release on Sept. 30.)
Survey of Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates: 2000 — Estimates of median
household income and poverty for the 50 states and the District of Columbia, and each of
the 3,140 counties. Included are estimates of poor children under 18 and poor children
ages 5-17 who are related to the householder. (Tentatively scheduled for release the week
of Oct. 26.)
2002 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Employment and Payroll —
Summary data on the number of employees and gross payrolls by government function,
for the nation, states and District of Columbia. (Tentatively scheduled for release the
week of Nov. 9).
As always, please feel free to contact your local AP bureau with questions.
Frank Bass
Director, Computer-Assisted Reporting
The Associated Press
fbass@ap.org

