Making CAR stories bulletproof
REPORTING & WRITING
Doug Haddix, projects editor
The Columbus Dispatch ( www.dispatch.com )
dhaddix@dispatch.com or (614) 461-5082

NICAR conference
Cincinnati
March 2004

With thanks to the Dispatch staff for providing tips and examples.

REPORTING
•

Do your homework. Thorough research, background reading, and
brainstorming with colleagues and sources will make your story thorough and
less likely to be attacked for incompleteness, bias or inaccuracy.

•

Build an accurate timeline / chronology. Note the source(s) for each
entry. Be careful, particularly with sensitive material, that's taken exclusively from
past clips – especially if it came from a single story.

•

Find authoritative sources. Make sure that experts are respected in their
field and free from institutional biases or conflicts.

•

Minimize or avoid unnamed sources. Of course, there are exceptions, but
they should be rare. Aim to have everything you write backed up by multiple
independent sources and/or documents.

•

Be a pest. If you don’t fully understand something, call the source again. Ask
different sources to explain the same thing. You need to be able to clearly and
concisely explain complex systems or situations to readers. “I may seem like a
pest by the end of it all, but I believe sources prefer accuracy even if they’re
annoyed,” one Dispatch reporter said.

•

Understand the data work. Even if someone else does the data analysis, you
still are responsible for your story. Make sure you understand the data, the
analysis, the limitations and the gaps. Look through the raw data for oddities that
might be red flags. As one Dispatch reporter noted of a colleague who had
analyzed data for a story: “Despite trusting him, I still went to great lengths to
understand exactly what he had done and what the data represents, to the point
where I’m sure he’s sick of me questioning how he did it. I just figure that my
name’s going on this, and I need to understand it.”

•

Corroborate, corroborate, corroborate. Ask sources for documents or
other people who can corroborate key information they pass along. This doesn't
necessarily have to be “official” documents. It could be notes in a personal
calendar, an e-mail, photograph, restaurant receipt or other bit of evidence. In the
absence of any tangible evidence, ask the source how he knows what he
purports to know.

•

Work early on graphics. After you’ve made your key findings, put together
graphic requests as soon as possible. Make sure the numbers/analysis are
bulletproof early in the process. Do spot checks with a calculator. Look for toogood-to-be-true examples because they might be just that. Ask colleagues to
verify your analysis, check your Excel formulas, and examine your Access
queries. By the time you’re close to publication, you’ll have less time and energy
to triple-check key data findings.

•

Share key findings and charts with sources. You’ll need their comments
anyway, so give the sources time to digest the findings. See if they can poke
holes in your methodology or findings. Better for them to criticize before
publication than after the story’s in print.

•

Schedule confrontational interviews sooner rather than later. Waiting
until a few days before publication can create major headaches, especially if the
target of your investigation cannot be reached or attacks the whole premise or
foundation of your story. Competitive pressures and the possibility of leaks or
public counterattacks have to be weighed case by case in each market.

•

Identify the best “real people” through the data. CAR stories need
people whose experiences reflect the key findings of the analysis. Find the
person who had the most DUI convictions without going to jail. Find the parents
of a child killed at the most dangerous crosswalk in your city. Find the person
whose house is the most over-assessed or under-assessed in your county for
property-tax purposes.

WRITING
•

Be realistic about the time you need to write and the time needed for
editing. A CAR story is no place for a rush job. That’s a recipe for a correction
or retraction or worse (lawsuit).

•

Explain your sources’ credentials. Rather than writing that someone is a
leading expert on forensics, weave into your story that she has studied the topic
for 20 years and written two textbooks used in universities across the country.

•

Check key quotes. If you have any doubts, call the source back and verify the
quote. Sometimes, you end up getting a better quote when the source tells you
“what I really meant to say was…”

•

Trust your gut. Examine sweeping statements and conclusions in your story.
Avoid overdoing it, reaching a bit too far than the facts/data allow. As you write,
keep asking yourself: “What do I know, and how do I know it?” Keep asking that
throughout the editing process. As one reporter noted: “If anything is nagging at
your gut when you go home, you need to check or fix it now. Don’t let an editor’s
hyped lede or headline throw off the tone of the story as far as accuracy.”

•

Share rough drafts with people whose judgment you trust. Maybe it’s
your spouse, a close friend outside the newsroom or trusted colleagues. Ask
them to put themselves in the place of the target of the story. Ask them to punch
holes in your story. That will help identify areas that need shoring up.

