THREAT OR MENACE?
SOME QUICK THOUGHTS AND IDEAS FOR THOSE NEW TO SPREADSHEETS
Christopher H. Schmitt
San Jose Mercury News

-

RELAX, YOU'VE ALREADY DONE IT WITHOUT EVEN KNOWING IT. If
you've ever scribbled out rows and columns of figures on a notepad, you've made a
spreadsheet. Because that's all one is: a grid of rows and calumns.
TfIE POWER IS IN THE AUTOMATION. What do you do with those rows and
columns? You might do calculations on them, like adding a column or taking an average of a
group of values. You might categorize or sort them, putting related items into groups or
arranging entries in alphabetical or numerical order. The neat thing about a spreadsheet is
that it handles rinything like this you'd want to do to your rows and columns only far
faster and more accurately than you'll ever be able to. Functions like these are among the
spreadsheet's most popular capabilities.

-

BUT WAIT, THERE'S MORE! Sorts and calculations, powerful and attractive as they
may be, don't begin to tell the story of what you can do. Among many other things, you
can:
8

Do sophisticated mathematics, forecasts and modeling.
Use pre-programmed formulas to automate tasks or handle advanced operations.
Take textual information and insert it into a spreadsheet for easy analysis.
Quickly and easily graph material for visual analysis.

mIF
I CAN DO THIS, SHOULDN'T I BE ABLE TO...?" If you're like many users,
mastering basic functions will naturally lead you to thinking about what more advanced jobs
a spreadsheet can do to make your life easier. The good news: The spreadsheet will virtually
neva let you down. As your vision expands, the spreadsheet will more than likely be able to
handk that next task on your mind.

HOW MUCH WOULD YOU PAY NOW?! Besides mathematical and analytical
functions, today's spreadsheets also offer powerful graphics capabilities for you to present
your work. Typically, reporters and editors rely on artists to prepare material for final
publication, but the ability to quickly create professionalquality graphics can be useful if,
say, you need to present information to editors or sources.

