Investigating UN
Steve Stecklow, Senior Special Writer, Wall Street Journal, steve.stecklow@wsj.com
For two of the last three years, my New York-based partner, Alix Freedman, and I
have investigated parts of the United Nations. Last year, we wrote a series of stories on
how Saddam Hussein, with the tacit help of multinational corporations, profited from
U.N. economic sanctions that were meant to punish him. Those stories were a finalist this
year for the Pulitzer Prize in international reporting.
In 2000, we wrote “Bottled Up: As UNICEF Battles Baby-Formula Makers,
African Infants Sicken,” a seven-month probe of the children’s agency that won three
awards. The story explained why, unlike in the West, HIV-infected women in sub-Sahara
Africa aren’t told that infant formula is an alternative to breast-feeding that could help
protect babies from AIDS.
These stories involved months of painstaking digging to penetrate a highly
secretive bureacracy. While the U.N. employs a small army of p.r. people and issues
countless reports, most internal U.N. documents and contracts are treated as confidential.
Here are some tips for investigating the U.N. and its many agencies:
1. Former employees: In nearly every investigation I’ve ever done, I’ve found
that former employees are often the best sources. They can provide invaluable
information, insight and quite often, internal documents. The United Nations
has literally thousands of employees, so it’s not very difficult to track down
former staffers.
2. U.N. Missions: Members U.N. countries maintain “permanent missions” in
New York and, in many cases, Geneva for diplomats and other staff (see
www.un.int). These people can provide an inside view on U.N. goings-on, and
often are freer to talk, usually on background, than U.N. employees. They also
may have access to internal U.N. records. We’ve found it’s best to contact as
many missions as possible as it’s often surprising—despite their public
postures--which ones are willing to cooperate, and which ones aren’t, on
particular issues.
3. Internet: The U.N., beginning with www.un.org, runs an extensive, multilingual web site for its agencies, and includes many reports, press releases,
statistical information, etc. It’s an excellent starting point. To track down
former employees who live in the U.S., www.infospace.com is useful, as well
as, of course, Google are valuable tools.
4. Interviews: Face time is always preferable to phone interviews for virtually
any story, but is especially so when it comes to the U.N. Despite the existence
of countless p.r. people, many agencies will allow employees to be
interviewed, often without a minder present. It’s also usually possible to
telephone employees directly and either interview them on the phone or set up
meeting. Face time allows you to gain people’s trust and also helps when, for
example, English isn’t a person’s first language.

