Schools: Teachers, Contracts and Discipline
Brad Heath / The Detroit News
bheath@detnews.com
Money and public schools
In 2001, America’s public schools got more than $400 billion a year from taxpayers. But do you know
where the money goes?
How much is actually spent in the classroom? How much pays for sports and benefits? Are some schools
grossly inefficient? How much is being spent on education management companies that run public
schools for profit? And why is public education so much more expensive than it used to be? It’s not hard
to find out.
Where to start
Every state keeps different records to track school finance. But you can get some ideas for researching
school finances using data readily available on the Internet:
Arizona State University Education Policy Research Unit
http://www.asu.edu/educ/epsl/EPRU/
ASU publishes a yearly report tracking for-profit management of public education, both in charter schools
and traditional public schools. The ASU report profiles education management organizations and
identifies which schools they run, though the list is not always complete. It also discusses trends ranging
from concentration of ownership to the availability of venture capital.
National Center for Education Statistics
http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/schoolsearch/
NCES provides basic financial and performance information on school districts nationwide, including a
basic breakdown of their revenues and their spending. These figures can offer a starting point for
comparing financial information among schools, though you’ll want to look also at data reported to your
state education department, which should be more timely and more detailed.
U.S. Census Bureau
http://www.census.gov/govs/www/school.html
The Census Bureau also offers summary financial information for public elementary and secondary
school districts. The census database gives finer details than the NCES reports, breaking out more
categories of revenue and spending and allowing you to look at, for instance, how much schools spend on
benefits, adult education, construction or administrative salaries. There’s also a category for payments by
school districts to charter schools, though not all states fund their charter schools in this way. The figures
are typically reported to the Census Bureau by the states. A few words of caution are in order, however.
Some records are adjusted by the Census Bureau (they’re flagged in the database). Also, the data now
cover only up to 2001, though they do go back as far as 1992, making some comparisons over time
possible.
State education departments
Your state’s education department will likely have the most complete and current financial information.
Some states make all or some of this information available on the Internet. (Michigan’s Bulletin 1014, a
per-student compilation of basic financial information, is available at
http://www.michigan.gov/mde/0,1607,7-140-5235_6539-21514--,00.html.) Other records are typically

available upon request. New York, for instance, can readily provide spreadsheets on school spending. In
addition, many education departments require audited financial statements from schools, which are open
to public inspection.
What to look for
The financial reports offer a wealth of good stories, and the permutations of how you can stick them
together to analyze them are nearly limitless. Want to know which school spends the most on sports? Or
which has seen the biggest increase in the cost of employee benefits? What about how much is paid to a
for-profit management company? The list goes on. But here are a few that are worth looking at to start:
Who gets the money? Increasingly, public schools are being run by for-profit education
management organizations called EMOs. The companies have been around for years, usually
contracting to run failing city schools. But the growth of charter schools has led to explosive
growth in the industry. It’s not uncommon for the companies to take a school’s entire revenue as
its fee and keep what’s left over after expenses as its profit. Look especially at how the
management contracts are set up – many companies own the schoolhouse, the chairs and
everything else and lease it all back to the charter’s board, a practice that’s been questioned
repeatedly by auditors.
Does the money buy results? That’s usually a tricky question – it gets you back to the question of
how to measure in schools at all – but sometimes it’s obvious. In Michigan, the News found six
management companies with educational records among the state’s worst still getting more than
$120 million a year in state money. You can also look at spending using a performance cost index
like the one developed by Standard & Poors (http://www.ses.standardandpoors.com/), which
measures the link between spending and performance.
Where is the money spent? Some schools put a lot more money into the classroom than others.
That usually, but not always, makes a difference in improving test scores, etc. Others spend more
on administration, transportation and sports. Most school finance data make it relatively easy to
compare how schools slice up budgets.
How has that spending changed? Most schools get more money now than they did a decade ago,
even in light of lean state budgets nationwide. How have they spent the new money?
Keep in mind …
A few words of caution are in order if you’re thinking about an analysis of school spending. First, keep in
mind that however uniform the data may appear, reporting can be inconsistent and there aren’t always
clear accounting standards. Every state may report its figures slightly differently. Even within states,
there is often a lack of standardized reporting (Michigan is among them). For instance, one school district
might classify the salary it pays a teachers’ aide as an instructional cost while another might classify it as
staff support. You have to figure out how these numbers were reported and interpret them with caution.

