Databases and the War on Terror
National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
Cincinnati, Ohio
March 11-14, 2004
As is the case on many beats, the best databases on the terror beat are hidden,
inaccessible or just plain difficult to dig up. Still, a thoughtful reporter can use several
databases to develop or add depth to stories about terrorism and the US war on terror in
general. Here’s a small sampler:
1. The 2000 Census. The data are becoming somewhat old, but there are a number
of opportunities for adding depth to the story. The Summary File 3 (SF3) set from
the 2000 Census, released in summer 2002, can help on a couple of fronts:
a.

b.

Military veterans or current military personnel. Obviously, the number
of military veterans and/or service personnel living in an area changes.
Still, these numbers represent an opportunity to look at veterans from
different eras, such as World War II or the first Persian Gulf War, and to
get a glimpse of their neighborhoods.
Ancestry. Certainly most editors are going to want to know where the
most Arab-Americans live. There’s more, though. You can use the SF3
set to look at different ancestries. Almost 25,000 people of Afghan
ancestry, for example, live in California. Who knew? More than 1,600
people of Basque ancestry live in Colorado. And two people of
Carpatho-Rusyn ancestry make their home in Windham County,
Vermont.

The Summary File 4 set from the 2000 Census, released in summer 2003, has
even more options. Instead of being able to find out how many veterans live in an
area, you can find out how many single-parent households headed by veterans
live in a given area. You can find out the median age and income of LebaneseAmericans in Brooklyn, or just about anything else you could find out from the
SF3 set – except you can do it for any one of several hundred ancestral groups.
The Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) release, which occurred this last fall,
can be useful in certain circumstances. The PUMS data allows you to crosstab
SF4 data. So now, you can look at the median income of Lebanese-Americans in
Brooklyn by occupation, if you’re so inclined.
A word of warning about dealing with PUMS: The sample sizes are very, very
small, so the margins of error generally are very, very large. The AP has done
some work with the PUMS data, but as a general rule, it’s not terrifically useful as
a precision tool, and again, it suffers from being fairly old.

To dig up information from the SF3 and/or SF4 releases, I’d suggest using the
Census Bureau’s American Factfinder (factfinder.census.gov). For PUMS data,
the best resource is the ipums.org site, operated by the University of Minnesota.
Be advised, though, that while you can play with these numbers in Access or
Excel, you really want something a little more industrial-strength, such as SAS or
SPSS.
There is also a potential wealth of information available through the Census
Bureau’s American Community Survey, its projected successor to the decennial
Census long form. For now, however, the survey remains only partially funded,
and it will be several years before it’s possible to get fine-grained information for
smaller geographies.
2. The Associated Press. The world’s largest newsgathering organization has begun
collecting data and posting it on the Web for its members. Here are a fe w of our
more useful resources:
a.

We continue to maintain an online database of victims from the Sept. 11
attacks in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania. The database,
which was developed in the days after the attacks, is now probably used
primarily as a jumping-off point for reporters seeking comment from
families on the war on terrorism.

b.

The AP also maintains a database of soldiers killed during the war in
Iraq. With the first anniversary of the war fast approaching, it’s a very
useful resource that offers multiple search options, as well as highresolution photos. Because of difficulties with the Pentagon’s method of
accounting for injuries, though, we do not have access to those names.

c.

Until November, The AP had kept a database of reserve mobilizations
that was updated weekly. The Army, however, decided that releasing
the information to the public posed a risk to operational security, and it
has stopped giving out that information. Other branches, however,
continue to provide the information at www.defenselink.mil/releases.

Should you have any ideas for web sites, please contact your local AP bureau
chief. He or she will forward the idea to the appropriate staff.
3. NICAR Resources. Two important databases can be obtained from NICAR: The
organization keeps a database of all federal contracts that has proven useful in the
past and should continue to be a prime source of information about where tax
dollars are going. Next year’s database, for example, sho uld provide the first good
look at Department of Homeland Security contracts (DHS, a consolidation of
many federal security agencies, was formally established by legislation in
November 2002).

Another excellent method for tracking the flow of tax dollars comes from the
Census Bureau. The Consolidated Federal Funds Report shows spending by
geographic area by federal program. While it’s much broader in scope than the
federal contracts database, it’s much more useful in looking at geographies. As a
rule, the CFFR data will show you where the money is going; the federal
contracts database will show you who’s getting it.
When following the money trail, don’t forget the inspector general’s office. While
their effectiveness varies from department to department, they can be an excellent
resource for ferreting out government waste and corruption. Check agency web
sites for links to the IG offices and read their reports. They issue a semiannual
report to Congress; most investigative reporters will tell you it’s the journalist’s
equivalent of a Christmas catalog. If their reports aren’t available online, they can
generally be obtained through the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). In
many cases, you can FOIA for supporting materials that were used in the
investigation but didn’t quite make it into the final report.
NICAR also has a wealth of other resources that may prove useful in future
attacks, such as a database of hazardous materials incidents, the FAA airmen
directory, a census of all trucks weighing more than 10,000 pounds, boat
registration and federally licensed firearms dealers.
For a general description, go to www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/index.html.
4. Immigration. The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), which was
absorbed into the Department of Homeland Security and is now part of the
Directorate of Border and Transportation Security, can be a source of worthwhile
data. It’s extremely difficult to get specifics, but the INS keeps databases showing
where most people who are deported go; how many people from different
countries enter the United States on work or tourist visas; and which companies
sponsor foreign workers (by occupation) under the H1-B visa program.
Be warned: This agency can be extremely frustrating when it comes to obtaining
data. With patience and a tremendous amount of perseverance – as well as a bit of
help from well-placed FOIAs – the struggle can be worth it.
5. Transportation Security Administration (TSA). Because of the nature of the
Sept. 11 attacks, the TSA has been extremely leery of releasing information. The
last enforcement database from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), a
predecessor organization, was released in summer 2001, and TSA shows little
signs of releasing that information any time soon.
Despite its reluctance to provide specific safety data, there does seem to be the
hint of a thaw on the horizon. Several organizations seeking a database of fines
levied against people who knowingly or unknowingly carry prohibited items
aboard US flights have been encouraged to file FOIAs for the information. And

the agency continues to make records of airspace incursions available to the
media; The AP used the incursion records shortly after Sept. 11 to show that
while planes routinely fly through prohibited airspace, such as the White House
and surrounding area, the average penalty was considerably less than a parking
ticket in the nation’s capital.
6. National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). It’s an intimidating
source of data, simply because of the volume of records that are held, but can reap
benefits. The AP has been collecting a database of more than 100 million veterans
over the past two years. While service numbers or unique identifiers aren’t
available, the NARA database allows The AP to rapidly narrow down potential
record locations at the National Military Personnel Records Center in St. Louis.
The AP will also be evaluating a NARA database showing details about nearly 2
million buildings (including mines, caves, subways, etc.) that could be used to
protect the population against nuclear attack and/or care from the effects of “a
natural or technological” disaster.
Finally, the Department of Veterans Affairs maintains a database of all
individuals buried in national military cemeteries. The department is in the
process of verifying its records, which could take several years. The VA database
also doesn’t include Arlington National Cemetery, which, along with Soldiers
Home National Cemetery, are administered by the Department of the Army. For
more information about obtaining copies of the VA records, go to the FOIA page
at www.cem.va.gov. You can obtain a CD with a “verified” list and another CD
with an “unverified” list rather easily.

Please don’t hesitate to contact The AP with any questions.
Frank Bass
Director, Computer-Assisted Reporting
The Associated Press
fbass@ap.org

