American FactFinder:
A beginner’s guide to getting
just a little local census data
Revised and updated for NICAR National Conference
Cincinnati, March 11-14, 2004
(originally prepared for NICAR National Conference, Philadelphia, March 14-17, 2002)

Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427
How does a beginner with just a browser and a spreadsheet keep from drowning in oceans of census data? One
way is American FactFinder, the Census Bureau’s data dissemination site. After a long, clumsy development stage,
it has steadily improved. It offers so much – and several ways of finding it -- that it takes a little work to learn the
navigation. But it’s now pretty simple to drill down to a small area, extract just a little data and download or print it.
Here’s a step-by-step guide to getting just one county worth of neighborhood-level data on one subject, a typical
task for many newsrooms. The example uses Census 2000 public and private school enrollment for Bucks County,
Pa., but you can adapt as needed:
1. Go the American FactFinder web site: factfinder.census.gov. In the left bar on
the home page, click on the box labeled “Data Sets.”
2. On the page that opens, click in the radio button for “Census
2000 Summary File 3.”

3. You’ll see that the page reloads, and a list of links appears to the right. Choose “List all
Tables.” (It’s a good idea to have a printed list of tables and their categories saved in a threering binder for reference. A link to that list is shown at right as “Technical Documentation.”)

4. On the list of tables, scroll down to P054, highlight it
and click the “Next” box at lower right corner of the
page.

5. On the page that opens, click on the drop-down arrow for “Select a
geographic type” and choose “Census tract.”

6. You’ll see the page reload. Then choose your state from the list and watch the page reload again to present a
list of counties. Choose one and watch the page reload again with a list of census tracts.
7. Click on “All Census Tracts” and then on the blue “Add” button. The list of tracts
will appear in the box below. Then push the blue button “Show Result.”
Be patient while the page reloads with data, especially if you’re doing an urban county. Here’s what you’ll see:
Notice the links to
documentation on the table’s
categories and definitions and
to the documentation. Since
these numbers come from a
survey, there’s a little cloud of
uncertainty around each
number. The document tells
you how to figure out how big
that cloud is for your numbers
so you don’t overstate what
they say.
8. Notice at upper right
how the “Print/Download”
button opens into both options
when your cursor hovers
there. Choose “Download.”

9. In the window that pops up, choose “Comma delimited (transpose
rows and columns).” Then click “OK.” When a box pops up prompting
you to save the file, steer it to the directory you prefer and save it, then
open it with Excel. Or just click on “Open this file from its current
location.”
You’ll get something like this:
10. Make sure to save the file as an Excel file – choose “Save As”
from the File menu and give it a name that ends with *.xls. Then you
can start calculating percentages, sorting, etc.
If you’d like to change your selections, go back to FactFinder and
choose a spot along the trail of navigation breadcrumbs that always
runs across the top:

You might try blazing off from this trail if you see something
interesting. But these simple steps will let you find and grab just the
data you need.

