Sifting the census

How to find the numbers you need
The 2000 census gave us literally gigabytes of data that can add context to the stories we write
every day. But first we need to know where to look.
In an effort to make that search easier, the Census Bureau developed American FactFinder —
FactFinder.census.gov — a gateway to 1990 and 2000 census numbers, recent population
estimates and the latest economic survey data.
Here’s a user’s guide to the site.

Quick profiles
In the left margin of the FactFinder home page, select Fact Sheet for a quick way to look up
basic demographic profiles for the nation as a whole or for individual states, counties, cities and
towns. This section of FactFinder has the most commonly sought numbers from the 2000 census.
Say we want to know how many children lived in Roseville, Minn., in 2000.

Simply fill in the city and state boxes of the search form, then click on Go. FactFinder will
return the Census Bureau’s demographic profile for the city. It will list all of the most commonly
used census numbers, including population, race, housing, social and economic variables.

Quick geographic comparisons
The People and Housing tabs in the left margin offer a quick way to compare states, counties
and cities. Say you want to compare rental costs among all counties in your state. Select Housing
from the left margin, then type the name of a county and your state’s name into the search form.

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

March 2004

2
After you click on the Go button, a list of
tables will appear below the search form. Scroll
down to the section labeled Financial
Characteristics. Under the heading Financial
Housing Characteristics, select for all counties.

Want to save
the table so you
can sort to see
where your
county ranks?
Often, these
tables will cut and paste right into Excel. Or, you
can select download from the top of the page.
Tell FactFinder you want a comma-delimited
file, (be sure to check the box labeled include
descriptive data element names), save it to your
computer, and then open it in Excel.

A table will appear listing figures for all
counties in your state.

Need more detail?

Confused by the headings? To learn the
difference between contract rent and gross rent,
click on the hyperlinked table name at the top of
the chart.

At the bottom of the window that pops up,
you’ll see the names of the census tables from
which the chart was culled.

Click on Median Gross Rent, and you’ll get
another window listing the measures for that
table. Click on Gross Rent, and you’ll find out it
includes the cost of utilities.

What if the quick tables don’t contain the
numbers you need, or what if you want numbers
broken down by race? Then it’s time to move to
FactFinder’s Data Sets feature. This is where
you get detailed figures down to the
neighborhood level from 1990 and 2000.
First, you’ll need to understand some census
terminology.
The Census Bureau releases data in summary
files. Summary File 1 contains the short-form
information. The short form goes to all U.S.
households, so Summary File 1 contains what
the Census Bureau calls 100-percent data. It
covers age, race, ethnicity and home ownership.
Summary File 3 contains information from the
long form, which goes to 1 in 6 households. So
Summary File 3 contains sample data. It covers
economic, social and general housing topics.
Summary File 2 contains short-form data for
detailed race groups. This is where you can get
age and home-ownership detail for specific
racial and ethnic groups, such as Minnesota’s
Hmong population. Summary File 4 contains
long-form data for these smaller groups.
Also understand some census geography: The
smallest geographic area for which data are

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

March 2004

3
summarized is a neighborhood block. Because of
privacy concerns, only short-form data are
available for blocks. The smallest geography for
which long-form numbers are available is the
block group. A block group is just what it
sounds like: a grouping of blocks. A collection
of block groups forms a census tract.
Caution: Because the long form is sample
data, a cloud of uncertainty surrounds every
number, like the error margin in a poll. The
cloud becomes larger at smaller units of
geography. The numbers become especially
murky at the block-group level. So if you seek
neighborhood data, it’s best to stick to tracts.
Another caution: Tract boundaries are
redrawn for each census. Although Saint Paul’s
tract lines changed little between 1990 and 2000,
much of the rest of the Twin Cities was redrawn.
A tract with the same ID number in 1990 and
2000 could have radically different boundaries.
Do not compare data without checking maps to
see if the boundaries changed. (To find reference
maps, use the Maps and Geography tab on
FactFinder’s main page.)
Now let’s walk through pulling numbers from
FactFinder’s data sets. We’ll try to find out
which St. Paul neighborhood has the highest
private school enrollment.
Start by selecting the Data Sets tab from the
left side of the FactFinder home page. That will
pull up a list of the 1990 and 2000 decennial
census data available for searching. (As an aside,
note that tabs across the top of the page link to
other searchable data sets, including the
American Community Survey, the Economic
Census and population estimates.)
For our example, we want stats on education,
a long-form topic, so select the radio button for
Census 2000 Summary File 3. Select Detailed
Tables from the list that appears at right.

Next, specify a geography, in this case St. Paul
census tracts. At the top of the page, under
Choose a selection method, choose the tab that
says geo within geo.

This will enable us to list only those census
tracts within the St. Paul city limits.
Under Show me all, choose census tracts.

Under Within, choose Place.

Then select the state, Minnesota, and the
place, St. Paul city.
Next, select the tracts. We want to see them
all, so choose All Census Tracts, then click Add.

Then click Next.
Now it’s time to pick the table that contains
private school enrollment figures. FactFinder
will list every table available in the long-form
data, and there are many. You can scroll through
the list until you find what you want, or you can
search it by subject or keyword. Let’s select the
by keyword tab, then type private school in the
search box. Click search:

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

March 2004

4
The first result looks promising: Table P36:
Sex by School Enrollment by Level of School by
Type of School for the Population 3+ Years. To
be sure this table contains useful numbers, use
the What’s this? button. A window will pop up
displaying the variables for the highlighted table.

In Excel, compute the private-school
enrollment rate for each tract, then sort to see
which has the largest percentage. It’s Tract 348.
And where is that? Go back (two steps) in
your browser to the screen where you selected
the census geography. Select Tract 348, then
click Map It.

You’ll see Tract 348 is along the Mississippi
River, in the Mac-Groveland neighborhood.
Back on the original window, highlight table
P36, click the Add button, then Show Result.
You’ll get a table listing figures for St. Paul
census tracts. If you click on the table name, you
can get the definition for each table variable.
Note two things: First, this table doesn’t have
one neat figure for private school enrollment.
The subject is broken down by sex and age.
You’ll have to download to Excel and sum the
numbers. Second, FactFinder is paging the
results, another reason to download.

Want to compare to 1990?
If you want to compare 2000 data with 1990,
first, remember the caution about comparing
census tracts. Since St. Paul is one of the few
places where tract boundaries didn’t change
much between 1990 and 2000, you can seek out
the 1990 numbers on this topic.
Repeat the exercise. Just choose 1990
Summary Tape File 3 from the data set offerings
on the opening page. The 1990 numbers are in
Table P54: School Enrollment and Type of
School.

Find a neighborhood
Another important note: Always be aware of
the census table’s universe. In this case, the
figures are for all people 3 and older. If your
story focuses on K-12 enrollment, you’ll want to
calculate a new base — private-school
enrollment as a percentage of K-12 totals.

What if you want demographics for a specific
neighborhood? An easy thing to do is pick a
street address in that neighborhood, then ask
FactFinder to show you the census tract.

To download, select download at the top of
the page. Then choose Comma-delimited
(transpose rows and columns).

Go back to the step in this handout where we
chose the selection method. Instead of choosing
geo within geo, this time choose address
search. The screen will refresh and prompt you
for an address. Type one in, and hit Go.

Save it to your computer, and open the file in
Excel. Note: It’s important to select transpose
rows and columns so you’ll be able to sort by
census tract.

FactFinder will display the tract number for
the address. Select the tract, then follow the
steps in the previous example to get its census
numbers.

Janet Roberts, St. Paul Pioneer Press, jroberts@pioneerpress.com

March 2004

