CAR in small newsrooms
Jennie Coughlin, assistant city editor
The News Leader (Staunton, Va.)
540-213-9121
jcoughlin@newsleader.com
Working at a small paper means juggling several balls at once just to get the paper out.
Adding CAR into the mix without dropping anything isn’t for the faint of heart, but it can
also make a much bigger impact than at a larger paper. Done well, it adds context to
many deadline stories with a little prep work. Your readers get better stories and it
separates your small paper from the competition.
One big challenge at a small paper is scale. Statewide data might not mean much, if
anything, when applied to your coverage area. Trends can also be tough to see when
you’re only talking about a limited area. But that doesn’t mean you can’t use the
information.
1. Use state information to find similar towns. Statewide numbers can be skewed
by big cities. Rather than rely on those, we took population, crime, location and
other information and pulled together half a dozen cities and counties across the
state that we can compare ours to. It takes a few hours to pull enough information
to narrow the list down to the benchmark communities, but it saves plenty of time
on deadline when a city council member announces that the city has too much
low-income housing for its size.
2. Localize. Often times AP or other wire services will move a state or national
story that you can pull your area’s information for and localize. When Virginia
AP moved an advance story on failing dams, four of ours were on the list. We
used National Inventory of Dams data to get more information on those four and
found all were owned by the state.
3. Check your towns against the rest of the state. Even if your region isn’t in step
with the state, you can still do the comparisons by checking against your
benchmark towns. This might also help you find stories that statewide analysis
could miss, such as an increase in Head Start slots in rural areas.
4. Make small bites add up. At a bigger paper, the countless faxes from the state
about grant winners might head straight for the briefs column. But in a small
town, a $25,000 grant for graduation remediation for underperforming schools is
big news. By checking the test scores from the previous year against the state
average or your benchmark communities, you can see how needy the school
really is. If you have the extra 20 minutes, you can even see how it stacks up to
the other schools that received grants.
5. Don’t jump to conclusions. It’s a lot easier for small data sets to get skewed by
one or two oddball numbers. If the county goes from two murders one year to six
the next, it’s a 200 percent increase, but it’s not the same as saying Boston went
from 75 murders to 225.
6. Double up. One of the challenges is always finding enough copy to fill the paper
tomorrow. If you can find a data set that provides ongoing copy, it’s a huge help,
and can free up more time for bigger projects. Our state health department keeps

restaurant inspections online and updates it constantly. Once we publish the big
inspection story one reporter’s working on, we’ll start running inspections on
Page 3 once a week. It’s useful for readers and an easy way to fill space once we
get the template set up.
The other big challenge at small papers is time. Most likely, you wear more than just a
CAR hat, and it’s easy to get caught up in more pressing tasks.
1. Set aside a little time every day. Some days it might only be 15 minutes. Other
days you might get lucky and spend two or three hours on a project. But on even
the most hectic days, try and take 15 minutes to do something CAR-related. If you
wait for a day with no crises, it will never happen.
a. Before you start proofing pages or call a source for an interview, start
downloading a big data file from the Web.
b. While you wait for a phone call, clean up a chunk of restaurant inspection data.
2. Keep a to-do list. This makes those 15-minute blocks more useful because you
always have something to do. I keep a running list of CAR-related tasks that’s
broken down by how long they’ll take. Every few weeks, I set aside an hour or so
to troll the IRE tipsheets for new data sources or story ideas.
3. Work ahead. Whether it’s downloading local or state data that you don’t have
use for now or doing prep work for something you know is coming, it can save a
lot of time on deadline.
a. Spending 15 or 20 minutes familiarizing yourself with the Census site will
come in handy when the city reporter is on deadline and needs to know what the
median rent in town is for a story about affordable senior apartments.
b. Setting up a blank spreadsheet to enter IRS Form 990 information on took
about 30 minutes. But when a local arts group announced it was selling one
property and laying off employees because of debt, we were able to download the
forms from Guidestar and enter the revenue and expense numbers for the last
three years in about 15 minutes, then calculate the year-to-year changes.
c. Annual state testing scores are usually released in the same format each year. A
few weeks before they’re due, go into last year’s and add in the new columns for
this year. If you’ve never put them in a spreadsheet before, find copies of last
year’s and set one up.
4. Make yourself useful. Once people know they can turn to you for information
on deadline, they start doing it more often.
5. Spread the wealth. When you’re working with people, whether it’s a project or
smaller story, have them watch while you’re working. Or, if it’s something from a
Web site, walk them through it. I have Brant’s CAR book on my desk with the
sections clearly marked so reporters can steal it for a cheat sheet.
6. Organize. More importantly, make sure everybody else knows how your files are
organized and where they’re kept. You can find things quicker and everybody
else knows where they are if they want to use them.
7. Know when to wait. Smaller towns can be behind the curve on computerizing
records. If records are only available on paper, find out if and when the agency
will be switching to computer records. If you can save copying and data input
time by waiting six months, it might be a reasonable tradeoff.

