The majority minority: Black kids in adult prison
Doug Stanley, CAR Specialist
The Tampa Tribune
dstanley@tampatrib.com
(813) 259-7364
http://tampatrib.com

2004 NICAR Conference
Cincinnati
Race and data: Profiling and
finding disparities in traffic
stops, loans and justice

The overrepresentation of blacks in the nation’s prisons is well documented, but lesser
known is the disproportionate number of black youth charged as adults and sentenced to
adult prisons. The Tampa Tribune examined 3½ years’ arrest and sentencing data and
found that a startling 67 percent of minors sentenced to adult time in Florida are black. A
similar, but much smaller, imbalance is found among adult Florida prisoners, who are 53
percent black.
Every state has provisions for charging minors as adults, so – depending on your state’s
public records laws – this is a project that could be done in most populous states with
reasonably sizable minority populations.
1. Get the data: We obtained prison data from the Florida Department of Corrections
and arrest data from the Florida Department of Juvenile Justice. Equivalent agencies
in your state would be the logical first contact point. We also obtained a database
purportedly showing teens charged as adults who were later sentenced to probation,
but found so many inaccuracies in the data that we didn’t use it. Your luck with that
piece of the puzzle might be better.
2. Check the data: Every CAR project should begin with this step, but it’s crucial here.
In complying with our data request, a state programmer used the wrong variable to
calculate the suspects’ ages at arrest. We called this to the state’s attention and got a
second, corrected set of data. The SQL for calculating age at arrest is:
Int(DateDiff("d",[Tablename]![DOB],[Tablename]![ArrestDate])/365.25)
3. Query the data: Calculating age at arrest is the most advanced data task on this
project. Once you’ve done that, you’ll use straightforward “group by” queries for
race, charge and other variables you may be interested in. The data will likely lead
you to black kids and white kids who faced the same charges but drew dramatically
different sentences.
4. Hit the streets: Follow the path the data points you toward. We built our story
around two kids, one black, the other white, who faced robbery charges. The white
boy was sentenced to house arrest, the black boy to adult prison. We interviewed
judges, prosecutors, public defenders, offenders and academics who have studied
disproportionate minority representation among imprisoned teenage offenders.
Experts who were particularly helpful included Barry Feld, a University of Minnesota

law school professor and a nationally recognized expert on the subject, and
University of Florida professor Charles E. Frazier, who studied criminal cases filed
against 137,028 Florida children.
5. Caveats, etc.: This story raises at least as many questions as it answers, so be careful
about drawing overly broad conclusions. Oddly enough, the public records law in
Florida did not give us access to the prior criminal records of juveniles charged as
adults, so we were unable to assess how an offender’s record figured into sentencing.
Expect considerable feedback from readers. In our case, the reaction was broken
pretty evenly across racial lines. Black readers were highly complimentary; white
readers tended to view our reporting as intentionally biased or inherently flawed.

