NICAR 2004

Keeping Business Honest
Neil Reisner/Miami Daily Business Review/nr@nreisner.com
Staying on top of business doesn’t always mean playing “Gotcha!” Sometimes it means keeping
track of a plethora of public records which, taken together help paint a picture of an entity’s
doings. Here are some of the best places to mine the information you need to fill in your portrait.
For more information, see the IRE Resource Center or The Investigative Reporter’s Handbook.
PUBLIC COMPANIES
Securities Exchange Commission
Where all companies traded on U.S. stock exchanges must file their corporate forms. Among the
most important: S-1 registration statements;10K annual reports; 14A proxy statements, which
contain executive salaries and board of directors members.; 8K, reports of significant events;
10K, 10Q, annual and quarterly reports; 13D, insider trading. (For more, see New York Times’
Diana Henriquez handout “5 Easy Pieces,” available from IRE Resource Center.
The SEC’s EDGAR system allows you to search for particular forms and also enables full-text
searching of filings.
Subscription sites such as subscription-based 10K-Wizard (www.10kwizard.com) and free
SECInfo (www.secinfo.com) may be easier to navigate and provide other features.
Yahoo Finance
finance.yahoo.com
One-stop shopping for comprehensive information on public companies. Searchable by stock
symbol. Provides price and trading information, research reports, boards of directors, insider
trading, news and more. Set up a free account with my.yahoo.com and create custom pages to
track the companies in which you’re interested.
PRIVATE COMPANIES
Hoovers
www.hoovers.com
Keeps track of some 50,000 private companies, providing free capsules of some. Subscription
opens access to more extensive information.
Dunn & Bradstreet
www.d&b.com
Compiles self-reported information on thousands of private companies.

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 2 of 16

All Companies
Company Web Sites
www.COMPANYNAME.com or find it through Yahoo Finance or Google on “COMPANY
NAME,” enclosing the name in quotes. Public companies often provide extensive libraries of
their SEC filings on web sites, as well as company histories and other information. Private
companies may also provide company information.
Corporate Records
http://www.nass.org/busreg/corpreg.html

Public and private must both companies must file them, usually with the Secretary of State in the
state in which they are incorporated. The National Association of Secretaries of State provides
one-stop access to corporate record sites throughout the country.
Note that larger companies may not be incorporated in the state where it’s headquartered. Many
incorporate in “corporate friendly” states like Delaware or New York. Many states require
“foreign corporations” – corporations incorporated in another state -- to register locally.
Companies’ initial incorporation papers may not contain the names of the real company officers;
sometimes the names of whatever legal secretaries, administrative assistants or lawyers are
submitted just to get the entity incorporate. “Annual Reports” (not the glossy documents
published by big companies, but the legal papers filed with the states) are the most up-to-date
sources of information on corporate officers, addresses and “registered agents,” the people
designated to accept legal service (lawsuits, subpoenas and the like) on their behalf.
Records on limited partnerships, trademarks and judgments – documents filed when companies
lose lawsuits – are also often available.
Property Records
indorgs.virginia.edu/portico/
Property records show what a company or individual owns and, often, what they owe
• Deeds, usually kept by the county recorder, show who owns a property, either a person or
a company. If it’s a company, check to see who signed the document on behalf of the
company. It should show the price of the property, but often it’ll only say “in
consideration of the sum of $10.00 and other good and valuable considerations.” To find
out what the real price is, look for the tax stamps that are affixed to the document. If you
find out the tax rate, you can calculate the price. My house, for example, cost $270,000,
but my deed says I paid $10. There’s $1,890 worth of tax stamps on the deed, however,
and Broward charges $.007 (7 mils) per $1 of the purchase price. Divide $1,890 by .007
and you get the price: $270,000.
• Mortgages, also kept by the county recorder, show how much a buyer borrowed to buy
the property, from whom, for how long and at what interest rate. Also kept by the county
recorder.
• Tax Records, typically kept by the tax assessor, tax collector or property appraiser, show
how what a property is assessed for tax purposes, what the tax on the property is and who
pays the taxes.

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 3 of 16
•

Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings, a different sort of “mortgage,” this for
tangible property (things) instead of real property (land). A UCC is filed on equipment –
restaurant hoods or building HVAC units, for example – that costs a lot. Often filed with
the county recorder, but can be elsewhere.

•

Liens/Lis Pendens/Mechanic Liens get filed when a vendor or contractor or the winner
of a lawsuit have a claim on the property. The contractor who’s redoing the company
president’s kitchen might file a mechanic lien to make sure she gets paid. A way to find
out if the president pays his bills and a way to find people who’ve been in his house,
worked under him, etc.

Court Records
• Lawsuits generate lots of paper, all of which is public. Look for initial complaints,
responses, depositions, motions, etc. Each document will contain allegations, defenses,
arguments and people’s names and help reporters scope out who’s who in a business,
who has information, who’s friendly and who’s adversarial. To find lawsuits, lookup the
docket number and then ask for the file. These and other court records are usually kept by
the clerk of courts.
• Judgments record who lost a lawsuit and what they owe in damages.
• Criminal Complaints are like lawsuits, but are filed by the government and concern
violations of law. Provide details on what the government prosecutors think. Can also
include responses, depositions, affidavits in support of search warrants, etc. Often are not
public until a case is over.
Other Useful Records
• Business licenses/Complaints
• Professional licenses/Complaints
• Permits
• Inspection Reports
• OSHA Reports
• Contracts with government
• Environmental Reports

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 4 of 16
AN EXAMPLE
Jesse Gaddis, Broward County, FL, transportation mogul who controls all taxis, buses and limos
picking up passengers at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport.
The challenge: How much did he contribute to candidates for County Commission.
The problem: He may be contributing through any of his companies or through any person
involved in any of his companies.
Corporate Records.
What entities does Gaddis Control?

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 5 of 16
Searching on Gaddis’ name as an officer or registered agent:

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 6 of 16
The results

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 7 of 16

An online record

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 8 of 16
The associated document

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 9 of 16
The Result
Addresses:
P.O. BOX 950
FT. LAUDERDALE FL 33302-0950
517 N FED HWY
Fort Lauderdale
221 W. OAKLAND PARK BLVD
Fort Lauderdale
Names
Collins, Roy
Gaddis, Jesse
Gaddis, Michael
Lorden, Kenneth
The Drudgery
Search on all corporate records, run all names and addresses against contribution database.

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 10 of 16

Property Records

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 11 of 16

Search Results

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 12 of 16

A Record

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 13 of 16

Court Records

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 14 of 16

Searching

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 15 of 16

Results : Files to Look Up

Keeping Business Honest/Reisner/Page 16 of 16

