Downloading and analyzing campaign finance data
Wendell Cochran
March 2004
This tipsheet looks at four major sites that provide Federal Election Commission
data for downloading: The Federal Election Commission, Politicalmoneyline.com and the
American University Campaign Finance Site. Obviously, it cannot cover all the details and
you would be well-advised to spend time looking at each site before deciding which one
best fills your needs.

Who: The Federal Election Commission
Where: http://www.fec.gov and other sites mentioned below.
What: This site is the root of all campaign finance information at the federal level.
Whether you are using politicalmoneyline or the American University site or data from
IRE or the Center for Responsive Politics, it all began with filings with the FEC. The
commission has added some search capabilities, but the files it creates are not
downloadable. However, there are two major areas that contain file that can be
downloaded directly from the FEC.
First, and most important, is the FTP site: ftp.fec.gov/FEC. Files on the FTP site also
can be accessed from the main FEC site by navigating to
http://www.fec.gov/finance/newftp1.htm. Warning: This page is horribly organized. To
get to the list of 2003-04 files, you need to click on the 2001-2002 label or you can scroll
down past file descriptions to a table that shows the names of the files for each cycle.
There are two types of file -- details, which contain records of each contribution from
individuals and committees (separate files), and summaries. The key detail files are
can04.zip, which lists candidates, com04.zip, which lists committee information,
ind04.zip, which is the detail of all individual contributions and pas04.zip, which is detail
of PAC contributions to candidates. Be careful with the summary data. There are a
couple of file types and the FEC basically denies that any of them are valid for making
candidate comparisons because of report timing, especially for PACs. The FEC’s position
is explained at http://www.fec.gov/finance/ftpsum.htm.
Unfortunately, it is the only summary data at our disposal, so use it, but with caution
and disclaimers. Another unfortunate thing is that the FEC seems to have suspended
making a summary file for political action committees (PACS).
There is good news and bad news about the raw files on the FTP site. Good news: The
files there are in fixed-width, ASCII text format and they are stable over all election
cycles. Thus, when you create an import routine for a particular type of file, it will be
Downloading and analyzing FEC data
NICAR ‘04
Wendell Cochran, American University
Page 1 of 5

good for any year. Bad news: The data needs some massaging. The contribution
amounts are in COBOL, which means that for negative numbers you have to write a
routine that converts characters to digits and convert the result to a true number field.
And the dates are in a text format, which means you need to write a routine to convert
them to date type if you care about contribution timing (and you should). Actually, the
only major difference between the files available at FEC and the other sites is that
Politicalmoneyline and American make those conversions, as does IRE.
The second major category Beginning with the 2000 presidential cycle, and now in the
2004 presidential and House races, the FEC is making electronically filed data
available. You can see the entry form for this data at http://herndon2.sdrdc.com/dcdev/.
Or you can go to the FEC’s FTP site: ftp.fec.gov/FEC/electronic to get zipped files from a
particular day.
The sad truth is, having this information available really hasn’t improved access to data.
If you want an example of how the government can screw up a good thing, you need
look no further than one of these files. First once they are unzipped, they come with file
names like 10930.fec, so it is impossible to discern who filed the report. Second, there is
no reliable structure for the files because a campaign or committee submits a variety of
information in each report: loans, debts, contributions, expenditures. Or the file might
not have any of that in it, it might simply be a letter to the FEC. Or the file might be an
amendment to an earlier file, with no indication, really of what was amended. The files
are in a comma-delimited format, but some of the campaigns put commas in the middle
of fields. Some use quotes to delimit text fields, some don’t. Some (President Bush, for
example) have now separated contributor names into first, last, etc., but put them at
the end of the file; most candidates have a single contributor name early in the file, but
it’s usually (not always) delimited by carets. The result of all this is that you cannot
simply automate the file gathering and massaging routines. For example, you might
well be forced to tweak your import routines from time to time. The bottom line is that
this is non-disclosure, disclosure. The sad thing is, this is the only place to get street
addresses for contributors and the only place to get expenditure information. So, they
can be important sources of data for good stories (Several news agencies reported on
the fancy hotels Al Sharpton uses, for example). But if you decide to venture into these
files, don’t say you weren’t warned. Oh, one more thing, Senate candidates don’t file
electronically and the FEC seems incapable of making them.
When: Files on the FTP site usually are updated weekly, typically early Monday
morning. But because of data entry and other issues, they don’t necessarily include all
the information filed in the previous week. By the end of the cycle, these are large files,
so the FEC has begun offering ways to merely delete amended records, append new
records and update records with smaller files. However, most people who work with the
files start over each time, downloading the most recent complete files. Major updates
occur close to specified filing deadlines. For electronic files, the FEC provides daily
uploads, as mentioned above on the FTP site; you also can use the form referenced
above to locate and download filings from an individual candidate or committee
immediately after they are filed (presidential files, for example, are due on the 20th day
of the month, so February data will be filed March 20, etc.).
Downloading and analyzing FEC data
NICAR ‘04
Wendell Cochran, American University
Page 2 of 5

Who: The Campaign Finance Information Center is operated by IRE, using grants from
a variety of foundations. Jeff Porter is the manager.
Where: http://www.campaignfinance.org
What: CFIC offers weekly downloads of the individual, PAC, candidate and committee
files from the FEC’s FTP site. The files are converted to dbf format and are all collapsed
into one zip file, so downloads can be fairly time consuming (even zipped, they can run
into scores of megabytes by the end of the cycle). The downloadable data is available
only via subscription, which is available from IRE for $100 to $225 per two-year cycle;
prices are based on market size/circulation size. CFIC also will sell CDs of the files for
$50-$125; again the fee depends on market size.
The site also contains links to other key sources for campaign finance information and
data. Any reporter new to the field should check out some of these resources before
plunging deeply into the numbers: http://www.campaignfinance.org/background.html
Additionally, CFIC has links to state campaign finance information.
When: New files are available for subscribers each week, usually on Tuesday.

Downloading and analyzing FEC data
NICAR ‘04
Wendell Cochran, American University
Page 3 of 5

Who: PoliticalMoneyLine is operated by Kent Cooper and Tony Raymond and is the
follow-on company to Raymond’s fecinfo site, which began in 1996. Cooper and
Raymond, both former FEC officials, have been around FEC data longer than almost
anyone else. Cooper started dealing with campaign finance issues before the FEC even
existed by working for a Washington foundation. Cooper and Raymond also are quite
reporter-friendly and many news organizations are among their subscriber clientele.
Where: http://politicalmoneyline.com
What: PoliticalMoneyLine offers exhaustive information, both from campaign data and
lobbying disclosure reports, with some of the data going back to the 1980 election cycle.
The site offers extensive search capability. Search results can be downloaded but
downloads are not free. Here’s what Cooper said in early March 2004: “On the candidate
files, it's $25 for House, $50 for Senate and $100 for Presidential. Whenever you
download it’s for all that is in the full cycle file at that time in the cycle. The download
also includes the itemized expenditure data as well, which is not in the FEC disclosure
database download. The file also has all the smaller less than $200 donations that are
filed electronically by the candidate, but not included in the FEC disclosure download
file. However, we do not make available the street address field in the download.”
Additionally, Cooper said: “We will shortly be making our Donor Geography section
available for download. One will be able to download a whole file for a state, or
download any of the individual sections, House, Senate, Presidential, PAC, Party, 527.
There will be three tiers of states (big, medium, small) with prices accordingly $500,
$250, $100. Some are huge files but for a state reporter they could be a quick way to
start a statewide database.”
When: Data from the FEC Disclosure Database (the FTP site) is available almost
immediately after the FEC posts it on the web. Data from electronically filed reports is
available immediately after it is received at the FEC. Reporters may also subscribe to EAlert ($99 a year) that sends you an e-mail each afternoon that lists new electronic
filings received that day.

Downloading and analyzing FEC data
NICAR ‘04
Wendell Cochran, American University
Page 4 of 5

Who: Wendell Cochran, who teaches journalism at American University, created and
maintains the site.
Where: http://www1.soc.american.edu/campfin/index.cfm
What: This site offers free downloadable data files from election cycles since 1996. At
the moment there are no registration requirements. For now, these files all are based on
the data available from the Federal Election Commission’s FTP site, although it is
expected that some electronic data for presidential candidates will be added to the site
this spring.
File types available include:
□
□
□
□
□

Candidate summary files
Files with data from individual contributors from a particular state to all
candidates (House, Senate, Presidential)
Files with contributions to all candidates in House or Senate races in a
particular state (both individual and PAC)
Files with contributions to candidates in individual House races (by district),
both individual and PAC
Files with contributors to PACs from individuals in a particular state

Except for summary information, all files are in Dbase format and all are zipped with
Winzip. File descriptions, showing original FEC file structures, along with the revised file
structures, are available at http://www1.soc.american.edu/campfin/files.cfm.
Though not downloadable directly, the site also offers queries that will return lists of
PAC contributions to individuals or all contributions from a particular PAC. Users also
may create lists of such things as the top recipients of PAC money.
When: New files usually are available each Monday afternoon or Tuesday morning
during election years and updated monthly during non-election years.

Downloading and analyzing FEC data
NICAR ‘04
Wendell Cochran, American University
Page 5 of 5

