Educators workshop: Integrating CAR
By Jeff South < VA Commonwealth University < School of Mass Comm
Reasons for incorporating computer-assisted reporting into other journalism and
communications courses:

1. Pervasive need for CAR skills – All journalists should know how to do online

research and basic data analysis; PR and advertising professionals also need
these skills. They are important for accuracy, depth, speed and efficiency.
Newsrooms have moved away from an expert-centered CAR model.

2. Emergence of CAR in everyday reporting (the “computer-assisted paragraph”)
3. CAR as a reflection of critical thinking, numerical literacy and computer literacy
4. Difficulty of squeezing CAR courses into the existing curriculum; the zero-sum
game of accreditation; university bureaucracy and politics

5. Students’ “checkoff mentality”
6. Repeated reinforcement; continuous-loop learning
Ways to integrate CAR into existing courses:

1. Treat CAR as a routine method of gathering, organizing and understanding
information.

Think of computerized information as you would human sources and paper documents.
Show parallels between interviewing people and “interviewing” data.
Evaluate Internet documents or data as you would human and paper sources.

2. Use CAR to add context, localize stories, find background and find sources.
3. Deconstruct stories and look for underlying data and CAR opportunities.
4. Discuss the best ways to tell the story (graphics, tables, Web-searchable
databases and online presentation, all of which may involve CAR).

5. Emphasize precision journalism. CAR helps you be precise.
6. Explain CAR concepts and what software can do even if you don’t teach hands-on

skills. There are some CAR tools that students don’t need to know – they just need
to know about.

7. “Offload” software skills. Require students to learn basic computer skills before they
enroll in your courses – so that you can emphasize how to apply these skills to
journalism.
Build on what students learn in computer-science, statistics and math courses.
Have students take online tutorials and assessments, such as Freeskills.com or SmartForce.

8. Develop a CAR-skills hierarchy. In introductory courses, cover how to search LexisNexis; how to find authoritative documents on the Internet; and basic spreadsheet
skills (entering data, sorting, totaling, simple calculations).

9. In upper-level courses, cover advanced spreadsheet skills (functions, pivot tables);
SPSS and/or database managers (grouping, joins); and possibly GIS.

10. Have students do real stories or graphics with real data (census, campaign finance,
crime, etc.).

Imprecise journalism

Precision journalism

Many legislators
attended the University
of Virginia.

Twenty-five legislators
– about 1 of every 6 –
attended U.Va.

Delegate Steve Landes
is among the few
legislators who
attended VCU.

Landes is one of two
legislators who
attended VCU. Ferrum
College, with just 1,000
students, has more
alumni in the General
Assembly than does
VCU.

In May 2003, journalism students at Virginia Commonwealth University spotlighted the vast grading
disparities among academic units, among different courses and among different professors at VCU with a
multimedia package on where to find an “easy A.”

Prepared for the National Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference ♦ March 14, 2004 ♦ Cincinnati

