Reporting on the vulnerable: Guardianships
NICAR 2004, Cincinnati
Sarah Cohen, The Washington Post
cohensh@washpost.com, (202) 334-6259
Reporting on guardianships is a story that can be done in almost every state and county.
Regulation of guardianships and the people and companies eligible to serve as a courtappointed protector vary from state to state. However, there is a common template for
the laws and virtually all states administer the program out of the probate court – the
same place that people file and contest wills and estates.
In D.C., only lawyers or family members are allowed to serve as court-appointed
guardians. Elsewhere, companies are selected who hire social workers, lawyers and
accountants to manage the affairs of wards. But virtually no place has strict oversight,
leaving the elderly and infirm vulnerable to theft, abuse and neglect.
Much of the work in our series derived from a database containing 10 years’ worth of
probate dockets, including guardianship cases. Here are some tips in reporting on
projects when a database that might lead you to cases and trends is available, but you
have no idea what it might show.

Find cases you know
As is pretty typical, a first step was to examine the dockets of cases we’d already
partially reported. This helped us learn how to read the dockets and taught us that the
database did not contain a field for a key element of the story – the lawyer who handled
the case.
From the dockets, we looked up key phrases that we discovered usually appeared
whenever a guardian ran into trouble and produced targeted lists of cases to evaluate.
When most of those were fruitful, we looked for other patterns. This process of going
from a case you know to the database and back should be done very early in a project
and can be used to generate examples while allowing you to evaluate which trends you
will be able document in your analysis.

Look for what’s missing
The key element in the case dockets was missing was, well, everything. We eventually
began calling these cases that “went dark”. No one cared about them enough to ask
about the ward or to demand that a guardian follow the most basic and superficial rules
– turning in a form showing how often they visited a ward, any changes in health or any
changes in their living conditions. Other reporting indicated this was a nationwide trend
and that our results were not inconsistent with a system that allowed neglect and abuse.
About one-sixth of the cases in the court file had no contact between the guardian and

the court after the appointment. Some of these cases were still active after a decade, but
no one questioned how the ward was faring.

Code selected data
We thought that some lawyers were routinely appointed to new cases despite a history
of botched ones. Don’t be afraid to spend a couple of weeks coding your data for
important elements of the story. We created a new database and coded every name
found in the docket in one field and entered important docket codes for selected
important events in another. (These were pre-filled with the court’s codes and names,
which we just had to correct.)
To make this process work, it requires being selective. You will only know exactly what
you need when you’ve done enough reporting to know what the story might say. So
don’t start it too early, but don’t leave it to the end. In our case, it took me about 2 weeks
to code about 1,000 dockets.

Consider your own data collection
For another part of the story, we wanted to know how often basic protections against
being unfairly placed into guardianships were followed. The dockets would, again, only
reveal part of the picture. So we did our own survey of case files.
Three reporters and our editor went to the courthouse for two mornings and were able to
read the relevant parts of all cases filed within a six-month period. It added a powerful
element to the story and uncovered several more interesting cases. The keys to keeping
the project manageable were knowing what documents inside every case file we had to
look at, and having a form to fill out rather than just take notes.

Report as a team
If you are working with other reporters, make sure they understand what you plan to be
able to say after working with the data. If you are doing the data work, make sure you
report out at least a couple of cases yourself and also work with your team members to
make sure they agree with the way you are doing any analysis or finding any cases. This
is a lot more efficient than working in a corner and then finding out your analysis doesn’t
match the story.

Hone your story memo style
Reporters and editors are, by nature, word people. Before story meetings, spend at least
a day producing a tightly written story memo that will help lead the work to come. Include
real examples from strong cases, include graphics and tell them what trends you think
you will be able to document. Identify themes that will become the spine of different days
of a series or possibly secondary stories for the page. And be careful not to undersell or
oversell your story or your data work. You know the database may be mined for the best
examples and analyzed for some trends. Stick to what you know or have strong reason
to expect you’ll find.

