LEO SISTI, INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER , “L’ESPRESSO
Milan
+39.02.481-8350 Milan office
+39.348.710-8797 cellphone
l.sisti@espressoedit.it
GLOBAL INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISM CONFERENCE COPENHAGEN
PANEL: “Organized crime networks: the new challenges in covering international crime”
Friday, May 2, 2003
THE PAST
During the early Eighties a fratricidal war sparked off in Sicily by “families” inside the mafia
left on the ground hundreds of mafiosi: all have been murdered for the seizure of power and the
control over the territory. Totò Riina, from Corleone, was the winner of that bloody war after
defeating his adversaries. He became the real boss of bossses and tried to reach an agreement
with his main opponent, Bernardo Provenzano, from Cinisi, a “don”, who owns a world record:
he is fugitive from justice since 30 years. The result is that police archives show a very old
picture of him, which only if treated by a computer can give us his new face.
In 1992 Riina made a mistake. He decided to wage a war against the Italian State trough the
murder of two antimafia prosecutors, Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino. Riina and his
brother in law Leoluca Bagarella backed the so called “slaughter” line, while Provenzano
conceived a more moderate line. But the “slaughter” strategy was defeated as the State reacted
running thorough, and successful, investigations. Riina was later arrested and convicted many
times to life sentences in jail, as well Bagarella. Other prominent leaders were captured and
now they are spending the rest of their life in jail. Many turncoats, former members of the
mafia, are revealing the “who’s who” of the organization.
THE PRESENT (the aftermath of a dreadful war)
The Sicilian “families” signed a peace deal. Provenzano, the “moderate”, is the winner,
against the old strategy of the “slaughterers”, in order to avoid the pressure put by police forces
on the mafia. Now Provenzano has to cope with the rising star of the mafia, a young boss who
might oust him from power: Matteo Messina Denaro. Nowadays the mafia is turning its focus
on awarding the new procurement contracts by Governments, regional as well as central.
Provenzano and his mafiosi must deal with politicians for lucrative bridge on the Strait of
Messina, dividing Sicily from the mainland. It’s the business of businesses worth billions of
billions of US dollars.
The Sicilian mafia is always strong in its traditional criminal activities: arms traffic, drugs
trafficking, extortion, loansharking, toxic waste dfisposal and “protection money”, the famous
“pizzo”, or bribes paid by shop owners.

THE OTHER “MAFIAS”: CAMORRA, ‘NDRANGHETA, APULIA ORGANIZED CRIME
(Apulia Organized Crime)
In Naples, and all over Campania, the Camorra is made up of small criminal groups with
flexible organization, but without a real leadership: too many families, no hierarchy. The
camorra groups have their own criminal specialties: trucks robberies; drugs trafficking;
loansharking; illegal betting; gambling; smuggling of cigarettes; counterfeit of fashion products.

In Calabria ‘Ndrangheta groups have just ended a new phase aimed at reshaping its
organization based on Cosa nostra patterns and new entrepreneurial ways. This is the result of
a new policy “designed”, according to the latest report by DIA (Direzione Investigativa
Antimafia, or Investigative Antimafia Board), “to reduce bloody internal fights by entrusting
the most important decisions to a single body “. Now the new ’Ndrangheta is more dangerous
and its profits stem from drugs, arms, extortion, procurements.
The Apulia Organized Crime (or Sacra Corona Unita) is active in the Apulia Region and is
not rooted in the rest of Italy, like the mafia, the Camorra and the ‘Ndrangheta. They handle
businesses like drugs, and smuggling of tobacco from Montenegro. Another business is
trafficking in stolen cars with the help of looser networks of criminal entrepreneurs.
THE FUTURE
It’s the Organized Crime from foreign countries: Albania, China, Nigeria, Russia ( or former
USSR), Turkey.
Albanians control prostitution in Milan. Always in Milan Albanians are presiding over the
distribution of drugs in the Northern part of Italy. Sometimes they clinch deals with Sicilians,
sometimes with member of the ‘Ndrangheta, from Calabria. It’s quite interesting to notice that
now most of the heroin produced in Turkey is handled by Albanians. Sometimes the Albanian
bosses exchange Turkish heroin with Colombian cocaine. Cocaine for the Italian market and
heroin for the American market. Last year “Operation Florida”, run by a special antidrugs unit
of Italian police, Servizio Centrale Operativo (SCO), in connection with undercover agents of
the American FBI and DEA, arrested a group of Italians, Americans and Albanians in many
countries. Now ten Albanians families control the drugs market after reaching an agreement
with Colombian Cali Cartel. One of these families has close connections with politicians
associated with prominent members of the Albanian Government.
The Russian mafia is specialized in arms traffic. Leonid Minin, one of the moss respected
bosses, was arrested in Milan where he is standing trial.
THE NEW CRIMES
Smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons. The bosses of these new crimes are
Albanians, Nigerians and Chinese.

TIPSHEETS FOR STORIES ON ORGANIZED CRIME
# SITES TO VISIT
1. DIA (Direzione Investigativa Antimafia, or Antimafia Investigative Agency)
- www.poliziadistato.it
- click on Documentazione
- click on Relazioni semestrali (semestral reports)
DIA publishes semestral reports on the mafia on its site. The second half of 2002 was posted
in these days.
The English version of these reports, with some delay, is available
2. PARLIAMENT ( Italian, English, German, French, Arabic)

For Mafia stories:
- click on www.camera.it (Chamber of Deputies)
- click on joint committee
- click on Commissione d’inchiesta sul fenomeno della
mafia
- click on Resoconti stenografici (to get the text of the hearings held by the Joint Committee
on the mafia)
For Toxic waste disposal stories
- click on www.camera.it
- click on joint committee
- click on Commissione d’inchiesta sul ciclo dei rifiuti
- click on Resoconti stenografici
3. UNICRI
United Nations Interregional Crime & Justice Research Institute
www.unicri.it

4. EUROPOL (A SPECIAL POLICE BASED IN THE HAGUE , HOLLAND: IS FORMED
BY THE 15 COUNTRIES OF THE EUROPEAN UNION).
www.europol.eu.int
e-mail address info@europol.eu.int
5. OLAF (THE EU POLICE BASED IN BRUSSELS AND SPECIALIZED IN
FINANCIAL INVESTIGATIONS)
http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/antifraud/index-en.htm

#RESEARCHES INVOLVING COMPANIES:
VISIT THE TRADE REGISTERS OF THESE COUNTRIES:
ITALY
www.camcom.it
SWITZERLAND
www.admin.ch
http://zefix.admin.ch
www.teledata.ch
BANKS IN THE WORLD
www.bankersalmanac.com

