SEVEN STEPS TO TELLING MEMORABLE C.A.R. BROADCAST STORIES IN A SMALL OR
MEDIUM-SIZED MARKET
Mark Greenblatt
Investigative Reporter
WBBH-TV (NBC)
Fort Myers & Naples, FL
Mark.greenblatt@nbc-2.com
239-939-6281
1)

2004 IRE Annual CAR Conference
BROADCAST TRACK: “Doing
the CAR broadcast story no matter
what size market you’re in.”

LOOK FOR FREE OR LOW-PRICED DATA
websites that will help:
www.accurint.com This backgrounding website is cost-effective and allows you to do many of
the same searches Autotrack does- for a fraction of the price.
http://www.searchsystems.net This is a treasure trove of free data for reporters in any state. It is
a one-stop shop for data on everything from restaurant violations to health care licensing. It’s a
good starting point if you’re trying to find relatively clean databases that you can have immediate
access to.
Databases You Can Get For Free, or for a Nominal Fee:
*Property Appraisers Information
*Tax Delinquents
*Inventory items your government has lost
*Criminal convictions
*City/county/school board employee lists
*local campaign contributions
*Bridge Inspections
*Bid Waivers- check out the “sole source providers”
*Fire Code Violations
*Disciplined Attorneys
*Elevator Inspections
*Travel Expenses- check with ALL local governments (schools, fire districts, sheriff’s office, etc.)
*Top Overtime/Comp Time Earners in local governments
*Internal Affairs Investigations

2)

IF YOU DON’T HAVE YOUR OWN INVESTIGATIVE PRODUCER, LET THE
GOVERNMENT “HIRE” ONE FOR YOU
*The information technology departments of most local governments are eager to help reporters,
as long as they don’t feel like you are taking advantage of them. If you can get past the PIOs and
establish direct working relationships with the technology gurus, you will quickly gain some of the
best allies a CAR reporter can have. For the most part, PIOs simply don’t have the technical
knowledge to fulfill your request or even to understand how much time it really will take to work
on. The I.T. employees are the people who really know what data is available and what fields
might help you. In many cases, they will even provide simple technical advice if you are having a
problem working with the data. In order to keep these relationships strong- you have to manage
them well. I stagger my data requests among different agencies, trying not to ask for more than
one large dataset from a particular agency more than once every three months.

3)

SHOOT FOR MARS, BUT SETTLE FOR THE MOON ON DATA REQUESTS
*Often times, you will put in a data request and get quoted a price that is much larger than your boss
will pay for. Once you have your I.T. allies working for you inside government agencies, ask them
for help in reducing that cost estimate. Together- you can brainstorm ways to still produce some of
the data you need while freeing up the I.T. department to work on other projects.

4) MANAGE UP
*Make sure you show your newsroom managers how your database purchases can benefit the entire
newsroom. If you have the complete employee database for your local school district- find ways to
use it in addition to your larger projects. For instance, if a school employee is arrested and the local
PIO is stonewalling, you will already have his/her name, date of hire, salary, department, and title
during a breaking news event. The more you can use databases in breaking news and daily reporting,
the more your bosses will be willing to invest in them.
5) OVERCOME THE LACK OF RESOURCES
*Many small/medium market investigative units don’t have access to non-linear editors and other
resources larger markets have, but it is your job to overcome these obstacles and still make your stories
stand out from the crowd. By working with people in other departments in your own station, you can
achieve many of the same visual effects an AVID might produce- it just might take you a bit longer to
complete. With the combined help of your graphics department and a good director, you can make
your stories memorable. In return for their help- make sure you plan ahead and ask for help well in
advance of when you go to air. Free food goes a long ways too. Many employees in other
departments will be excited to help make a major investigative project look good. As long as you
aren’t too demanding of them, they can be some of your strongest storytelling allies.
*Invest in a mini-DV cam. You can use this to set up two-camera shoots with one photographer.
You can also buy an inexpensive hidden camera to hook up to it- so you get dual uses out of the same
camera.
*If you don’t have good wireless microphones for interviews or standups- invent a solution.
Sometimes, you can still achieve the same creative results if you think ahead about how to get clean
audio even when you are shooting from a long ways away from the camera.
6)

BRING OUT THE EMOTION BEHIND THE DATA
*Don’t get your audience lost in a maze of numbers. People remember what they feel much longer
than facts they’ve heard or read about. Keep your writing focused on whatever will evoke some sort
of emotional response from your viewers (outrage, sadness, frustration, joy, relief, etc.), and use your
data to reveal the real emotion of the story. Chances are- even right after someone is done watching
your investigation, they won’t remember how many computers you told them the government lost last
year. They WILL remember feeling upset the government lost a lot of computers it paid for with
your tax dollars. If you drive home the emotional parts of the story in your writing (and minimize the
data and the paperwork), your stories will be talked about and remembered.
*Use surprises in your writing to reveal a new “ah-hah” moment for your viewers about every 10-15
seconds. Every time you come across something that surprises you while researching your story
(perhaps it is a surprise twist in the story, or an irony that can’t be ignored), write it down. If it
surprised you- it just might surprise your viewers too. If you can sprinkle those surprises throughout
your writing- your audience will stay hooked as uncover the story right along with you.

7) MAKE USE OF IRE/NICAR LIST SERVES
*When you run into technical difficulties, your colleagues in other newsrooms might have the answer.
*Sign up for NICAR’s list serve by visiting this website:
http://www.ire.org/membership/subscribe/nicar-l.html

