Keeping Government Accountable
Following the Money
The very words government purchasing make most reporters' eyes glaze over.
--The IRE Handbook 2nd Ed.
The quote is pretty much true. Perhaps Willie Sutton thought banks were “where the money is.”
But for government accountability reporting, it’s the enticing world of procurement. On your
beat, you probably tend to focus on FUNCTIONAL performance -- Does the the community get
whatever service is intended (ambulance service, education, police protection, unrutted roads)?
The spending is in the less obvious OPERATIONAL side of the organization. Whatever else it
is -- a county, a school board, a city, a university -- it's also essentially a business that's spending
a lot of money to buy things. In many places, the school board is the single largest employer and
one of the biggest buyers of building supplies, office supplies and cleaning supplies.
It's a great investigative reporting opportunity for two reasons:
1. The process is bureaucratic and inherently boring. That means that in many places, no
one is paying attention. What do you think happens when millions of dollars are at stake
and no one is paying attention?
2. The bureaucrats create a lot of paper. For the kind of reporter who lives for the chance to
prowl through a document-rich paper trail, it's a dream come true.

The Basic Data
Any city-county-agency can give you a prinout in electronic format -- called a print image -- of
their payments to vendors. This system is usually separate from the payroll system. Think of it as
the government's check register for everything it buys, every contract it has, every utility bill. Ask
for the printout to include:
• recipient with name and address information
• invoice date and/or pay date
• amount
• department and sub-department
• invoice description -- the database most likely has some brief memo or note
• fund type such as capital bonds, federal/state grants, local funds, enterprise funds
• approving official
That printout may be easily managed in a spreadsheet program. You may be able to turn it into a
database with a product like Monarch (www.datawatch.com, about $450). If you don't have that,
NICAR may be able to convert the text image printout to a table for you.
Note: Asking for a copy of the entire database may be problematic. These “databases” are often
transactional processing systems that may have hundreds of tables and use dozens of records to
account for a single payment (think pre-encumbrance, encumbrance, fund liquidation, etc.). The
printout of payments is almost certainly a report they already have and a better place to start.
Another key dataset is the Contracts Database. If there’s a procurement department, it should
have a contracts tracking system. You can try to get a copy of the database or a printout -- once
again in electronic format as a print image -- that would list:
• key dates such as bid date, award date, contract begin and expiration
• type of contract such as personal services (consulting) or commodities (toilet paper)

Dan Keating, The Washington Post

NICAR March 2004

•
•
•
•

how contract was awarded -- sole source, competitive bid, extension of existing contract
award amount -- BEWARE -- the is very often not the amount paid in the end. Contracts
can be awarded that are never used. They can be awarded at one amount and then grow
and grow and grow.
recipient with address and contact information. It may list officers of the corporation, a
place to check for conflicts of interest.
affirmative action goals, if the agency has them. The database may have information
about the vendors such as the percentage of employees who are minorities and/or women.

The Questions
An obvious question is Who gets the most money from your government? What do they do for it?
Break that down further to ask Who gets the most from each department or agency?
From the Contracts Database, you can see whether most money is spent after competitive bidding
or other means. Remember, don't assume that amounts in the contracts database are actually
amounts spent.

What To Do With It
Even if it's not an immediate investigative story, these sources provide fundamental, underlying
information that you need to know about the organization you're covering. These are excellent
sources for intranet lookups in your newsroom so reporters covering any topic can see whether
the parties do business with the government.
To make a story out of it, you can simply start with the biggest moneymakers and work your way
down the list. For each recipient, inquire what service or product they provide. In many cases,
large contracts were publicly debated and are already well known. You may be surprised that
many of the largest contracts were never publicly discussed. You can pull out the largest no-bid
contracts or compare contract award amounts to eventual payments.

Back to the Paper
To get to the nitty-gritty, you need to get paper copies of bids, bid evaluations, contracts,
purchase orders, receiver reporters, detailed invoices and contract correspondence. Armed with
the Payment Database or Contract Database, you can construct well-directed FOI requests that are
more likely to be successful. Contracts have someone assigned as the contract manager. That
person should have a folder or file cabinet for each specific contract that should have the pertinent
documents. Very large contracts may have been audited. Inquire with the relevant oversight
bodies in your area.
There are two hurdles in public record law about government spending. Businesses want to say
that their information is proprietary business information. Courts have ruled that businesses have
to be able to show substantial competitive harm, not just a general preference not to have
information out. The other common exemption is for internal deliberations or working papers of
bureaucrats. Policies and rulings on that have varied by jurisdiction. But any final action -- such
as awarding a contract -- would not fall under internal working papers. And correspondence
between the merchant/vendor and the agency is not "internal" deliberation.

Dan Keating, The Washington Post

NICAR March 2004

