Census: Beyond the obvious
Tired of obvious census stories? Think that dealing yet again with the 2000 census is worse than a
force-feeding of grandmother’s borscht?
It isn’t.
Really.
Clear the glaze off your eyes because there’s stuff in the census data mine that’s useful for all
kinds of daily, weekend and longer-term enterprise stories and projects – quirky or otherwise.
From commuting to commodes, the census has endless uses beyond basic stories about changes in
population and race from one decade to the next. Get a good feel for the data and you can keep
that pulse-free editor forever at bay with that story on the geological history of Convington.
For example:
How about finding the locus of very elderly people NOT living in nursing homes and what’s
luring them to certain places? Or what life is like for seniors where you have the biggest ratios of
elderly single women to elderly single men? Conversely, what is life like for the highest
concentration of college grads over 25 still living with mommy and daddy? Perhaps a look at the
value of commuting to the big city from the suburbs and whether it’s worth it? And while we are
at it, where are the highest clusters of shrinks, clerics and telemarketers? And who’s still heating
their house with coal and running to the outhouse when nature calls?
Among other possibilities…..
The changing economy and how it affects your turf. Which industries are gaining, which are
losing and how does that affect wages?
Development sprawl around environmentally sensitive areas. Is more and more housing going up
on sites with flooding, hazardous waste or other problems?
The workplace salary gap. Is it narrowing or widening between men and women, whites and
others?
The places where no one stays and the places from which no one leaves. Which communities
have the most transients and which have the most families who stay generation after generation?
The real estate boom. What neighborhoods are hot and which are not? Break out property sales
trends into census tracts.
Those are just a few of the stories you can do, based solely or partly on census data. With
questions on a broad range of topics and one census release that let users mix and match actual
answers on census forms, the possibilities remain vast long after the initial reports on Census
2000 land in the archives.
Here’s a snapshot of various census releases and what jewels they contain:
The major releases:
Summary File 1 (SF1), the basics
Race, sex, age, household relationships, home ownership down to the neighborhood and block
levels
Summary File 3 (SF3), lots more
Marital status, more on household relationships, education, income and poverty, jobs, commute
times and modes, veteran status, disabilities, ancestry, citizenship, education, home values, rents,
mortgage and other housing costs, home size, overcrowding, phone service, plumbing, home
heating. Data goes to neighborhood levels (block group or census tract, depending on category).

Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS), the mother lode
This is the real goldmine. There are two PUMS files that show actual answers people put on their
census forms, minus names and addresses. One file shows answers from one of every 100 forms
and is good at the large county or regional level. The other shows answers from one of every 20
forms (with fewer categories offered, but still a lot) and works better at the county level because
you get bigger samples with smaller margins of error.
PUMS data is best sifted using a statistical analysis program like SPSS or SAS because of its size,
but can be broken up into sets usable in a database manager such as Access, Paradox or Fox Pro.
With PUMS, you build your own salad, mixing and matching various answers. For example, you
can find public school teachers whose kids go to private school; how salaries differ for people in
the same jobs, with the same education and experience; how strapped single parents are for
money after they pay their housing costs or the phenomenon of house-poor middle-class families
living paycheck to paycheck after paying huge mortgages and other expenses; college graduates
still living with their parents; who takes longer to get to work, the drivers, the walkers or the
public transit riders; the number of people without indoor plumbing or telephones; blue-collar
workers getting post-high school degrees. And so on and so on. The permutations are limited only
to how far out of the box you want to step.
A cautionary note on SF3 and PUMS data: These sets are samples. The SF3 data comes from long
forms sent to one of every six households. The PUMS data comes from one of every 20 or 100
forms. So the narrower the slice (for example, how many men of Mexican descent earning more
than $75,000 own three-bedroom homes in mostly non-Hispanic white neighborhoods and walk
to work?), the smaller the number and the greater the margin of error. A result showing 25 of
some type of person or household in a community could be an estimate easily resulting from one
or two people answering a question a certain way on the long form. Not exactly reliable. Stick
with questions that produce larger numbers.
Other valuable census chunks:
County business patterns – a trove of data showing how many people work in different industries
and sub-industries. The annual data gives the number of jobs and total payroll, broken down by
size of companies.
County-to-county migration – shows domestic migration patterns into and out of every county in
the United States from 1995-2000.
Equal Employment Opportunity data – shows the number of people who work in different 471
different jobs, broken down by race, sex, where people work and where people live. The data
covers counties and places with at least 50,000 people.
Each data set can be downloaded from www.census.gov., along with data documentation files.
SF1 - http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2001/sumfile1.html
SF3 - http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2002/sumfile3.html
PUMS 1% data - http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2003/PUMS.html
PUMS 5% data - http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2003/PUMS5.html
County business patterns- http://www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/view/cbpview.html
County-to-county migration http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/ctytoctyflow.html
Equal Employment Opportuntiy data: http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/eeoindex.html

