Using Indexes for More Precise Community Profiles
(Being more precise – and less precise – with advanced statistics, 2004 NICAR
Conference, Cincinnati, Ohio)
David Donald
Training Director

Investigative Reporters & Editors
138 Neff Annex
Missouri School of Journalism
Columbia, MO 65211

Phone: 912-713-2728
Fax: 912-898-8240
E-mail: ddonald@ire.org

Journalists often need community portraits to get an understanding of how the system is working –
or not working. For example, crime statistics are put into context when we see what communities with high
or low crime rates are like. Or when investigating environmental justice, we need to understand the socioeconomic conditions of the neighborhoods near polluters.
At the same time, social researchers have been critical of reports that use a single measure, such as
poverty rate, to describe a community’s status. In their terms, the concept is too complex for a single
measure or variable. In our terms, we should think about being more precise.
Why? Because more precision can mean more accuracy.
An index is one solution. It’s a powerful way of describing a community with a single number that
readers and viewers can understand. It uses readily acquired census data. It can be mapped in GIS. And it’s
easy to do in SPSS.
A well-used index for socio-economic status is the Social Disadvantage Index. You’ll see various
forms of this in the social research literature. We’ll use one by B. Jarman developed in 1983 to illustrate.
Jarman is from the United Kingdom, and the SDI (not to be confused with the Strategic Defense Initiative)
uses U.K. census data. We’ll use U.S. census data that is very similar to the U.K. data. For example, a lot of
U.K. census data measures people age 15 and older. The U.S. data is at age 16 and older.
STEP 1 – The Data
Begin by downloading seven measures, or what SPSS calls variables, from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s AmericanFactfinder at http://factfinder.census.gov. If you need help with this, check out IRE
tipsheet #1978 by Ron Campbell of The Orange County Register. It’s an excellent introduction to the
Census Bureau’s main Web site for disseminating data.
The seven variables for this index are
1. Households of four or more people.
2. Single-parent families.
3. Rental housing units.
4. People 18 years and older without a high school diploma.
5. People 16 years and older who are unemployed.
6. People 16 years and older who are not in the labor force.
7. Families below the poverty level.
Download these data for your community at the census tract level, the closest census geography for the
neighborhood level. For this illustration, we’ll use data from Chatham County, GA, which includes the city
of Savannah. Because SPSS reads Excel files, download the variables as an Excel table. Collapse the data
(for example, adding male single parent families to female) and bring the data into SPSS. It should look
something like this.

Notice we’ve included the geographic identifier so that our results can be mapped in GIS. Also, we’ve
included total populations so we can figure rates and percentages for each variable. Give the variables
(columns) names you can remember.
Step 2 – A Rate
Because census tracts vary in size in population, we need to calculate a rate for each of the seven
variables. That will help give us our first step in making an apples-to-apples, not apples-to-oranges,
comparison.
Because census tracts usually vary between 1,000 and 4,000 people, we’ll use the familiar percent
as our rate. It can give us easy to understand whole numbers, although the default in SPSS is two decimal
places. We won’t report the percentages, so it’s not important at this step.
You’ll find an easy way to figure percentages in SPSS using the Compute dialog box under the
Transform menu item.

2

Under Target Variable, give you percent a new name. From the list on the left, highlight the variable you
want to figure percent for. In this instance, it’s families below the poverty level. Click the arrow between
the boxes, moving the variable into the right dialog. Divide that variable by total number of families for
whom poverty is figured. Multiply the answer by 100 to turn into a percent. You can use your computer’s
key pad or the key pad in the dialog box to do this. When finished, click OK and SPSS computes the
percent and puts it in a new variable (column) with your name on it.
Repeat for the remaining six variables.
Step 3 – Standardize
One more step makes sure you can compare scores among the census tracts. By calculating a
standard score or Z score, which is the mean or average score subtracted from the raw score and divided by
the standard deviation. This puts the raw rates into scores in which all the assumptions of the standard
normal curve apply. For our purposes, that makes the apples-to-apples comparison complete.
While you can compute a Z score in Excel by using the above formula (after you have calculated
the mean and the standard deviation), SPSS can do this for you. It saves a lot of time.
Go to the Analyze menu, click on Descriptive Statistics, then Descritptives to get the following
dialog box.

3

Move the seven variables that are percentages from the left list to the right Variable(s) list. Again, use the
arrow between the lists. Also, you can select all seven at once by highlighting the first, holding down the
ctrl key and clicking on the remaining six. They’re now all highlighted and you click the arrow once.
Next, make sure the box on the lower left is checked. This figures Z scores for all variables in the
right hand list, putting them in new variables (columns) in our data file. Go to the variables on the right end
of your file and check. Notice that some are positive and some are negative. That depends on whether their
rates or percents are above or below the mean (average).
Step 4 – To weight or not to weight
In Jarman’s SDI, the Z scores are then weighted. But do you need to do this? Another way of
asking this question is, how precise must you be? Or even, how precisely can you do this? Or are you being
“too” precise?
Weights are used because we know that each of the seven variables has a different amount of
impact in measuring socio-economic status. For example, the number of employed people may have a
bigger effect than, say, the number of households with four or more people in them. Simply put, not all
measures are equal, and weighting tries to account for this.
Sounds good, put it raises its own question. What should the weights be? How do we determine
them?
Jarmen figured the weights by surveying those who work with disadvantaged people. The survey
asked them on a 10-point scale how much each of the seven variables affected their workload. The higher
the ranking, the higher the weight that needs to be given to that variable.
But consider. Jarmen developed this SDI in 1983. Over 20 years, those rankings could change.
And it’s from the United Kingdom. Maybe the United States would be different. And finally, how much do
you want to trust the survey? While it gives you what appears to be a hard, precise number, that number
represents the impressions of the survey respondents.
If you decide to use Jarmen’s weights, here they are.
1. Households of four or more people – 2.88.
2. Single-parent families – 3.01.
3. Rental housing units – 3.60.
4. People 18 years and older without a high school diploma – 2.90.
5. People 16 years and older who are unemployed – 3.34.
6. People 16 years and older who are not in the labor force – 3.34
7. Families below the poverty level – 3.00.
To do this, go back to the Transform menu and click on Compute. For each variable, give it a name for the
weighted variable, move the corresponding Z score variable into the compute area and multiple by the
weight list above. That will give you a weighted Z score.

4

Step 5 – The Index
Finally, whether you are using the seven Z scores or the seven weighted Z scores, we need to put
them into one number. That’s easy. Go back to the Transform menu and click on Compute one final time.

Add all seven of the Z scores or weighted Z scores together. Make sure you give the sum a name in the
Target Variable box. Click OK. That gives you the last computation in your data file, a single number
Social Disadvantage Index.
Take a look at the distribution in your index. Since Chatham County, Georgia, has 68 census
tracts, we can look at the spread of those 68 scores.
Go to the Analyze menu, click on Descriptive Statistics, then click on Explore.

Move the final variable to the Dependent List and select plots in the Display selection on the lower left.
The click on the Plots … button.

5

Select Histogram, click Continue, then click OK.
You’ll get this histogram.

Notice that many of the census tracts are in the negative range. That makes sense. They have little if any
social disadvantage. They might even be gated (some are gated in Chatham). High positive numbers mean
high social disadvantage, with each of the seven variables playing its role.
It’s a rich – and precise – portrait.
You can put the process you’ve gone through into a nerd box. But most readers and viewers can
grasp the concept of negative numbers being the opposite of the positive numbers.
And what really is cool is exporting the data file as a dbf, easily done in SPSS. Join that file to a
census tract map in a GIS program. You now have an intuitive visual display that readers and viewers will
grasp quickly.

6

