Using state highway crash databases
Prepared for the IRE/NICAR 2004 Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
March 11-14, 2004, Cincinnati
Paul Overberg
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427

Maybe your newspaper covers every fatal highway crash in your area. That sounds comprehensive,
but it means you’re covering barely 1% of the people hurt on local roads each year. (U.S. highway
fatalities have averaged 42,000 a year recently, but another 3 million people are injured.)
It’s probably not worth trying to cover every injury crash as spot news. Even if your coverage area
includes just 300,000 people, that would mean writing about more than 500 injured people each week!
But it suggests that you might want to try to do more enterprise. One resource is your state’s crash
database. Not all states have them, and some that do don’t make them easy to get. Here are some
suggestions on why it’s worth the fight and expense:
-- It’s like housebreaking a puppy: All the work is up front. Next year – and every year thereafter –
become easy.
-- For much of the last decade, highway safety programs – and grants – have focused on “booze and
belts” – drunken driving and seat belts. Other problems may be just as important in your area.
-- Deployed on your intranet, this data can bolster daily reporting every time you write up a fatal
crash.
-- Using a GIS program like ArcView or MapInfo, you could find patterns in time and type and
space that the state hasn’t found.
Just getting the data can be difficult, depending on your state’s public records law and the agency’s
appetite for revenue. John Stefany of the Minneapolis Star-Tribune says his newspaper is arguing with
the state’s Department of Public Safety about the proposed bill: $15,000 for several years of data, plus
a nickel per crash for monthly updates. But in Ohio, newspapers can get the TransTape data file for
free, reports Ken McCall of the Dayton Daily News. For details on your state’s public records law, see
the guide compiled by the Reporters Committee For Freedom of the Press at
http://www.rcfp.org/elecaccess/.
And depending on what’s in your state’s data, privacy law may raise its ugly head. You may be
asked to sign a form consenting to use the data only for research, and to agree not to use it to find
particular individuals. If you do, check with your organization’s lawyer. It may be worth proposing a
change that states that you retain the right to find and contact individuals on this subject through
“normal journalistic means.”
If there seems to be no way around a fair-size bill, see if you can build a coalition to share the cost.
Most states have at a history of collaboration on big jobs such as polling or public records audits. The
state AP bureau or press association might prove helpful. You might do the same thing if the opposite
happens – the state gives you 5 million records in 16 linked tables and charges nothing. If you’re in
over your head, remember that NICAR’s database library can do the heavy lifting
(http://www.ire.org/datalibrary).
Once you finally have the data, make sure before analyzing it that you know what you have and
what it can do. What’s the accident reporting threshold in your state? Does the data include every
accident reported to police? Or just those that caused injuries? Or just those reported to the state
police? Or is it some sort of sample? Texas compiles all crashes into one database, but California only

compiles those handled by state agencies – each city or county handles its data from crashes on local
roads. And in North Carolina, there is both a master crash file and one just of crashes handled by state
officers.
In a 2002 survey of 32 states, a coalition of highway safety groups found that state databases’
coverage of crashes with just property damage ranged from nothing to 65%.1 The coalition
recommended that states require reports for all crashes involving death, injury or property damage of
more than $1,000, including data on everyone involved – injured and non-injured alike.
The coalition also produced a set of 111 recommended data elements. To see how your state stacks
up, compare its data to
http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/pdf/nrd-30/NCSA/MMUCC/2003/MMUCC.html#index.
One way to cross-check is to compare state data on some fatal crashes to the federal Fatal Accident
Reporting System, which can be queried online. Start at http://www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/.
Once you have your state’s data, make sure to get every code documented. If you’re compiling
more than one year, get documentation for each year – codes come and go and change. Assemble all
documentation in an old-fashioned three-ring binder, and be sure to give a copy to your library.
Inevitably, editors will want to know the most dangerous highway/interchange/intersection. This
depends on getting good traffic volume data, which is usually not included in crash databases. If you’re
lucky, there’s recent, reliable data that can be linked, without too much trouble, based on milepoints or
station numbers or something similar. If not, check your state’s bridge database, which usually
includes a figure for each bridge. Some states have placed traffic counts reports on interactive web
sites. To calculate your rate:
crashes/(vehicles)* (length of road section)
Finally, know how much is enough. State highway bureaucracies have their own ways, which
you’re not likely to change. Unless you’re prepared to plow into the world of control sections or link
nodes, you might have to accept less precision than you’d like. Get the best data you can and then use
it. You may save lives.
Thanks for help on this handout go to Jeff Claasen (Fort Worth Star-Telegram), Dan Keating
(Washington Post), Jennifer LaFleur (Dallas Morning News), Jo McGinty (Newsday), Ken McCall and
Kris McAllister (Dayton Daily News), David Raynor (Raleigh News & Observer), Dave Schleck
(Newport News Daily Press), and John Stefany (Minneapolis Star-Tribune).

“Model Minimum Uniform Crash Criteria Guideline: Improving Crash Data for Safer Highways,”
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/pdf/nrd-

1

30/NCSA/MMUCC/2003/intro.html

