Sports and the Computer: All star teammates
HEADFIRST CAR
CINCINNATI 2004
Presenter: Tom Witosky, sports projects writer, Des Moines
Register. 515.284.8522/twitosky@dmreg.com
Panel: The boom in sports reporting with CAR: Finding and using
data for better stories.

Basic databases:
1. EADA reports. Since 1996, all U.S. colleges and universities
have made public the amount of money spent on athletics
broken down on a sport-by-sport and gender basis. Known as
the EADA (Equity in Athletics Data Report) the reports show
the level of varsity level sports participation. There are several
online sources for the most basic information. The best is the
U.S. Department of Education at http://ope.ed.gov/athletics. It
is a searchable database. But there is other information
available from the public institutions. Each school must prepare
worksheets for their data that breaks down the data even more
by category. Your own database over the years will show
trends in revenues and expenditures in a variety of categories.
2. Graduation rate reports. Since the late 1980’s, colleges and
universities also must make public graduation rate information
on scholarship athletes. This information is broken down by
sport, race and gender. It is also is compared to the overall
undergraduate student body. Several online sources provide
the basic information including the Chronicle of Higher
Education (http://chronicle.com/stats/ncaa/) and the NCAA
(www.ncaa.org) Again, there is a tremendous amount of data to
be culled from the reports, but will require you to build your own
data base.

3. High school athletic budgets. Once again, you will have to do
this on your own, but the benefits can be great. Take your local
high schools and database not only revenues and
expenditures, but coaches salaries and booster contributions.
Use the database to tell you what schools take their athletics
seriously.
4. Outside income contracts. This will allow you to track over the
years the amount of money your top college coaches receive
from endorsement contracts and other deals. Coaches are
required to provide reports to their presidents for all outside
income contracts.
5. Coaches salaries. Given the increase in coaching costs, a
simple database listing base salary, outside income and other
income/benefits keeps you updated on how much a coach
makes. Saves times looking it up in the archive.

FUN STUFF
1. Play by play – Database every play for your local high school/college
football or basketball team. Gives you a capability to provide deeper
insight into tendencies and other x’s and o’s that fans love to read
about.
2. Coaches scorecard. Keep an up-to-date database on wins/losses for
each major head coach over his tenure. Takes just a few minutes and
can be used as resource when the coach is in trouble. You also want
to include rosters from each team. Players can disappear at times
when you might not otherwise notice.
3. Coaches contracts. A quick way to keep track of years left on
contract, bonuses paid or available and buyout language. Compare
coaches against each other over time.

4. Expense accounts. Public colleges and universities with Division I
athletic programs spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on
recruiting athletes and playing games. Each time a coach or team
goes on the road, they spend money. Just where are they spending it
and how. Database a year’s recruiting expenses to see just where
coaches go, how much they and on what. Remember most schools
frown on liquor on their expense reports.
Sports are always about numbers. Use CAR not only finds the story that
is below the surface, but also to manage the data in a usable fashion so
that is a click away when you write your stories. The computer is your
friend.

