Tracking 527 Committees
Derek Willis, Center for Public Integrity
NICAR 2004
(this handout is available at http://www.thescoop.org/nicar04/)
What is a 527 committee?
Technically, all political committees are 527 committees for tax purposes –
Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code governs the tax status of political
organizations. The definition that I use refers to those political committees that do not
file reports of their activities with either state or federal election authorities; they only file
with the IRS. 527s can perform a range of political activities, such as advertising,
mailings and GOTV; they cannot, however, donate to federal candidates.
What do 527s have to file?
Like federal committees, 527 organizations have to file a Statement of
Organization (called a Form 8871) and periodic reports of contributions and expenditures
(Form 8872). The IRS has instituted an electronic filing system mandatory for 527s that
raise or spend at least $50,000 in a year; others may file on paper, which are scanned into
PDFs on the IRS site. The IRS assigns each 527 an Employer Identification Number to
uniquely identify each committee, but an organization can have more than one 527
committee (several labor unions do this). 527s file on a quarterly or monthly basis during
2004. Some committees file semi-annually in off-election years, because the IRS filing
system is tied to the federal election calendar..
How can I view reports/data?
The IRS web site has two main methods of disclosure: the first is a search page1
where you can enter the name or EIN of a 527 in order to get a list of results. From there
you can view PDFs of both paper and electronic filings. The second method is a data
download of records from all electronic filings2. The IRS updates this file once a week on
Sunday mornings (although it claims to update more frequently during busy filing
periods, there is no evidence it actually does). The layout is available on the same page.
What’s in the data download?
The download file is a single pipe-delimited text file that contains records in
multiple layouts, so contributions (known as Schedule A), expenditures (Schedule B),
statements of organizations and summary pages are in the same file, along with other
records. My advice is to pull the text file apart manually with a text editor or
programmatically with a script that grabs the lines you need and writes them to a new
file. The electronic records are fairly clean, although names of contributors and recipients
are contained in a single field, so you may want to split them for analysis purposes. You

1

http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/basicSearch.jsp

2

http://forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/datadownload.jsp

can also download smaller files divided alphabetically by name if you don’t want the
whole collection, but I recommend using the single file as it makes things easier.
What’s not in the data download?
Records from paper filings, which are scanned into the IRS’ collection but are not
entered into the data download. Be sure to check the filings for every committee you are
interested in to make sure that you have all the records.
What’s the catch?
The catch(es) are several: many, if not most of the committees that file with the
IRS do not have to because they file “substantially similar” reports with state or federal
election authorities. But they do it anyway, so if you’re interested in tracking 527s in
your state, be sure to check whether the committees filing with the IRS don’t already file
with the state (there is a field in the 8871 data that indicates if the committee does report
to state authorities, but it hasn’t always been accurate). A second wrinkle is the presence
of paper filings, as I mentioned before. There is no easy way to check for these outside of
looking up the committee on the IRS site. A third factor is the weekly data update
schedule. Often a filing will appear on the IRS site on a Monday, and even though the
PDF is generated from an electronic filing, the itemized records won’t be available until
the following Sunday. I’ve pestered the IRS about this; perhaps more complaints would
help.
Where can I learn more?
The Center’s website3 tracks “pure 527s” that only report to the IRS and includes
paper and electronic reports, and we identify and standardize top individual and
organizational donors and recipients. In addition, our database is the only one that
includes records from the pre-electronic filing age (pre-2003) and dates back to the
beginning of disclosure, in August 2000. If you have questions about a filing or a
committee, feel free to email Derek Willis (dwillis@publicintegrity.org) or Aron Pilhofer
(apilhofer@publicintegrity.org) or call the Center at 202-466-1300. And if you spot any
527s that are operating in your state but aren’t listed on the site, let us know about them!

3

http://www.publicintegrity.org/527/

