KEEPING GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABLE
Public contract abuses and public employee misdeeds
NICAR, 13 March 2004

1. Remember Willie Sutton…and Bob Woodward
Piles of cash have a magnetic effect on crooks, whether they are bank robbers or
government rip-off artists. What agency in your area hands out big bucks? Take a
close look; the worst you’ll come away with is an explainer for readers/viewers of
how oodles of their money is being spent.
Usually, the faster the money is being shelled out, the more chance for abuses. Our
probe of the Ohio School Facilities Commission started when we heard them
bragging about spending $2 million a day.
The Watergate axiom of “follow the money” has been repeated a zillion times. So
what. Make it a zillion and one.
2. Learn the rules. Then learn how the rules are broken, often through creative
loopholes.
Campaign finance reporters have absorbed this adage well over the years as obscure
rules about “soft money” and “527 groups” became major vehicles for filling political
coffers. The same principle applies to government spending.
In Ohio, the School Facilities Commission had a rule that three brands or
manufacturers must be considered in all purchases. In practice, bid specifications for
new and renovated school buildings identified only one product in thousands of
instances, sometimes even including the name and phone number of the desired
supplier. This dodge of competitive bidding supposedly met the rules because a
blanket statement was included saying “approved equals” would be considered. In
practice, there were rare deviations from the original unbid specs, and vendors who
may have provided better prices for the same quality product were frozen out.
3. Who’s minding the store?
While buck-passing is common when problems arise, somebody is accountable. Nail
‘em. Be especially wary of oversight groups consisting of elected officials. Often they
are too busy or lack the specialized expertise to really pay attention, although their
names sure look good on the agency letterhead. Other times, they avoid their
oversight responsibilities by sending surrogates to meetings.
Both occurred with the School Facilities Commission. Almost by default, the
agency’s executive director wound up with the authority to unilaterally hand out
millions of dollars worth of unbid contracts. He also had the power to approve change
orders. While these usually are routine adjustments in construction plans due to
unforeseen circumstances on the job site, in one instance he OK’d a $707,000 change
order. The adjustment? An entire new school building that wasn’t in the original
plans.

4. Be strategic in your requests for documents and electronic records.
You can’t ask for everything, at least if you want to publish/broadcast this century.
But use your instincts – and sources – to fish a little, depending on your state’s public
records law.
We knew the commission’s executive director was an avid golfer (although he
claimed he did extensive business on the course). Obtaining his emails for a threemonth period showed how much time and effort he put in to scheduling his outings,
which sometimes were provided by companies getting unbid contracts. Some of the
golf took place on nationally renown courses that require expensive memberships;
while the expense for the greens fees was low, the value of playing 18 holes on such
courses for the ardent golfer is inestimable.
Examining his appointment book showed he was meeting extensively with lobbyists
who used to be his fellow staffers with the former governor. Seeking his financial
disclosure statements (which in Ohio contain only very general information) led to
the discovery that until then, nobody noticed he hadn’t filed for the previous two
years. The favors and his failure to report them were among the offenses for which he
was later prosecuted.
5. Look beyond direct campaign contributions.
The quid pro quo of course is that rarely seen holy grail, where a check to a politician
can be linked directly to a favor for the donor. Don’t limit your examination to the
official’s traditional campaign account. Look also at PACs he or she may have set up,
or other funds in which they have a direct interest.
In Ohio, we found few campaign contributions directly to the governor from
architects, construction managers and others who got most of the commission’s unbid
contracts. Several months later, when glancing over the list of donors for a statewide
ballot issue the governor was touting, we discovered that several of those firms were
major givers, even though the issue had nothing to do with school construction. Duh!
In fact, almost 90% of the unbid contracts went to firms that contributed to the issues
fund; every single firm that donated got unbid work.
By the way, that issues fund – lovingly dubbed “the governor’s slush fund” by some –
was simply rolled over from election to election to support the governor’s favored
position on the statewide issue. Unlike his own campaign fund, under Ohio law the
issues fund could get direct corporate contributions and donations in unlimited
amounts.
6.

Always answer these two questions for the readers/viewers: Who cares? Why is
this bad?

Darrel Rowland
Public Affairs Editor
The Columbus Dispatch
614.461.5132
drowland@dispatch.com

