THE TOP 38 EXCUSES
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES GIVE FOR NOT BEING ABLE TO FULFILL YOUR DATA REQUEST
(AM) SUGGESTIONS ON WHAT YOU SHOULD SAY OR DO)

COMPILEDAT OUR HOME OFFICE AT THE POYNTER
INSTITUTE BY MEMBERS OF THE
COMPUTER-ASSISTED
JOURNALISM
SEMINAR
- APRIL 20, 1994

@INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS AND EDITORS / NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING

We don't know how to do that.
Let me show you how.
Don't you know how to do your job?
Then who does know how to do it?
I'd like to meet the programmer that set it up.
I'd like to talk with your boss.
Take your equipment there and dump it yourself:
It's too late in the day to do that.
What time do you open tomorrow?
It shouldn't take that long.
What are you going to do, and how long will it take?
Might the data center be able to do it then?
Give yourself plenty of lead-time for data requests. Be clear about
what you're needing, there may already be a report.

It takes too long.
It shouldn't take that long.
How long do you think it's going to take?
That's OK. I'll be happy to wait - I've got the latest edition
of the FOI Reporter. I can read while you do it.
The person that knows how to do
that is on vacation for two weeks/
doesn't work here anymore.

So, how are you doing your work
Who is the backup, I'll talk to them.
What would you do if the governor asked for it?
I don't believe you'd close your office for 2 weeks.

It costs too much for us to do it.

0

Ask for an itemized estimate of charges.
Offer to pay reasonable programming fees.
See if there is a rate charged by the state agencies to other agencit
Offer to pay the overtime.
Provide your own tape or disc.
See if there is a commercial user rate.
Lfspecial programming is required to get a subset, think about ge
a copy of the whole set of data & doing your own subsetting.

We've never done that before.
We'll be gentle.
I'll still respect you.
So?
Surely you backup your system, We'll take yesterday's backup
We'll show you how.

We won't give you the records, you
might use it as a mailing list.

Show me the statute that says we can't use data any way we
want to.
I swear I won't use it as a mailing list.
Is there a way to disable some of the fields that would render
it useless as a mailing list.
Show me the statute.
See you in court.
File an FOI.

Our compilation is not public record.

We'll have to get approval from each
agency that contributed data.

We don't like what you plan to do
with the data.

We don't keep our data that way.

There are confidential records
mixed in.

Well, then I won't keep you. Let me know when you
have all of them.
Show me the statute that says you have to do that.
How long will that take?

0.

Tough.
Tell me why that's your business.
Show us the statute that says we can't do that with it.
Honest, you'll like the story. (Don't go into detail about what the
story.
Offer to sign a standard agreement that doesn't allow reselling.
How DO you keep your data (get record layout)?
That's OK, just give us what you've got.
I'd like to talk to your programmer.

Then take them out. (You may have to pay for redaction.)

Start working to make sure agencies deal with public record requests as systems are designed. Work
with groups like SPJ, League of Women Voters, Taxpayer Assets Project, Common Cause & state
press associations. Make a public policy issue, not a media issue. Suggest that confidential parts of
records be encrypted.
We don't think you'll understand the
data/technology.You'll mess it up.

Yes, I do.. .no I won't.
Show me the statute that says I have to
understand.
That's kind of you to worry, but don't.
The more you work with us, the better we'll
be.
I'll be sure to call you if I have any problems.

@INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS AND EDITORS / NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING

We don't keep that on the computer.

We keep it on computer, but we'll
only give you paper.

We've done that kind of analysis,
we'll give you the reports.

Make sure that's true - look at the
printout you get. If it is clean,
it probably came off a computer.
If it isn't true, file an FOI.
If it is true, is there another source for the records?
Get the paper records and start typing (don't scan).
Show me the statute that says you can do that.
Can we get the print image file (print to disc)?
This is no different from asking for paper files.
Appeal to their interests in accuracy - there is greater
likelihood of error if it is keypunched from paper.

Great, 1'11 take the reports, and the data.
I want this for further analysis.
I want this for our research library.

You don't have the equipment to handle it,
Yes, I do.
My consultant does.
Show me the statute that says I need the equipment.
The computer can't make files.

Thenitmustnotbeacomputer.
You make backups right? I'll take one of those.
How do you store your data?

Our programmer is too busy with official business.
A public records request is official business. It is part of our agency's
mission, do it.
Have them do it in off hours, and offer to pay overtime.
Threaten to hire your own programmer.

If we give it to you, we'll have to give it to everyone.
what7S your point?
Well, everyone has a right to it.
Save the files, make it easier to help the next guy.
We'd love to give it to you, but it
violates our contract with the
software company.

How can you sign a contract that lets you give away public
access?
Give us the data, not the program.

Fill in your own responses to these excuses:
We don't know how to work our own computer.
We don't have the machine that can read that record type anymore.
@INVESTIGATIVE

REPORTERS AND EDITORS / NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING

You don't know the difference between 1600 and 6250 and we won't give it to you because you don't
know anythng.
I don't understand your request.
We're &aid you'll get into our mainframe and corrupt our data.
Let me see something in writing, we'll get back to you.
We don't have to give it to you.
There's nothing ig'the state record laws that say anything about electronic records, therefore.. .
We'll be glad to do that for you when we have our new system up - should be soon now.
A private firm maintains the information - contact them.
The data is cheap, but you have to buy the software, and it's not.
We don't have liability insurance.
We lost the code, we've changed the file layouts andlor we don't collect it that way.
And, the final excuse to avoid fulfilling public records requests: The dog ate the password.

@INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS AND EDITORS / NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING

