Editing CAR Stories
Before The Reporting Begins:
• Discuss ideas BEFORE data – Don’t just run out and get a database, then look for the
story. Make sure you have a solid idea in mind, with possible human and data sources,
before investing time and resources in one particular dataset.

•

Get involved in data acquisition – Once you’ve targeted data sources, work with
reporters to develop public records requests and help with any negotiations on costs for
databases. Develop a good understanding of your state’s public record law so you’ll be
able to act on reporters’ behalf, if needed.

•

Anticipate the “warts” in the data – Keep in mind that “all data is dirty.” Get a good
feel for the strengths and weaknesses of the datasets you work with from those who
produced the data and the reporters working with it.

During The Reporting/Analyzing Process:
•

Keep a copy – Put data files in a common area so that you and the reporters have access
to them, if needed. Treat the data as you would reporters’ notes, and follow your
newsroom policy on reporters and editors sharing notes.

•

Be patient – Set a reasonable time period with reporters to analyze datasets, and talk
about what you hope to get from the analysis. Re-evaluate the time schedule as the
reporting and analyzing develops. Remember, there may be further complications with
the data once you begin your analysis, so don’t set unrealistic deadlines. But keep in
mind that the analyzing has to end at some point.

•

Write a “primer” – Work with reporters to develop a working summary of what the
data are showing – a “primer,” of sorts, of your most meaningful findings. Distribute it to
those working on the story. Editors, copy editors and graphic designers can use it as a
“cheat sheet” to double-check numbers. It also should help the reporters formulate what
they have. And it could serve as a foundation for nerd boxes or bullet points within the
story, and serve as a summary sheet for sources reviewing or reacting to your findings.

2

As the writing begins:
•

Revisit the story idea with reporters – Do the human and data sources point to the
same findings? Can you support or enhance what people are telling you with the data?

•

Think outside the main story – Considering your data findings, are there possibilities
for “breakout” stories? Graphic/illustration stories? Online/multimedia stories?

•

Consider the alternatives – As the analyzing continues, help reporters think through
possible alternative reference or data sources to check against your dataset(s). Ask
yourself: “Does my data make sense?” when compared to national data on the same
topic, or a similar analysis. If not, try to determine why your analysis might differ.

•

Dump the “nerdiness” – Help reporters think through “human” ways to describe the
numbers they’re producing.

During The Editing/Rewriting Process:
•

Remember less is more – Keep in mind that with “numbers” stories, it’s usually quality
over quantity. More numbers don’t make for a better story, BETTER numbers make for a
better story.

•

Question, question – While editing, continue to ask yourself how the data might be
interpreted by readers. Are some of the data overplayed in the story? Are the data not
supported in some way? Do the numbers tell you something/advance the story?

•

Plan for the aftermath – Anticipate what might happen after the story is published, and
think through how you and your reporters will support your interpretations of the data.
Draw up a list of possible questions and criticisms from readers and develop a plan to
answer them.

Mark Nichols
Computer-Assisted Reporting Coordinator
The Indianapolis Star
VOICE: (317) 444-6197
FAX: (317) 444-6600
EMAIL: Mark.Nichols@indystar.com

