Finding Databases on the Web
2004 Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference (Cincinnati)
Panel: The Internet for everyone: The best indexes, the best sites and where to find the best data
Carolyn Edds
Eugene S. Pulliam research director
IRE/NICAR
carolyn@ire.org

Use Google’s Advanced Search: http://www.google.com/advanced_search?hl=en
Filetype: Select Microsoft Excel (.xls) from the “File Format” field (The default is only
such that Google will search only for Excel files.)
This returns several hits from all types of domains. However, you are interested in
government databases so return to the Google Advanced Search page. In the “Domain”
field, enter gov.
Search results contain links to Excel files on government Web sites.
To add a keyword to this search, on the advanced search page, in the field labeled “with
all of the words,” enter a keyword such as education. (If you have an exact phrase, enter
this in the field labeled “with the exact phrase.”)
The search results contain links to Excel files on government Web sites that contain the
word education.
Next is to search for Access databases. Go back to the Advanced Search page and
click on the drop-down arrow in the field labeled “File Format.” Notice that Access is not
a choice. Select Excel again and click on “Google Search.”
In the search results page, notice your search sits in the search box with some syntax.
For example, to focus on Excel files, the syntax is filetype:xls
To search for Access databases, in the search box, change xls to mdb, which is the
filetype for Access files. The complete syntax is filetype:mdb.
Using filetype:mdb and site:gov for the search, the results contain Access databases on
government Web sites.
Once a file is found, to find related files or documentation about that file or which agency
is providing that file, back up one directory at a time and eventually a Web page will
display that might have information. (In Internet Explorer, right click and choose "copy
shortcut' and paste the address in the address window.) Delete the file name and strike
the Enter key. If nothing comes up, delete the directory name and strike the Enter key.
Continue deleting directory names until a Web page appears.
By the way, just as Google can be used to search Web sites in the government domain,
it can also be used to search education or organization Web sites. This can be handy
when these Web sites do not have their own search engine or the search engine seems
difficult to use.
Carolyn Edds Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference 2004 (Cincinnati)
1

For example, to search the IRE Web site from the advanced search page of Google,
enter www.ire.org in the Domain field and a keyword in the keyword field.
(State government Web sites can be found at www.state.XX.us where XX is the twoletter abbreviation of the state.)
Finding a file that doesn’t exist anymore
If the Google search results lead you to a 404 error code or the file cannot be found,
there are a couple of ways to possibly retrieve that file. Sometimes this can be used to
retrieve earlier versions of a file. The first is to try the Google cache version (see
http://www.google.com/help/features.html#cached)
Wayback Machine (http://www.archive.org)
Another way is to use Google to find the Web address of the site. Then visit the
Wayback Machine and paste the Web address into the search box and click on “Take
Me Back.” The Wayback Machine attempts to archive the Internet, although it is not
comprehensive and requests can be made by Web masters not to include pages in the
Wayback Machine.
Google Again--another way of finding databases
In the “Domain” field, enter gov. In the “with the exact phrase” field, enter
“downloadable database.” Search results include pages on government Web sites that
mention the phrase “downloadable database.” Similar phrases to use include “download
database” or “record layout.”
Other search phrases are “searchable database” or “search database.” While the
results may not include databases immediately available for download, if a database is
available to search on the Web, then it is probably available from that agency.
One reason to get a database from the agency rather than use the search interface on
the Web site is because you want all the data. More fields may exist in a database than
are provided as search options on the Web site.
Yet another way of using the visible web to find parts of the invisible web is something I
call compendium searches. These are searches for pages containing a collection of
Web sites on the same topic, usually by state. Examples: state inmate locators, sex
offender lookups, and real estate/tax assessor Web sites. Think of the text that might
appear on such a page and then search for that text. For example, to find a collection of
state inmate locators, you might use this for your search: "inmate locator" California
Maine Utah Alabama
Learning about new databases:
Google Alerts http://www.googlealert.com/
Use similar searches as mentioned above, using the syntax, for finding out about
government databases. You can set up to three alerts to run either daily, every two days,
twice weekly or every week. For example, use this for your Google Alert: "downloadable
database" site:gov

Carolyn Edds Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference 2004 (Cincinnati)
2

NICAR databases http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/
Click on the database of interest to learn the source, size, record count, how available
(by U.S. or by state) and the cost. Descriptions include table layouts, sample data and
suggestions of how the data can be used.
Uplink Index
(http://notes.ire.org/irepubli.nsf/$$PublicationsSearch?OpenForm&Seq=1#_RefreshKW_
pickview)
Once you have data or if you are looking for data story ideas, visit the Uplink index to
find past articles. If you subscribe to Uplink, you can then find the article in your
collection. Otherwise you can contact the IRE Resource Center to get a copy of that
article.
IRE Resource Center story database
http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/initial-search-stories.html
Search the IRE story database for CAR stories by using this search:
field category contains computer-assisted reporting
To focus on contest entries, add "and contest" to your search (without the quotation
marks) To focus on a subject, education for example, use this:
field category contains computer-assisted reporting and education
IRE Resource Center tipsheet database
http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/initial-search-tipsheets.html
Once you have the data, if you need help, search the tipsheet database. Most of the
tipsheets can be downloaded from the Web site with your membership ID number. For
example, search Excel and 12 results are obtained.
IRE Resource Center Bookstore--http://www.ire.org/store/books/
Computer-Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide, 3rd edition by Brant Houston.
http://www.ire.org/carbook/
The page on the CAR book includes a link to the Table of Contents, which includes links
to exercises, record layouts discussed, and other supplementary material.
NICAR-L mailing list-- http://notes.ire.org/nicarl.nsf
This is a great source of support for computer-assisted reporting. Subscription
information is available on this page. IRE members can also search the archives of this
mailing list from the same page. (Membership ID number will be required.)
NICAR 'Net Tour-- http://www.ire.org/training/nettour/
This page includes links to downloadable data from the Web, searchable online
databases and public records on the Internet.
Extra! Extra! http://www.ire.org/extraextra/
Keep an eye on this page for recent investigative stories, which sometimes include
database analysis. This collection of stories is archived and can also be searched.

Carolyn Edds Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference 2004 (Cincinnati)
3

