Measuring and reporting on highway road roughness
Greg Reeves, Database editor
Kansas City Star
greeves@kcstar.com (816) 234-4366
http://www.kansascity.com

2004 IRE Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
March 12-14, 2004, Cincinnati, Ohio
PANEL: “Bridges, dams, roads and public safety: How to find
the problems before the collapse”

You can report on the condition of your state’s highways by 1) downloading data from the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA),
2) receiving detailed measurement data from your state highway department, or 3) going out and measuring it yourself.
1. Federal Highway Administration data
The FHWA1 offers a volume online and in print called Highway Statistics2 that contains spreadsheets rating your state’s arterial roads
as very good, good, fair, mediocre or poor. The latest edition is for 2002 and was posted in October 2003. The volumes are available
online as far back as 1992, so you can compare the trend in road conditions, with some limitations, over 10 years.
In Highway Statistics, look for Section V, Table HM-63, “Present Serviceability Ratings-pavements, by functional system” and Table
HM-64, “Measured pavement roughness, by functional system”.3 These two spreadsheets contain the numbers you need to analyze
road roughness in your state.
The tables contain measurements of the seven types of roads making up the National Highway System – urban and rural interstates,
urban and rural other primary arterials, urban other freeways and expressways, rural minor arterials (all in HM-64) and urban minor
arterials (HM-63). They contain the total number of miles in the state highway system, the number of miles in each kind of highway,
and the number of miles in each condition – very good, good, fair, mediocre or poor.
Since the mid-1990s, states have used a measurement called the International Roughness Index, or IRI, to describe road roughness.
This replaced an earlier scale called the Present Serviceability Rating, or PSR. The PSR still appears beside the IRI in FHWA reports.
The IRI is a scale from 0 to 220 and above. Roads with IRI of 0 to 60 are in “very good” condition; 61-94 in “good” condition; 95-170
in “fair” condition, “171-220” in “mediocre” condition and over 220 in “poor” condition. Interstates are rated on a stricter IRI scale
with eight categories from 0 to 220 and above. You can see the categories as column headers in Tables HM-63 and HM-64.
2. State department of transportation data
The FHWA gets this data from the states, which employ specially-equipped vehicles to drive interstates and state-maintained
highways and measure roughness. These vehicles can cost $100,000 and up and are equipped with sensitive vibration-measuring
devices known as accelerometers or a second kind of device, profilometer. States submit data generated by the devices to the FHWA
for inclusion in Highway Statistics. Some states contract this work to TRW or other vendors.
Call your state highway department and ask for the accelerometer or profilometer data. In Missouri and surely other states, it’s
gigabytes in size and there’s a small DOT team dedicated to gathering and analyzing the data. Look for mapping data as well –
MoDOT has used GIS to create sophisticated color-coded maps showing the condition of every mile of the state highway system.
3. Using an accelerometer to measure highway roughness
You can also measure road roughness yourself with an accelerometer, an industry-standard device used to measure vibration and
shocks. Accelerometers are widely used in automotive testing, including by the Big 3 automakers. The devices are attached to the
front axle of a car or truck, below the vehicle’s suspension system. As the vehicle moves along the road, the accelerometer measures
the shocks absorbed by the axle and translates them into G forces.
There are many kinds of accelerometers, but the one we used cost $648 from Crossbow Technologies, Inc.4 It was the size of a
matchbox and came with a software and cable interface that was easy to hook up. We happened to have an accelerometer expert in our
tech shop – but you probably won’t have trouble finding one at a local tech college or engineering school.

1
2

www.fhwa.dot.gov
www.fhwa.dot.gov/policy/ohpi/hss/hsspubs.htm

3

www.fhwa.dot.gov/policy/ohim/hs02/re.htm

4

www.xbow.com

Measuring and reporting on highway road roughness
Greg Reeves, Database editor
Kansas City Star
greeves@kcstar.com (816) 234-4366
http://www.kansascity.com
(Over)

2004 IRE Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
March 12-14, 2004, Cincinnati, Ohio
PANEL: “Bridges, dams, roads and public safety: How to find
the problems before the collapse”

3. Using an accelerometer to measure highway roughness (Continued)
We bolted the accelerometer to the A-frame of a rented Saturn – we couldn’t figure out how to bolt it to the axle - and ran a cable from
there to the front passenger seat, where it hooked to the serial port of a laptop loaded with the supplied Crossbow software, Accelview.
Yes, we got the permission of the rental company to attach the accelerometer and run the cable.
Accelview displayed a fever-chart with a moving line that varied in height according to the G-force measurements from the
accelerometer. A big pothole would spike the line to the top of the chart. At the same time, measurements were being recorded – 175
times a second – into a fixed-record-length text file on the laptop. When we struck a notable bump or pothole, hitting the F1 key
placed a sequential marker in the data, and we wrote down the data marker number, location or landmark in a notebook. At the end of
a day’s drive, the resulting text file was 60MB-100MB.
Our reporter Judy Thomas, a former professional trucker, drove 3,000 miles around Missouri and took 33 million measurements of the
roadway. She hit potholes that measured 20G’s – a force equivalent to a low-speed car crash. Some stretches of I-70 in Missouri had
major bumps or potholes every 3 seconds at 70 mph.
The cheapest accelerometers will measure vibration in only one direction, or on a “single-axis”, i.e., up and down. That’s fine to
measure potholes, but for a better overall measure of the ride experience, we used a tri-axis accelerometer that also measured motion
right and left and back and forth.
You can download a sample version of Accelview at www.xbow.com. Disclaimer: Crossbow is about the only company I checked
out, so I have no idea if their accelerometer is the best deal. Shop around or at least get the advice of someone knowledgeable about
accelerometers.
For this project, you need someone who knows how to bolt or weld or strap the accelerometer to the axle, and how to lead the cable up
through to the passenger compartment. You also may need to enter calibration numbers, supplied with the accelerometer, in the
accelerometer software the first time you use it. We found an outside engineer familiar with accelerometers whose volunteer help was
invaluable from start to finish in the project.
The G forces measured by your accelerometer will vary from vehicle to vehicle. There is no completely escaping the suspension
system of a modern automobile. Trucks and SUVs, on the other hand, will send your G-force measurements sky high. If you can get
highway-by-highway roughness measurements from your state highway department, your accelerometer readings won’t be the same
numbers, but the pattern should be roughly comparable.
Other resources
A good primer on this subject is The Little Book of Profiling5, which contains links to everything you’d ever want to know about
measuring road roughness. It’s from the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute (UMTRI) , itself a good resource on
pavement measurement. Contact at UMTRI is Steve Karamihas, engineering research, (734) 936-1057.
David Hartgen6 is a professor at the University of North Carolina (704-687-4308) who closely monitors state reports to the FHWA
and ranks state highways according to a series of criteria such as road funding, congestion, accident rates and other factors. He is very
willing to help reporters on this topic. His latest report, The Looming Highway Condition Crisis: Performance of State Highway
Systems, 1984-2002 13th Annual Report, is at http://www.johnlocke.org/policy_reports.
The Road Information Project (TRIP)7 is an insurance industry-backed not-for-profit organization that promotes road safety. TRIP
analyzes and publishes results from FHWA road roughness data every year, and ranks the states.

5

www.umtri.umich.edu/erd/roughness/litbook.html
http://www.geoearth.uncc.edu/people/faculty/hartgen/ dthartge@email.uncc.edu
7
http://www.tripnet.org/index.html
6

Measuring and reporting on highway road roughness
Greg Reeves, Database editor
Kansas City Star
greeves@kcstar.com (816) 234-4366
http://www.kansascity.com

2004 IRE Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
March 12-14, 2004, Cincinnati, Ohio
PANEL: “Bridges, dams, roads and public safety: How to find
the problems before the collapse”

