Behind the Criminal Justice Veil
John Archibald, Database editor
The Birmingham (Ala.) News
jarchibald@bhamnews.com
(205) 325-2324
Thursday, June 17, 2004

2004 IRE National Conference
Atlanta
Crime Beat: The data and stats of injustice
http://www.al.com/birmingham

Crime is generally covered well by newspapers and TV news organizations. That is, the coverage
of killings and kidnappings and bank robberies is usually thorough. Often we fall into a routine
in this coverage, however. We tell the story of the crime, with perhaps a profile of the victim or
killer. But we too often rely on police officers and prosecutors to give us crucial information.
Find other ways to tell the story. Find data that holds those authority figures accountable and
leads you to the real stories. Your story may lead to the courts, where you will find that whitecollar criminals continually face penalties less severe than those convicted of drug possession
and other crimes. You may examine police effectiveness or police corruption and misdeeds. You
may find areas where poverty and hopelessness make crime inevitable. Don't just go on the ridealongs and write about heroic police officers bursting into the homes of criminals. Look behind
the veil. Look for data that will part the armored curtain of the police department and the courts.
Potential stories:
County coroner's office: We acquired a database of all homicides in our primary county for a
15-year period. We backgrounded the crimes and victims. Rather than focus on the crime, we
focused on those left behind, and wrote a series called "The other victims of homicide." Such
data also allows you the ability to do demographic analysis and examine police investigative
techniques, clearance rates and success.
FBI uniform crime stats/state criminal justice information center: You can download stats
from the FBI or many of the states, but IRE has amassed the data over time in a convenient
database.
Build your own crime database: Our newspaper collects all burglaries and other crimes to print
each week in the zones. We are massaging that data into a metro-wide crime database. Use such
a thing to test whether police are accurately reporting crime, especially in the smaller
communities where scrutiny is less intense.
Acquire data from prison systems and state and court systems to find criminals in places
they shouldn't be. We acquired those databases and ran them against a database of all school
employees in the state, finding that more than 300 school employees, in violation of the rules,
had been convicted of serious crimes. More than 60 of those lost their jobs after the stories ran.
DUI databases: Acquire from your Department of Public Safety a database of all DUI offenders.
This is more difficult since the advent of the Driver's privacy protection act, but it is still possible
if you ask for the database without personal information of the driver attached. You can go back
and find that elsewhere. We found dozens of multiple DUI offenders with more than eight

convictions. Two had more than 24 convictions, multiple wrecks and countless more dismissals.
Both claimed to be the state's DUI champ. Looking at local Uniform Traffic Citations can also
lead to stories about illegal reduction of DUI charges to reckless driving, and can show whether
local or state officials have illegally "fixed" tickets for friends and associates.
Crime mapping: Use Arcview or other GIS software to map homicides, burglaries, other
crimes. Do the crimes occur near schools or liquor stores? Do they occur near abandoned homes
the city has failed to demolish? Mapping can point you toward the true story quicker than almost
any other method.
Tracfed: Tracfed is a subscription service administered through Syracuse University. It allows
you to examine all prosecutions, verdicts, and many other elements of the federal justice system.
You can analyze by agency, such as FBI, DEA, ATF etc., or you can analyze by crime or crime
category. This can be a valuable tool. We used the data to show that in Alabama, those convicted
of embezzlement, fraud and other white collar crimes are routines released with a slap on the
wrist while those convicted of simple drug possession in the federal system almost always
receive long prison terms. The stories pointed out flaws in sentencing guidelines more than
improprieties in the courts.

Other websites of interest:
Bureau of Justice Statistics: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data:
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/index.html
Federal Justice Statistics Resource Center: http://fjsrc.urban.org/
FedStats: http://www.fedstats.gov/

