Bulletproof CAR Projects
NICAR – Cincinnati, OH
March 13, 2004

It’s a trip. Plan it
Where do you want to go?
How will you get there?
Imagine the best possible stories. Write ledes for those stories.
Then think about what information is required to support those ledes.

Are you going to France? Or to the Louvre?
Describing France to your readers requires generalized data, but describing the Louvre depends
on specifics.
If other people can go to France and describe it differently than you do, then probably all you
have is a series of anecdotes.
Understand the difference between anecdotes and patterns.
Anecdotes define nothing more than themselves. Patterns define a larger universe.
Understand the difference between a universe and a sample of the universe. If France is the
universe, the Louvre is definitely not a sample. Nor is the Eiffel Tower. Nor the Bordeaux
region. But they could be elements in a sample that included examples of museums, monuments
and regions.
Samples must be random – any entity in the universe must have an equal chance of being
sampled.
A universe includes every entity.

Stories Based on Samples
Voter preferences for Democratic presidential nominee – random sample of registered voters.
Judicial sentencing patterns in Los Angeles County Superior Court – based on study of random
sample comprising 1,831 adult felony court cases.

Stories Based on Universes
Homicide investigation, prosecution and sentencing in Los Angeles County, 1990-94 – based on
study of the universe of 9,442 homicides.
Safety and efficacy of the Marines’ AV-8 Harrier attack jet – included study of the universe of
392 Harriers in the Navy Aviation Safety database.

Building your own database
Do your own data entry, at least until the database design is proven to be adequate and variable
definitions are so stable that there is no possibility that individual interpretation determines how
or what data is entered.
Database design loops:
Loop 1:
A: Obtain a representative sample of source materials.
B: Goto Loop 2.
Loop 2:
A: Design/revise a prototype database.
B: Enter data.
C: Run queries.
D: Analyze strength/weakness of design.
E: Goto Loop 1.
Repeat process until you get it right.
Design and use data entry forms as an intermediate step to force standardized formatting of
information from paper records, court files, etc.
If using multiple persons for data entry, do regular accuracy checks by randomly and secretly
having each enter data from the same record. Build internal verification tests into the data entry.
Demand 100% accuracy. Data become facts in the story. Factual errors are intolerable.

Low Tech Tools for High-Tech Projects
Create a start-to-finish audit trail on paper.
Take notes on what you are doing. Date them. Save them.
Better yet, type memos to self in Word describing what you’re doing, how, and why. Date them.
Save them.
Print copies of your table specifications. Print copies of your query designs. Print copies of your
formulas. Print copies of your programming code. Print copies of your reports.
Put serial numbers on all paper sources that will be entered into a database.
File them in folders by serial number.
Enter the serial number in the database as one of the variables.
Use a “numbering machine” (fancy self-incrementing hand stamp) to put serial numbers on
paper documents.

The rule of Three
Print everything on 3-hole-punched paper.
Put the paper into three-ring binders.
Three-inch thick binders work great.
Put each successive report, program, memo, etc. at the front of the binder.
Put a yellow Post-It flag on the top page of a group of pages and write a short label on the flag.
Label the binder as “Book 1” plus the name of the project.
When Book 1 is full, start filling Book 2.
Store the binders together. Long, complex projects may generate one or more “Final” books to
distinguish the completed analysis results from all the preliminary work.
Take relevant binders with you into meetings with editors.
Richard O’Reilly
Editor, Computer Journalism
Los Angeles Times
(213) 237-7084
richard.oreilly@latimes.com

