INVESTIGATING DIVERSITY IN THE
COURTS
Rick Brundrett, state judicial writer
The State newspaper
rbrundrett@thestate.com
www.thestate.com
803-771-8484

2004 IRE National Conference
Atlanta
Panel: “Exposing Racial Disparity”

1. Take the time to learn how your state’s court system is structured and how
judicial elections are conducted. Most states have several methods of election,
depending on the court level. In South Carolina, for example, the state
General Assembly in a joint session elects Supreme Court, Court of Appeals,
administrative law, circuit and family court judges; the Legislature also
confirms master-in-equity judges appointed by the governor, though not in a
joint session. Probate judges are popularly elected, while magistrates are
appointed by the governor and confirmed the state Senate; municipal court
judges are appointed by their respective town or city councils.

2. To find out how many minority judges are at each court level, you can
contact your state court administrative office; they often keep statistics for
their own records. If that isn’t available, you can contact judges who head
their respective court associations; e.g., in S.C., there are separate
associations for circuit, family and magistrate/municipal judges. Your state
bar association also is a good source. And just talking to longtime judges is
helpful. To determine the number of minority lawyers in your state, I would
suggest contacting your state bar association; the S.C. Bar, which is a
private, non-profit organization, even provided me with dates of birth and
licensing dates (without names to protect identities) of all participating black
lawyers for a story on judicial qualifications. The U.S. Census Bureau
(www.census.gov) also has data on minority lawyers by state, as well as
overall minority populations.

3. The American Bar Association publishes a book, “Minority Judges in the
U.S.,” listing minority judges, by name, race and court level, in each state.
Their latest edition is several years old, but I’m told they are working on an
updated version. I have found their research at the appellate and trial levels

generally to be reliable, but right now, I wouldn’t trust their numbers at the
lowest-court levels – South Carolina’s figures for low-level courts were
grossly under-reported. I suspect that’s because the ABA tracks only
lawyer/judges; in S.C., magistrate, municipal and probate judges do not have
to be lawyers.
4. The American Bar Association last year published a lengthy report titled,
“Justice in Jeopardy: The Report of the Commission on the 21st Century
Judiciary,” which examined judicial elections nationwide and made a
number of recommendations, including ways to improve diversity on the
bench. The report lists the names of the commission members; they can be
good resources for a story on diversity. If you need more contacts through
the ABA, you can contact their media office in Chicago at 312-988-6171;
their Web site address is www.abanet.org.
5. The American Judicature Society in Des Moines, Iowa, is an excellent
resource for diversity in the courts; I relied on their database of AfricanAmerican appellate and trial court judges (which, in turn, was derived in
part from the ABA minority judges report) to analyze diversity patterns
nationwide. Their phone number is 515-271-2281; their Web site address is
www.ajs.org. I also relied on the National Center for State Courts in
Williamsburg, Va., for information about judicial election methods by state;
their media phone is 1-800-616-6164; their Web site address is
www.ncsconline.org.
6. With any database project, it’s a good idea to double- and triple-check your
findings before you go to print. I also like to bounce my findings off experts
and other sources before publishing; I would rather know beforehand if
there are major problems with my methodology or premises.
7. And don’t forget that the people on the front lines make the numbers come
alive. It wasn’t always easy, but I spent a lot of time talking with judges and
lawyers for my stories. I was surprised at times by what they had to tell me
and learned a great deal from them.

