TIPSHEET: REPORTING/WRITING ABOUT WORKPLACE DEATHS
IRE Annual Conference, June 2004, Atlanta
By Justin Pritchard – Associated Press Writer (jdpritchard@ap.org)
-- Unlike many federal agencies, the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries (part of the Bureau of Labor
Statistics) lets its researchers help reporters directly, though a flack can help direct you to the right person.
Make friends with the researchers, treat them well and they’ll help you out.
E-mail cfoistaff@bls.gov or work through BLS flacks at 202-691-5902. The BLS also hosts a searchable
site (http://data.bls.gov/labjava/outside.jsp?survey=cf), but that can be frustrating to navigate and doesn’t
include all categories in the data – notably country of origin or state where the death occurred.
For population data, the best place is often the Current Population Survey – but when you start to get into
detailed queries, the numbers can be overwhelming, so don’t be afraid to enlist help (either as you extract
the data or as you review your conclusions before publication). Outside experts can also alert you to
pitfalls– in the case of CPS data, for example, population estimates below a certain number (opinions vary
from 50,000 to 75,000 people) are probably not reliable enough to use for calculating death rates.
-- The data have blind spots. The CFOI tallies annual totals by state, by occupation, etc. But it doesn’t
release victim names, when and where they died, what went wrong and why. Ways to fill in these details:
press reports, advocacy groups and Occupational Safety and Health Administration accident narratives.
OSHA keeps what it calls an “Integrated Management Information System” that has limited details of
specific accidents. This system is available online at (http://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/accidentsearch.html),
but is spotty and often months behind the actual accident.
-- All that said, don’t rely on statistics. Readers will drown in their Cheerios if you don’t illustrate the
story with compelling details about real victims. Finding the families and friends of victims, or coworkers
who witnessed deaths, takes even longer than you’d expect and they can be reluctant to talk. They may
not want to dredge up painful memories, or, in the case of the stories I wrote about Mexican-born worker
deaths, they may be worried about attracting attention of the authorities. Plan accordingly and prepare for
frustration. If you travel to do the interviews, reconfirm times and places (twice) before you hit the road.
-- Co-workers and relatives are hard to pin down, but employers are worse. Clearly explain to them that
you will give them a fair shake -- but if they don’t talk, you can’t fully represent their side in the story.
With the exception of one meatpacking company, every employer I approached tried to brush me off
initially – but once they saw I wasn’t out to skewer them, many engaged and the stories were better for it.
-- Once you sit down to write, imagine you’re on a barstool. What is a “death rate” in normal parlance?
Although workplace death stories are always about real-life examples, their foundation often is in the
data. Think of phrases such as "the odds that X kind of worker will die..." or "X workers were more likely
to die than..." But while those general phrases were fine for the top paragraphs, since you’ll ideally have
actual rates, why not include them?
If you do, be kind to your readers. The government reports death rates as X per 100,000 workers. That is
very abstract -- and because death rates tend to change slowly, might obscure otherwise important
changes over time. Instead, think about calculating death rates using a 1 in X formula. In other words, as I
wrote, "The annual death rate for Mexicans increased to the point that about 1 in 16,000 workers died.
Meanwhile, for the average U.S.-born worker, the rate steadily decreased to about 1 in 28,000." The
alternative would have read something like this: Mexican rates reached about 6.25 per 100,000 workers
while U.S.-born rates fell to about 3.57 per 100,000 workers. What's a fraction of a worker, anyway?

