Broadcast skills: Shooting and editing the story
Stephen Kline, Investigative Producer WOAI-San Antonio (stephenkline@woai.com)
Bryan Staples, Producer/Photographer WTVF-Nashville (bstaples@newschannel5.com)
Kristin Stinar, Investigative Reporter KSTP-Minneapolis (kstinar@kstp.com)

Let’s face it, not every investigative story has blockbuster video. CAR stories
can be among the most important we do, and at the same time, the most
boring for viewers to watch. Here are some of the ideas we’ve come up with
through trial and error, to help make those stories come to life.
1) The computer is NOT the story. CAR is a great tool to help analyze data and
uncover stories, but focusing the story around the computer is great way to lose your audience.
Just because you used a computer to research the story doesn’t mean it has to be in the story.

2) Find creative ways to VISUALIZE the data you have uncovered.
There are no limits. Ask other people for ideas. Brainstorm to find a visual way to communicate
what your data means to the viewer. If you have an idea but can’t make it happen, find
someone who can.

3) When you have no video... CREATE it. Graphics can help support what
you’re trying to say. By layering background video with still photos, documents, objects or
chyron, you can develop a moving image to draw viewers in.

4) EXPERIMENT with liveshots or multi-part standups. They can help
illustrate an example of what you’ve uncovered. Use natural sound breaks and different angles
to demonstrate a point. When trying to convey amounts or numbers, use a visual comparison
that make it easier for the viewer to comprehend. Show versus tell.

5) Pacing is key- DON’T outpace your story. Compliment the words with
graphics and pictures. Don’t try to too hard to fit too many pictures and nat breaks, it can
distract from the message. But in some CAR stories, quick edits are a must. A long computer
shot can slow down the piece.

6) Try TRANSITIONS. Shoot objects like Hi-8 cameras at different angles and add
sound effects to transition to undercover video.

7) Use CAMERA and EDITING tricks to keep viewers interested.
Vary your shot selection. Use sequencing mixed with natural sound. And don’t be afraid to try
something different. For example, undercover video isn’t just for undercover anymore. Try
using it for shot variety or to get a different perspective you wouldn’t otherwise get.

8) Play with LIGHT. Good lighting always adds texture and depth to video. In CAR
stories, instead of just a flat shot of the reporter and the computer using fluorescent lights, put
light behind them and shade the screen. Create great looks to breathe life into monitor shots.

9) Make the most of MONITORS. Try lighting a tv monitor or two and shoot
your video as it plays on the screen. Keep in mind, a flat screen is just that, flat. So avoid
shooting monitors head on. Angles add depth and focal lines to your shot. Move the camera
around the monitor, take the viewer’s eye in different directions. Take part of a CAR story off
monitor. Print the data and use the hard copy to create nats and use interesting lighting to keep
the viewer tuned in.

10) Take the reporter OUT of the hole. Most reporters have desks that are in
corners or cubicles in the newsroom. Use a lap top or create a computer look in a conference
room, then cut to the real screen.

11) Watch your story with the VIEWER’S EYE. Look at your story like you
know nothing about. See if it slows in places or if there is not enough video. Don’t be afraid to
cut something if it slows the piece. Also, don’t be afraid to make changes.

12) COOKIES and CANDY. Create great relationships with your graphics
department or editor. It’s not always easy to bring that vision in your head to reality. They put
in the time and deserve to be rewarded. Treat them right and they will bend over backwards to
make your graphics stand out.

Bottom line, there are no hard and fast rules. So don’t be afraid to try
something different. Ask others for ideas and opinions. If it doesn’t work
you can toss it out and try again. Remember, tape is cheap. Have fun!

