Sports Reporting: The Real Records
Author: Mike Fish
Author Affiliation: SportsIllustrated.com
Contact Information: 404-827-2553 (office); mike_fish@simail.com
Conference: 2004 IRE National Conference, Atlanta
Panel Name: Investigating Sports
Panelists: John Sugg, MaryJo Sylwester
Affiliation: Creative Loafing, USA Today

Investigating sports is pretty broad stuff _ and rightly so. If you look at the program for this year's annual
IRE conference, you find some very specific sessions for other folks in the newsroom. Sports is nowhere to
be found in any of the titles, but the same basic practices and techniques apply.
Here are a just few examples that catch the eye:
Tracking the dollar: City hall. For a sports guy, this sounds very much like what we do with a university
athletic department.
Covering sex scandals: From the military to high schools. We're talking, sadly, a subject not foreign to
the sports department, whether it's Little League baseball or AAU basketball, the University of Colorado
and a number of other big-time football programs or professional athletes.
Investigating your local company whether public or private. Again, this is something routinely done in
sports departments, whether it's the local pro franchise, the collegiate athletic program or sports governing
bodies like the United States Olympic Committee or the NCAA.
Pretty highbrow stuff for the Toy Department, right? Not really. The myriad of games, matches and races
will always drive the coverage. As a society, it can be argued we pay too much attention to sporting
diversions. But the media can't get caught up in boosterism. For the media, coverage has to remain
professional, balanced and it needs to be about more than who won, who clocked the fastest 100 meters or
hit the longest home run.
We've certainly made strides getting beyond just game coverage and writing about personalities, and
investigating sports reporting has all the appearances of a growth market. Consider some of the day's major
sports headlines and the issues behind them:
BALCO: Drug testing, sports science, legal issues, international sports.
Athens Olympics: Business/finance, security/terrorism, international politics.
Kobe Bryant: Legal, sports figures and abuse.
Bowl Championship Series: Finances, contracts, TV networks, non-profit bowl organizations, academics
vs. athletics.

Maurice Clarett: Labor law, academic fraud allegations.
How do we cover these stories? Like we do everything else in the newsroom, with solid reporting and as
many public records and documents as we can get our hands on.
Work the Beat: First, it's about hustle and legwork. It's identifying people close to the situation, experts
in the field and flushing out the details. In some cases, it is the sports scientist who broke the code on a
previously undetectable steroid. It's important, of course, that you cultivate relationships and trust long
before, so your sources are there when you need them. For a story involving a double-murder after the
Super Bowl here in Atlanta four years ago, it was tracking down the cab driver that first pulled up on the
scene. That meant finding video footage of the crime scene and going frame-by-frame to get the license
plate number and tag on the taxi.
Assertive Inquisitiveness: Have some passion for the subject to go with the curiosity to look into dark
corners. Be respectful of institutions and individuals _ whether the state's flagship university, the U.S.
Olympic Committee or a coach who regularly basks in the public spotlight _ but don't accept their word as
gospel. Dig around on your own.
Records, records, records: We live in an age where everyone has an opinion and an outlet to express it,
whether on talk radio, the Internet or on the pages of the local newspaper. That's where good reporting
separates you from the noisy crowd. And nothing ends an argument or lends credibility to a story faster
than a public document or a paper trail.
Go into a story assuming you can find a paper trail on the person or organization. Run a search to see
what's been written in the past. Look through local and state records _ bankruptcy court, Department of
Motor Vehicles, divorce court. If it's a nonprofit organization such as a booster club or now even some
athletic departments whose finances are run through outside organizations, request a copy of the group's
Form 990.
When I was looking into the Florida State football program last year, I found information in Florida
Department of Motor Vehicles and Leon County Circuit Court records that helped flush out a story on
quarterbacks Adrian McPherson and Chris Rix. Both had had their license suspended. McPherson had at
least five traffic citations. From these, I found out about a vanity plate (AFIVE, the 5 being his FSU jersey
number), blue neon lights on his windshield wipers and hood, and a TV mounted on the dashboard of the
1999 white Ford Expedition. Rix, it turned out, received two speeding tickets in his 1999 maroon Chevy
Tahoe the morning after quarterbacking FSU to a loss against Notre Dame _ both on the same road outside
the stadium and 30 minutes apart.
So ask around for databases that are available to you. Graduation rates on college athletes are available
through the Chronicle of Higher Education (http://chronicle.com/stats/ncaa/) and the NCAA
(www.ncaa.org). The NCAA site also includes a historical database of major infractions cases that can be
quite useful.
Media outlets would also be wise to periodically make public records requests of their state university,
asking for copies of correspondence between the athletic department or its compliance director and the
NCAA. This can be a tip off to a possible investigation. If you're interested in recruiting stories, ask for
expense reports related to, say, men's basketball recruiting over the last 12 months - including individual
staff members' travel and meal expenses, telephone records, etc. You'll likely uncover what coaches are
spending, where they've been, how hard they're recruiting top prospects and, as I found in one case, that the
head coach and a top recruit flew into town together on a charter jet and the kid's hotel mini-bar was empty
when he left.
Another college-related story worth looking at is the Bowl Championship Series (BCS). It's in the news
on a regular basis as BCS folks generate millions of dollars running the major college bowls. Most people

assume the NCAA runs postseason football. Well, it is not. Instead, the BCS (Orange, Sugar, Rose and
Fiesta) and the long list of lesser bowls are most often Chamber of Commerce, civic booster-type outfits.
They're non-profits. So you're free to dig through their Form 990s to see the monies they generate, where it
is spent, how much or how little goes to legitimate charitable causes, as well as compare the salaries of top
executives with other non-profits.
All of the major conferences _ the Southeastern Conference to the Big 10, for instance _ are set up as nonprofits. Request their 990s and compare salaries paid top executives, income generated and how it’s
dispersed to the member schools, sponsorship deals, the revenues behind conference basketball
tournaments and football championship games.
Coaching salaries is always a hot topic for discussion. After the 2002-03 college basketball season, I
noticed what seemed to be a large turnover of head coaches. So I made an Open Records request of the
major programs, requesting the contracts of the new head coach as well as the coach he replaced. This
allowed me to detail the significant bump in salary and perks as coaches shuffled along. It also provided
nuggets like incentives for wins and postseason appearances, contract buyouts and the like, that could be
used in stories during the upcoming season.
Based on the response to the story, I began a similar project with top college football coaches last
summer. The intent was to obtain contracts for coaches of the Top 25 teams to run at the start of the 200304 bowl season. It ended up taking three or four months to gather all the contracts. Teams moved in and out
of the Top 25, so the list was always in flux. And in a lot of cases it took multiple written requests as well
as phone calls before folks would part with the records.
Again, the end result was great detail as far as salaries and perks paid coaches, buyout clauses routinely
written in should the coach quit or be fired. This information doesn't have to be helpful just for a lengthy
project or enterprise piece, but can generate stories in the course of daily coverage. When there is
speculation about a head coach leaving for another job, you can speak with authority about the remaining
years and dollars on his contract, as well as whether it's practical for him to leave based on his pricey
buyout clause.
Compiling this depth of information on a national level might be a daunting a task, but media outlets
should make it an annual routine for their local college programs. You're leaving out a significant part of
the picture if you allow yourself to remain clueless about the money of your college athletic program and
teams.
Also a surprisingly large number of coaches have incentives written in for graduating players. So it's
possible to go back and write about their performance and the range of bonuses when the NCAA publishes
its graduation rates. Or on his next birthday, this August 27, I can now write authoritatively that Texas
coach Mack Brown is due a one-time bonus of $1.6 million.
So records are really important to get your hands on. They don't have to be for just investigative or
enterprises pieces. They can offer a strong, creditable voice to daily beat coverage. And if you have an idea
of what you're looking for and who the custodian is, they're not that hard to get.
Here are some keys:
1. Get your hands on a copy of letter requesting public records. The Student Press Law Center
[www.splc.com] has an easy to follow letter generator [See the example below].
2. Be prepared to cite the applicable public records law.
3.

Identify or know the best source in getting the information. Who is the custodian?

4.
Be patient. It's going to take time. So put your request in and go onto other business while
your waiting. But also be persistent. Write again if you don't receive a response within the time
frame cited by the law. Don't be afraid to follow up with a phone call.
A SAMPLE LETTER

October 2, 2003
T.K. Wetherell
President's Office
Florida State University
211 Westcolt Bldg.
Tallahassee, Fla. 32306`
Dear President Wetherell,
Pursuant to the state open records law, Fla. Stat. Ann. Secs. 119.01 to 119.19, I write to request access to
and a copy of the most recent contract for head football coach Bobby Bowden and athletic director Dave
Hart, including any and all outside income associated with their positions. If your agency does not maintain
these public records, please let me know who does and include the proper custodian's name and address.
I agree to pay any reasonable copying and postage fees of not more than $35. If the cost would be greater
than this amount, please notify me. Please provide a receipt indicating the charges for each document.
As provided by the open records law, I will expect your response within ten (10) business days.
If you choose to deny this request, please provide a written explanation for the denial including a reference
to the specific statutory exemption(s) upon which you rely.
Thank you for your assistance.
Sincerely,

Michael J. Fish
Sports Illustrated.com
Senior Writer
One CNN Center
Atlanta, Ga. 30303

