TEN LESSONS FROM THE COURTHOUSE
Jeffrey Meitrodt
Special Projects Editor
New Orleans Times-Picayune
504-826-3497
jmeitrodt@timespicayune.com

1. It’s a great place to go to find out things people don’t want you

to know.
Lawsuits produce information that the people you write about wouldn’t share with their
closest friends. During the discovery phase of a lawsuit, both sides go fishing for
evidence they can use at trial. These exhibits can be invaluable to your reporting, even if
the case itself is not newsworthy for your readers.
Example: the National Football League, one of the most secretive organizations in the
United States. Though taxpayers have spent billions on new stadiums, the league refuses
to divulge the most basic financial information. What we did: used Minnesota antitrust
case against the league to obtain financial data on every team in the country. Found out
the Saints – who received millions of dollars in support because they claimed that playing
in such a small market hurt their finances – were league’s second most profitable team.

2. Visit the courthouse regularly
When you start working on a profile of a person or a company, visit your state and
federal courthouses to find out if they’ve been sued, or gotten divorced, or filed for
bankruptcy. You will find all kinds of things that make your profile richer.
Example: “Deadbeat D.A”. While researching an election-year profile on the local
district attorney, we found out that he had been sued more than two dozen times. In those
files, we discovered that he had done business with two mob associates, defaulted on $18
million in loans and – while sitting on the board of a local savings-and- loan - rewarded
himself with loans that violated federal banking rules. The result: he resigned from office
the day he was supposed to sit down with us and discuss our findings.

3. Don’t depend on lawyers to understand the case
Lawyers aren’t there to tell the truth; they’ve been hired to win a case for a client. So
become your own expert. Read the case file and study the exhibits. Discovery produces
things that neither side may use at trial, but which may prove invaluable to your story,
and to your readers’ understanding of what really happened.

4. Don’t expect to learn everything you need to know in court
A hearing or a trial produces a news hook, but don’t expect to write a good story if all
you do is sit in court and listen to what the lawyers and witnesses have to say. Lawyers
only use the evidence they need to make their case, which may leave you – and your
readers – in the dark. Again, you have to master the case file and the exhibits.

5. Lawyers are great gossips
Forget attorney-client privilege. Lawyers are some of the best gossips in town, and they
know the best secrets. Get to know the most prominent civil and criminal lawyers. Call
them once a month to discuss cases you’ve written about or want to know about. Ask
them if they’ve heard of any interesting cases. You’ll come back with a notebook full of
stories.

6. Judges are not priests, even though they both wear black robes
Don’t be afraid to second-guess the judge, especially if he or she was elected. If you dig
into a high-profile case, you’ll often find the same kind of cronyism that exists at City
Hall. Look at the judge’s rulings, both during the trial and before it took place: Was
important evidence excluded? Were experts prevented from testifying? Did the judge
refuse to strike jurors who showed bias or provided evidence of a conflict of interest
during voir dere?
Example: “Shell Game.” We found two elected judges had abused their positions by
consistently ruling in favor of a powerful local constituency: oyster farmers. The farmers
claimed they were hurt by a coastal restoration project. The evidence showed, however,
that most of the farmers are doing better now than before the project was built.
Nevertheless, the farmers won $2 billion in court, jeopardizing $14 billion in future
coastal restoration projects. The result: state passed a constitutional amendment
prohibiting such lawsuits in the future.

7. The story isn’t over when the judge/jury comes back with a

verdict
After spending a week covering a trial, you may think your readers are tired of the
subject. But don’t quit yet. Sometimes, you can’t write the complete story until the trial is
over because you’ve been missing crucial evidence. But now you have access to
everything. When the case is appealed or settled, you’ll be in position to write a strong
feature.
Example: “Road to Ruin.” Our newspaper pub lished a 175-word item on the conviction
of a 32- year-old investment broker who stole $1.8 million from her clients. After
reviewing the case file and looking at divorce records and civil lawsuits involving the
woman and her husband, we found out that she had stolen the money to finance her

husband’s gambling sprees at local casinos. We used the case to anchor a three-day series
on problem gamblers.

8. The courts are where laws are tested
Wondering how a new state/federal law is being applied? Look for a case to illustrate it.
You’ll discover that what gets passed in Congress and your local Legislature gets a whole
new interpretation at the local level – where cops and lawyers use and abuse it.
Example: “Highway Robbery?” We found a racial profiling case that showed how cops
can make life miserable for Arab-Americans by seizing their cash when they travel out of
state. Two Palestinian immigrants – who were on their way to buy a convenience store in
New Orleans – had $27,000 seized when they were pulled over for careless driving in
Mississippi. Result: The feds ordered the money returned the day we published the story.

9. Everything is not where you expect it to be
Don’t show up at the courthouse the day before you’re going to publish your story or you
may be disappointed. If you’re trying to find an older lawsuit, it may have been shipped
somewhere else and the clerk will have to spend a couple of weeks retrieving it. If the
case is on appeal, the record will no longer be at the trial court – it will be at the appeals
court. And if you are looking for property records – such as mortgages and conveyances
– they are often kept in some obscure basement that may take some sleuthing to find.

10. Not all pleadings are created equally
Remember that most lawyers are paid by the hour, and they fill the record with pages and
pages of frivolous junk. Here are the key records to find, especially if you’re in a hurry:
- Original complaint/ petition, in which the plaintiff (or the state in a criminal matter)
first addresses the alleged wrongdoing (amended complaints/petitions also be worth
a look, as the original pleading is sometimes pretty skimpy and is filled out as
prosecutors/lawyers find out more)
- pre-trial orders, in which both sides lay out their entire case, along with witness lists
- motions for/against summary judgment – again, another nice overview. In state
court, judges often make one-word orders granting or denying the request, but
federal judges like to explain.

