Mark Katches
Senior Team Leader
County, State and Investigations
The Orange County Register
mkatches@ocregister.com
(714) 796-7724

Testing as an investigative technique
The Orange County Register spent two years investigating the dangers of
Mexican candy. We tested ingredients and candy samples. We also tested
children in a Mexican village where pots are made to hold tamarind candies.
TOXIC TREATS – MAJOR FINDINGS
ü The government has found dangerous levels of lead in candy one in four
times it tests, but it almost never tells the public.
ü Of the 112 distinct brands of candy that have tested high for lead, most
came from Mexico. In more than 100 cases involving different brands,
regulators have withheld the test results from the public – even when
candies tested high repeatedly.
ü In the Register’s own tests of candy, more than 30 percent of the brands
tested had at least one candy sample register dangerous levels of lead
ü Chili powder was a major source of lead. And it’s the most common
ingredient in Mexican candy.
ü Children have been contaminated in a Mexican village that makes pots for
candy. Of 92 children tested, 87 had elevated levels of lead.
PRODUCT TESTING
ü Inventory the ingredients. If you’re going to test a product or products
make sure you log all the ingredients. When you’re comparing products,
you can analyze the data and find links or common ingredients.
ü Trace the manufacturing process. Once you’ve determined the key
ingredients or key phases in the manufacturing process, go to the source
and follow the ingredients every step of the way if possible. We did this
with chili peppers used in Mexican candy. We started in the chili fields and
followed the trail through the drying and milling process before the product
is sold to candy makers.
ü Collect samples in a way that avoids cross contamination. We also
collected dirt samples, water and other ingredients. We consulted with
experts first. They told us how to get dirt samples and advised us to avoid
using metal spoons or shovels. We used a plastic spoon instead. We also
made sure that we asked a lot of questions about how to store samples.

ü Make sure you keep track of what you obtain. We kept careful logs of
the dates, times and places where we bought candy or obtained our
samples. From the get go, we were thinking of ways to analyze the data.
ü Consult experts. We’re not scientists. So when we decided to go down
this path, we wanted to talk to as many experts as possible. This may be
one of the most important steps you can do if you’re ever going to do
product testing. Product testing is not that common in the newspaper
business, and there have been cases where the testing has been attacked
because the journalists didn’t do their homework or used collection
methods that were questionable. Our testing results have not been
challenged by anyone. It helped a lot that for our candy testing we decided
to use the same private laboratory contracted by the state of California to
do its testing.
ü Develop a testing strategy. Once you’ve spoken to the experts, write a
plan on how you will go about testing samples. Make sure you get buy-in
from the top and figure out your budget. Product testing is relatively
inexpensive, but it can add up. We started with a budget of $2,000 and
ended up spending $9,000 because I kept convincing my bosses we
needed to keep going.
ü Explain your protocol. It’s important to describe to readers how you did
your work. When a newspaper does something as bold as testing
hundreds of samples of candy, or ingredients or children, we felt it was
important to take the time to explain how we did it.
ü Put your results on the Web. Consulting the experts, developing a plan
and explaining to readers how you did the work are great ways to boost
the credibility of your findings. Another way is to post the results online.
Every PDF we got from the laboratories we used were published online.
ü Make sure your sample size is large enough. This can be tricky. How
many samples do you need to prove your point – while not breaking the
bank? We typically tested five samples of each brand of candy. We did a
total of 180 pieces of candy and wrappers. For chili we tested 25 samples
of ground chili. We tested about 20 samples of dried chili and a fewer
number of fresh-picked chili. For some ingredients – salt and sugar, for
instance – we tested just a handful of samples, and stopped if we got no
hits.
ü If you test human subjects make sure to get consent. We tried to test
children in California but met resistance from health-care professionals
because of privacy issues. When we tested in a village in Mexico we
made sure that parents understood the results would be used for our
reporting. Again, it is important to consult experts and have a strategy.

