State Data: Making it Work for You
Kevin Corcoran, Statehouse reporter
The Indianapolis Star
kevin.corcoran@indystar.com (317) 444-2770
http://www.indystar.com

2004 IRE National Conference
Atlanta
CAR Day: “Dissecting Local and
State Government with Data”

Begin online: Start by tapping Web sites. Here are some useful ones:
§ National Association of State Budget Officers: NASBO (www.nasbo.org) is the professional
organization for state budget officials. Many briefing papers are available as well as reports on state
spending that can be broken down per-capita with census (www.census.gov) data to figure out where
each state ranks.
§ Federation of Tax Administrators: (www.taxadmin.org) Loads of nifty state-by-state tax data that can
be copied and pasted into Excel spreadsheets on deadline.
§ National Conference of State Legislatures: (www.ncsl.org) Click on NCSL Online Databases to find
the Education Finance Database, the Campaign Finance, Lobbying and Ethics Legislation Database,
the Commercial Motor Vehicles Database and others.
§ National Governors Association: NGA (www.nga.org) publishes reports on revenue shortfalls,
Medicaid woes and state income taxes.
§ Stateline.org: (www.stateline.org) This site has a searchable news archive and downloadable
spreadsheets containing such data as state-by-state teachers’ salaries, numbers of charter schools, perpupil spending, Medicaid enrollment and TANF caseloads. Not all of the data is recent, but it could be
useful for determining where your state fits in the national picture.
§ My other favorites include: Guidestar (www.guidestar.org), where you can download Form 990 tax
returns for foundations and charities; the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, (www.cbpp.org); the
Rockefeller Institute of Government’s Fiscal Studies Program (www.rockinst.org), whose work is
often featured in The Wall Street Journal; The National Center for Educational Statistics
(www.nces.ed.gov), which features loads of downloadable data; the Multistate Tax Commission
(www.mtc.gov); and the National Association of State Medicaid Directors (www.nasmd.org).
§ Other Internet sites: Stateline.org recommends www.statelocalgov.net/index.cfm, which features state
and local government links; www.firstgov.gov, the U.S. government’s official web portal;
lcweb.loc.gov/global/state/stategov.html, a Library of Congress site with state government links;
www.constitution.org/cons/usstcons.htm, which links to state constitutions;
www.prairienet.org/~scruffy/f.htm, which links to state laws; www.statesnews.org, The Council of
State Governments’ web site; www.publicintegrity.org, the Center for Public Integrity’s site, which
contains several state-by-state analyses of ethical conflicts; powerreporting.com, Pulitzer-winner Bill
Dedman’s site for journalists; nilesonline.com/stats/, a free statistics site for journalists; www.nass.org,
the National Association of Secretaries of State; www.aamva.org, the American Association of Motor
Vehicle Administrators site; www.opensecrets.org, the Center for Responsive Politics’ databases of
federal contributions, which can be supplemented by the Federal Election Commission’s site,
www.fec.gov; www.followthemoney.org, The Institute on Money in State Politics’ site, which features
a database of state-level contributions; the Education Commission of the States, www.ecs.org; and the
National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, www.naruc.org.
§ Closer to home: The Internet can be used to view state lawmakers’ statements of economic interest,
determine the location of prison inmates, look up state workers’ phone numbers and e-mail addresses,
check the docket of court appeals, download state campaign finance data, obtain electronic copies of
court opinions and so on.

Finding “real people”: Use e-mail to cultivate readers who respond to stories as potential sources.
Databases of people who respond to polls and agree to be contacted by reporters also can be helpful on tight
deadlines. Before reaching for the phone, you can have a feel for the respondents’ politics, income level, race,
etc., but be sure to verify the poll responses with them. Pollsters don’t always get it right.
Overcoming obstacles: If you’re like me, you come to conferences like this, find inspiration and then
return to the reality of a short-staffed news operation. Not only do you have daily deadlines, but you must file
stories for your news outlet’s Web site – or even appear on TV news to discuss the deadline story you’re
working on. Taking the first step toward doing a computer-assisted story seems daunting, and the rewards
seem hazy and far off. It’s easy to get discouraged, especially when you consider the time and resources
poured into projects that get you excited about CAR in the first place. However, mastering some of the
simplest elements of working with spreadsheets can make your work much easier while ensuring you get
stories the competition doesn’t have. My initial exposure to CAR came in the early 1990s, when the first
national CAR conference was staged in Indianapolis. But it was several years before I got to try my hand at it.
My first efforts weren’t anything special. But gradually, and deliberately, I built the skills necessary to make
CAR a part of my daily routine.
Getting started: Even if you have no idea how to use a spreadsheet (which is the best tool for getting
started), try asking government officials for relatively modest amounts of data in spreadsheet format. Don’t
put your requests in writing, though, because that’s kind of formal. You want public officials to feel like
giving you a computer file is the most natural thing in the world for them to be doing. Once you obtain the
file, open it in Excel. Scroll through the data and eyeball it for interesting patterns. Learn how to do simple
rankings using Excel’s sort function. If you’re in a hurry and don’t have time to do a full-blown analysis, these
rankings can help you determine which paper records you should pull (highest, lowest, average). After you
master this, try other calculations, such as totaling columns of numbers, figuring averages, determining
percentage changes. Having a guide like Brant Houston’s book on CAR comes in handy sometimes, especially
if you need a quick refresher. I also recommend ComputerPREP’s series of books that guide you step by step
(and I do mean step by step) through how to use programs such as Microsoft Access and Excel. The guides
start at a basic level and work their way through advanced uses of both programs. The books
(www.computerprep.com) are $22 apiece, and you might as well spring for the instructor’s guides. I also
recommend NICAR’s CAR Bootcamp, an intensive weeklong seminar put on several times a year at the
University of Missouri (www.ire.org/training/bootcamps.html). During the camp, you will learn basic SQL, or
structured query language, and will work with campaign finance and other data. When I went, I took some
data I was working with at the time and sought the trainers’ advice to work through problems I was having.
You get to keep the data you work with at the boot camps, so it’s a good idea to save the queries you write.
Open a Word file on your desktop and copy and paste them into the file so you can retrieve them later.
Getting data: If you enter into talks that could lead to paying for data, ask for a file layout and sample
records so you can figure out if what you’re buying is worth the expense. Don’t pay too much. You don’t want
officials to start thinking that selling computerized data can generate money for their cash-strapped agencies.
Indiana law puts computer records on an equal footing with paper records. The law states that agencies,
schools, local governments and other public entities cannot charge more than their “direct costs” of providing
data. Indiana law also features a provision that allows agencies to recover costs of any special programming to
meet requests for electronic records; in such cases, it allows agencies to recover 105 percent of the cost of
developing each program, labor to retrieve the data, and the cost of the CD-ROM or computer diskette. I have
only once paid for data. That’s because I routinely emphasize how much PAPER they’re saving by giving me
the data electronically. Saving data to a diskette means no one has to SPEND HOURS COPYING paper
records. See how REASONABLE I can be! Enough said.

What's out there: If a paper record exists, I assume somebody – somewhere, somehow – is punching its
contents into a spreadsheet or database program. If you think this way, your imagination is the only limit to
what you might discover.
Here are some examples:
§ The Indiana Supreme Court ordered an overhaul of the state’s property tax system. After tens of
thousands of Indianapolis homeowners’ tax bills doubled or more, I analyzed a couple of datasets for
follow-up stories. The first was a series of annual tax burden studies the District of Columbia’s
controller publishes. We used them to show that Indianapolis’ property tax burden on homeowners
was relatively low compared to other cities of similar size in the Midwest and elsewhere. In addition, I
analyzed a database of 209,767 owner-occupied homes to show how a slick maneuver by the General
Assembly had watered down a promised tax break to save the state more than $200 million. This was
done by calculating what the break would have saved homeowners vs. what they actually saved. The
same database also was used to show that thousands of homeowners had received more than the single
tax break they were entitled to for their primary residences. (Read more about this in NICAR’s next
issue of Uplink.)
§ I used the Indiana attorney general’s litigation database to analyze how much the state was paying out
in damage claims, and why? I found that repaying homeowners for mailboxes damaged by snowplows
and paint damage to cars from relined interstates was so common the Indiana Department of
Transportation had a special form for it. I also found the prior attorney general, an appointee who
served less than a year before losing her bid for election, paid out an unusually high amount to settle
cases.
§ After nearly 1,400 state workers accepted a retirement incentive package meant to ease Indiana’s
budget crunch, I obtained a spreadsheet from the state’s budget office listing: their names, job titles,
agencies, hire and departure dates, and salaries. Using conservative assumptions that state budget
officials endorsed, I quickly determined the state was within reach of its goal of saving $32.7 million a
year. The story included the highest- ($128,720) and lowest-paid ($15,730 after 18 years) workers
taking advantage of the incentive program; the number of retiring workers with more than 50 years of
individual state service (5); and the cumulative years of experience of the retiring workers (35,825).
§ While reviewing the governor’s campaign contributors in a spreadsheet, I noticed he had accepted a
lot of money from tobacco companies after announcing his steadfast support for Indiana’s lawsuit
against the industry. One of the primary legal arguments in Indiana’s lawsuit was that tobacco
companies had spent decades enticing minors to smoke by making smoking appear glamorous. The
irony: Even as the governor had accepted tobacco money while also supporting the state’s tobacco
lawsuit, he was advancing a children’s health agenda. I pointed out nearly every big politician in the
state, with the exception of the attorney general who filed the suit, was accepting tobacco money. But
the governor – who had accepted at least $30,000 – was taking the most.
§ After a candidate for governor unexpectedly won, I used a spreadsheet of donors from Election Day
through the end of the calendar year to show that energy companies hungry for deregulation had bet
heavily on this underdog after the race was over. Most had given to his opponent before the election.
§ Using the state’s gasoline octane-testing database, I analyzed results of more than 2,000 samples
drawn from stations across the state. I found that violations had declined steadily after testing began. I
also found it was safest to buy well-known brands, such as BP and Shell.
§ I used the state’s unclaimed property database to find $18,000 in checks due state agencies had been
collecting dust in the attorney general’s office because the rightful owners could be found. (In
fairness, some agencies had changed names!) There were 79 unclaimed checks for 28 agencies. Most
weren’t aware of checks until I called them.
§ Other useful databases I have come across include: property tax appeals, property sales disclosure
forms, no-bid contracts, attorney discipline cases, members of state boards and commissions, state
employee overtime, and state workers’ appeals of salary and promotion decisions, unwanted shift
changes, suspensions, harassment complaints, overtime disputes and smoking policy gripes.

