TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
IRE Conference
Atlanta, June 2004
Laura Ayo
Knoxville News Sentinel
865-342-6341
ayol@knews.com
CRASH COURSE
http://www.knoxnews.com/kns/traffic/text/0,1406,KNS_358_15416,00.html

What prompted the story :
Our mayor made repeated public statements that a particular Interstate interchange in our
city was the most hazardous in the state. We wanted to know whether that was true.
How we did the story :
No entity maintained a database of all crashes that occurred in the state. The DOT,
claiming federal protection under 23USC409, wouldn’t release its Accident Rate
Summary Report. So we decided to look at whether the interchange was the worst in the
city by obtaining a copy of our police department’s crash database.
The analysis:
Within days of asking for it, the police department gave us an Access database containing
its Uniform Traffic Crash Reports. There were 21,000+ records in the database. Some
of the fields included crash report number, crash location, type of crash, number of
vehicles involved in the crash, number of injuries and number of fatalities. We spent
more than a month cleaning up the crash location field. We then ranked the locations by
number of crashes, number of crashes with at least one injury, number of injuries,
number of fatal crashes and number of fatalities.
The initial findings:
For the 19-month period we examined, the mayor’s most dangerous location was 5th for
number of crashes, 8th for number of crashes with injuries and 8th for number of injuries.
There were no fatal crashes there.
The first round of reporting :
We spoke with transportation planners, traffic engineers, AAA and the UT Center for
Transportation Research about our analysis and the findings. It was recommended that
we separate out the intersections from the interstate interchanges and that we calculate
crash rates.
More analysis:
We obtained traffic counts from our Metropolitan Planning Commission and city traffic
engineering department. Working with a traffic engineer and transportation planner, we
calculated crash rates for the intersections. Based on the information we had, we were
unable to calculate crash rates for interstate interchanges.

More reporting :
We wanted to know why these locations stood out above all others and what could be
done, if anything, to reduce the number of crashes there. We spoke to traffic engineers,
transportation planners, DOT, city officials, including the mayor, legislators, AAA and
the research center. We tracked down people who had been involved in crashes at our top
locations to get their perspective. We solicited comment from readers about problem
areas. We spoke with paramedics, police officers and DOT Help truck drivers about what
they encountered every day. We obtained transit usage data from our transit authority
and used census data and licensed driver data from our state department of safety to
address the issue of whether there were too many cars on the road.
After the story : DOT released the 409 materials. Absent from the list was the
interchange in question. DOT is moving forward with a road improvement project
designed to correct the problematic interchange.
ON THE WINGS OF CONTROVERSY
What prompted the story :
We received several anonymous calls saying the newly hired president of UT was using
the university’s airplane for personal matters. At the same time, the university began
talking about replacing the airplane. We wanted to know who was using the plane, where
they were going and whether it really needed replacing.
How we did the story :
We asked the university for flight manifests for the plane. The information was only
available on paper; so two reporters spent a few days in a conference room at the
university building a spreadsheet.
The analysis:
We entered the names of the passengers and flight departure and arrival information into
the spreadsheet. We assigned each trip a number and each flight a number. We imported
the spreadsheet into an Access database. We determined who went where, how often the
plane flew and where it went the most often.
The findings:
The president of the university used the plane more than anyone else. Two of the top-10
locations were to the city the president lived in previously and another city our sources
had said he was visiting for personal business. The plane flew empty more than it flew
with someone on board.
The reporting :
We spoke with people who flew most frequently on the plane, university officials,
legislators, other universities and the aircraft’s manufacturer for a story about how the
plane was being used and whether a new one was needed. We also filed an open records
request for the president’s personal calendar.

After the story :
The president resigned weeks later. One of many audits determined the president used the
plane for personal business, racked up thousands of dollars in questionable expenses and
awarded no-bid contracts to friends and associates. Two of his top staff members lost
their jobs. A criminal investigation was launched, but the AG determined there was no
evidence of criminal wrongdoing. The search process that brought the president to the
university was scrutinized and the process used for the next president was conducted
more openly. New rules were implemented for the use of state airplanes. A similar story
was done for the use of TVA’s airplane after sources told us the chairman used the plane
to travel to and from his home in another state.
DON’T OVERLOOK:
Calls for service from: E-911 center, law enforcement, DOT Help truck operators
Enforcement campaigns conducted by law enforcement – they track the numbers
Building permits, new business licenses, rezoning and census data compiled with
traffic counts
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s Fatality Analysis Reporting System
(FARS)
Traffic signal priority listings

