Editing the big project
John Erickson, Dayton Daily News, (937)225-2266;
jerickson@daytondailynews.co
Bring your editor in from the beginning
• This makes your editor part of the team
• Decisions can be made jointly
• There are no surprises
• Makes it easier to coordinate art and graphics
• You get a better edit
Be a storyteller
• Aim for the heart, not the head. Find victims, even when they’re hard to
find. Two years ago we did a huge project on giant livestock farms, a
subject most of our readers knew little about. So we showed how the
farms are poisoning scenic rivers, endangering water supplies and
polluting the atmosphere. We told stories about a small community in
Indiana that had a series of miscarriages that were linked to
contamination in a nearby well. We went to Milwaukee where a lot of
people still believe the cyptosporidium epidemic in 1993 that killed 104
people was tied to animal waste. And we told the story of how poultry
houses in Arkansas owned by Tyson Foods are polluting rivers across
the border into Oklahoma, which has no jurisdiction to regulate them.
Remember this when doing any complicated story: People relate to
people much more than numbers on a spreadsheet.
• Find a gimmick. Tell the story through a single lens: a company that is
laying off workers because it is outsourcing its IT jobs overseas may be
the best way to illustrate a story on the global economy. The New York
Times magazine followed a single calf from birth to slaughter to
illustrate the economics of farming. To find out what it was really like to
work in a barn with 300,000 chickens, Dayton Daily News reporter Ben
Sutherly spent a week working on the farm. He wasn’t Paris Hilton —
Ben grew up on a farm — but he’d never seen anything like this, and
neither had most of our readers.
• Try a narrative. The best stories have a beginning, a middle and an end,
but most journalism stories aren’t structured that way. Take a chance.
Put us in the operating room, or at a crime scene, or at a natural
disaster, then leave us hanging until the end of the story. In 2002,
Dayton Daily News reporter Mary McCarty followed the story of Mary
Beall, a police officer shot after putting her gun down in a standoff. In

the opening scene Mary wrote that Beall felt a lightening, as if she was
about to die, then she remembered her daughter. It gave her something
to live for. But you didn’t know unless you read on whether she
survived. You only knew that she wanted to. People love narrative
stories, as evidenced by the long lines at local bookstores. They’re just
not accustomed to seeing it in their local newspaper.
Invent a new wheel
• For the Peace Corps series, the DDN obtained a database no media
outlet had ever seen before. In fact, few people outside the agency even
knew it existed. When the agency refused to release it, the newspaper
filed a lawsuit in federal court, which was settled when the agency
agreed to release the database. Our finding, that reported assaults on
volunteers had increased by 125 percent since 1990, had never been
reported before because nobody but the Peace Corps had ever seen the
data. We also were able to show how the Peace Corps was
underreporting its crime statistics. OK, you can’t always find a database
untouched by human eyes, but as you’re doing your background
reporting look for references to databases. Russell Carollo discovered
that the Peace Corps had an assault database because of a reference to
it in a report to Congress. We eventually discovered they had two
assault databases and a database on deaths. We knew we were onto
something when a Nexis search turned up no stories about any of these
databases.
• If you can’t find a database, create your own. When we were
researching our farm series we discovered that there was no national
database of regulations. Each state had separate laws, but nobody had
put them together in a single database. By calling each state and
constructing a grid, we were able to make statements like “half the
states don’t require megafarms to meet air quality standards, and just
four states enforce limits on toxic gas from large farms.” It gave us
something original and quantifiable, and gave regulators a notion of how
to fix the holes in the system.
• In every series we try to do something different. In 1999, for a series
on faulty military aircraft, we took a single story — the crash of Lt.
Cmdr. Randall McNally — and turned it into a serialized narrative: 6
parts. It was a series within a series, and not until part 4 did readers
know for sure that he died.
Check your work. Then check it again
• Don’t make a mistake because you forgot to check something. Line by
line your story. Is there anything in this sentence that could be untrue?
Does it unnecessarily put someone in a false light? In a big series, fact checking can take weeks. Build that into your timetable. Usually any

work that gets changed during fact-checking not only improves the
accuracy of your story, but also the readability. The subjects in your
story will also be impressed with your thoroughness, and that can be
invaluable after the story is published.
Be a Felix, not an Oscar
• Record-keeping is the key to good projects reporting. Organize your
notes. Type up your interviews. Alphabetize them. Keep phone numbers
in a place where you can find them. Create folders on your desktop for
research, related stories, databases, interviews. Work at it so you can
find things in a hurry. Keep a spreadsheet. Don’t just file things
randomly. Work out a system, so when you’re looking for a file three
months down the road you’ll know how to find it.
Make it pretty
• Get photo and graphics involved early and often. Make them part of the
reporting team. Discuss what you’re trying to accomplish and ways you
can make the art complement your reporting. Also, don’t be afraid to
express a need to your photographers and artists: We need more
victims. We need a P1 foto for this day. We need something to lede the
entire series with. Too often projects suffer because the lede art
decisions come after the fotos are shot. Make it part of the front end.
Some key presentation elements:
• Put readers at the scene of the crime
• Use graphics to complement reporting
• Use photos & graphics to tell a story
Nail the lede
• Spend days on it if you have to, but get it right. I don’t have a
preference for an anecdotal lede over a hard lede, or vice versa, but the
lede should grab the reader in a legitimate way. Put yourself in the
reader’s shoes: What would I want to know about this? For a story on
military prisoners getting paid by the government, Russell Carollo used
three examples of bad guys — a soldier who choked a cocktail waitress,
another one who sodomized three teen-age boys and a third who
molested a 4-year-old girl in a Dayton church — followed by the
punchline: each was paid during their prison stay by the federal
government. One of them received $148,616. It was a dynamic
example that screamed something is wrong with this picture. For a story
on foreign athletes in college, Mike Wagner took a different approach.
He described an actual soccer game where an American-born goalie was
overmatched by his foreign-born competition. It put us at the scene and
made the point of our entire series, that foreign agents and middlemen
were influencing the outcome of games in the United States, i.e. it’s an

unfair playing field. For Day 1 of our Peace Corps series we went with a
straight anecdote, but we felt it was so shocking we couldn’t not go with
it: a Peace Corps volunteer who was gang-raped twice. Our only rule on
ledes is if you’re going to use an anecdote, it better be a good one and
you better quickly get us to the nut graph of the story.
Bullets are for guns
• OK, they’re sometimes effective in news stories, too. We often use
bullets because the main story of a major series may be the only one
many readers read, and it allows us to cover a lot of ground in a tight
space. But there are a couple of rules: 1) Write them tight; and 2) Don’t
just repeat below what you told us earlier. You can expand on it, but
don’t send a message to a reader that they’ve read all this before.
Some general principles on writing long-form stories
• Do some of your best writing in the body of the story.
• Use subheads as second, third ledes.
• Write with discipline — don’t tell us everything you know.
• Don’t relegate human examples to sidebars. Sprinkle them throughout
your main stories.
• Blow out at least one example, i.e. the poster child.
• Theme each day of the series. Try not to have kitchen sink days.
Make the web your friend
• Post databases, hard to get documents on-line, but treat them as you
would a story. If you wouldn’t publish something in a story, i.e.
sensitive information that might have legal implications, why would you
do it on-line?
• Create some buzz around your story. It lives on the web, it dies in your
paper.
It’s a marathon, not a sprint
• Choose your projects carefully. The best projects have the following
things going for them. 1) The issue is an important one. 2) There are
victims. 3) The subject has been underreported, or has never been done
this way. 4) Something — a database, the release of records — allows
you to bring something new to the table. 5) There is some narrative
potential. 6) There is a potential for results.

