20 Tips for using open records laws
(Tips 15-20)
Ken Ward Jr.
The Charleston (W.Va.) Gazette
(304) 348-1702
Kward@wvgazette.com
IRE National Conference 2004
Atlanta
15. Get in a “FOIA State of Mind”: Make using the FOIA a part of your
daily routine – like calling a source on the phone or looking up
information on the Internet. FOIA requests are really just another tool
in the box, but they are a very sharp one. Whenever you start on story
or a project, think about ways you can use FOIA to help. What documents
can you ask for? What information might be lurking in agency e-mails or
correspondence logs?
16. File early and file often: The more you file FOIAs, the easier it
gets and the more you learn about doing it. Also, if agencies know that
you know about FOIA and will use it, they will be more likely to cough
up the documents without a formal request. Set a goal: File one FOIA
request every week, whether you need to or not.
17. Don’t be afraid to read the law: The best defense against efforts
to limit public access is a reporter who knows the law. Checking
summaries from SPJ or other groups is great. But nothing beats actually
reading the law itself. The Reporters’ Committee’s website contains the
text of all state public records laws at http://www.rcfp.org/cgilocal/tapping/index.cgi?function=browse. Better yet, see if your
newspaper library gets updated copies of the annotated state code. The
information there might be timelier. The DOJ website contains the text
of the federal FOIA, and maintains a running update of federal FOIA
litigation.
18. Surf the FOIA reading rooms: All agencies have them, and there’s a
list on the DOJ website at http://www.usdoj.gov/04foia/other_age.htm.
Many agencies post frequently requested documents there, or include
records that others – including reporters – have requested. Maybe
somebody else had a great story idea that you can borrow.
19. Consider filing with more than one agency: Depending on the issue,
different agencies are more or less likely to give you what you want.
If your state government balks at giving you a water pollution report,
maybe the regional EPA office has the same report and would be glad to
release it.
20. Learn about threats to public access: Subscribe to the Society of
Environmental Journalists’ WatchDog Tipsheet, a compilation of FOIA and
other First Amendment News, at http://www.sej.org/foia/index7.htm.
Other groups offer similar services. Check out the Reporters
Committee’s News Media Update at http://www.rcfp.org/ or the Society of
Professional Journalists FOI News at http://www.spj.org/foia_news.asp.
21. (BONUS TIP!) Get involved in fighting threats to public access:
Join or donate money to one of the groups that is fighting efforts to
rollback public access laws. Write your local congressman about the
issue. Encourage your newspaper to do stories – and editorials – about
these issues. When your FOIA request gets turned down, do a story
yourself about that. If journalists don’t stand up for public access
laws, nobody is else going to do it.

