Covering federal courts tip sheet
(1) If your coverage of the federal courts is mostly concentrated on individual show trials, you
are not covering the federal court system.
(2) The federal court system is not a single system. It is a very complicated organism with many
independent parts and very little central coordination.
• The investigative agencies to a remarkable degree go their independent ways.
• U.S. Attorneys around the country are much more independent of the policies of the attorney
general than are understood. The attorney general does not have the power to remove a U.S.
Attorney; that only can be done by the president. According to the text books, each U.S.
Attorney is appointed by the president. Historically, however, the senior political figure in
each state who belongs to the president's party has a very big voice in choosing who will
have this important job. This means an important aspect of the position is political.
• Judges, who mostly operate in the public with a court stenographer in the room and with
opposing lawyers present, have much less discretion in how they function than the U.S.
Attorneys and the assistant U.S. Attorneys.
(3) The law is not the law. Very important policy decisions often are made in complete secrecy
by federal prosecutors. The concentration of the press on individual cases obscures this fact.
Over a ten-year period in California a few years ago, for example, there was a huge variation in
environmental enforcement in the different districts. In the Northern District (San Francisco), the
U.S. Attorney and his assistants chose not to prosecute environmental cases. In the Southern
District (San Diego), the U.S. Attorneys and his assistants did.
(4) To better examine the federal court system, examine the enforcement trends in your court
over a period of years, see if policies have been changed. To better examine the federal criminal
process in your district, compare its performance with other roughly similar judicial districts.
(5) Stories about complex systems require some expertise and lots of time. Collect the string you
need during quiet periods in the news cycle. Do not tell your editors about your investigation
until you are sure it is a significant.
David Burnham
Co-Director, TRAC

