Investigating Agriculture: Down on the Farm
Christine Stapleton
Database Editor
The Palm Beach Post
cstapleton@pbpost.com
561.820.4587

1. Who’s supposed to be watching the barn?
Agriculture is one of the most heavily regulated industries. In Florida, there are 22 state and
federal agencies that oversee farming. First, identify the agencies responsible for making sure that
growers comply with local, state and federal regulations and laws. The best way to identify these
agencies is through growers’ trade organizations or an ag extension service. These groups often
provide regulatory guides for growers. Approach this task as if you are a new farmer. Where
would you go, who would to consult to find out what licenses you need, what rules you need to
follow?
2. Understand the regulations and the regulators.
What is each agency supposed to do? How well do they do it? How well do they work with other
agencies? Many agencies are responsible for a small slice of the regulatory pie. Inspectors aren’t
cross-trained. You’ll have situations where a wage & labor inspector might be standing in the
middle of a field sanitation violation but doesn’t recognize it. There may be fighting among
agencies. Agencies also don’t share data so it’s difficult for inspectors to get a true picture of the
grower. A pesticide inspector doesn’t have access to data about wage & labor violations or
contractor licensing data. Also, there is probably an auditor general somewhere who audits these
agencies and determines whether they are doing a good job. Find the audits.
3. Obtain data on violations, fines, penalties and suspensions. The U.S. Dept. of Labor maintains
data on wage & labor disputes and also oversees violations of the Migrant and Seasonal Workers
Protection Act. However, it delegates much of the MSPA enforcement to the states. Farm labor
contracting, transportation and housing regulations are enforced by local agencies. State agencies
also oversee enforcement of state and federal pesticide.
4. Politics – the final frontier. Beyond campaign finance and lobbying expenses, investigate the
background of politician/growers with appointments affecting the industry. How many times have
their farms been cited for wage or pesticide violations? Have their farms been the target of
lawsuits? Are their contractors licensed? Is the housing they provide sanitary? Do their vehicles
have the proper insurance? Have workers been injured? How many no-match letters have they
received from the Social Security Administration? How much land do they own? Where is it?
What do they farm? What kind of pesticides do they use?
5. Labor – What kind of labor force? Are workers employed by the grower or a contractor? Are
they paid hourly or by the piece/pound? Are workers required to pay for their implements? Are
workers covered by disability and workers’ comp insurance? What kind of training do they
receive? What percent of workforce is seasonal? How do they get to/from the fields? Where do
workers live? Finally, are workers organized and how influential is the UFW in your area?

6. Pesticides – one billion pounds of pesticides are applied to U.S. crops every year. Workers are
protected by the EPA’s Worker’s Protection Standards, passed in 1974. Under the standards
growers must provide; training and information about pesticides; protective clothing; waiting
periods for reentry into treated fields; hand-washing facilities in the fields. However, these
standards have been amended and weakened. In many states pesticide compliance is monitored
by state inspectors. Find out who is monitoring, how often they inspect and obtain data on
violations and citations.
7. Comparative analysis – how do conditions in your area compare to other ag areas? California,
home of the United Farm Workers, has progressive agricultural laws. Compare laws in your state
to California or other agricultural states. For example, California’s laws on transportation and
licensing of farm labor contractors are much stiffer than other states. For comparative data on
working conditions, see the National Agriculture Workers Survey, which compares working
conditions in various regions and states. See attached.

Important Agricultural Data
National Agricultural Workers Survey
Only national information source on the demographics, working and living conditions of
U.S. farmworkers. NAWS began surveying farmworkers in 1988 and since then has collected
information from over 25,000 farmworkers. The data breaks down workers by region and migrant
status. Also comes in Excel format!
www.dol.gov/asp/programs/agworker/naws.htm
Contact: Daniel Carroll carroll-daniel@dol.gov
202.693.5077
Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Enumeration Profiles Study
The U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services Migrant Health Program commissioned
numeration profiles in several agricultural states. Dr. Alice Larson performed these profiles and
they are widely considered the most definitive source of enumeration data on migrant farmworker
populations in key states. These data are broken down by county within each state.
Dr. Alice Larson
las@wolfenet.com
206.463.9000
U.S. Dept of Labor – MSPA/Wage & Labor violation data
Among the data gathered and maintained by the DOL are wage and labor violations. The main
website features national data but state data can be obtained by filing a FOI request with the
regional DOL office. These date contain violation data and amount of back wages and civil
money penalties assessed. Also, the DOL maintains a list of ineligible farm labor contractors on
its website. However, six farm labor contractors who have been convicted in Florida (and whose
cases were made public through DOL press releases) still aren’t on the list. Beware.

