Deadline CAR / IRE 2004 conference
Ziva Branstetter
Tulsa World Projects Editor
918.581.8378
ziva.branstetter@tulsaworld.com

GENERAL TIPS:
1. Gather databases before you need them. Don’t count on getting databases on
deadline.
2. Update data on a regular schedule. Databases that contain phone numbers should
be updated most often.
3. Share your data either through an intranet or a shared drive.
4. Teach a few key people how to use everything and the rest of the staff what they
need to know.
5. Excel is fine for smaller databases (66,000 records and below) but larger
databases require Access or another database program.
6. NICAR can often slice off a section of a larger database and email it to you on
deadline. Some databases require more time than others to learn.

DATABASE RESOURCES:
1. Airplane crashes:
• FAA aircraft registration and NTSB accident and incident data
searchable by N-number, name etc. available at
www.nasdac.faa.gov
2. Weather: National Climatic Data Center has historical data, some downloadable,
at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/ncdc
3. Environmental stories:
• www.epa.gov/iris is a searchable database listing risks and
impacts of hundreds of substances regulated by the EPA.
• www.epa.gov/echo will give you a quick indication of a
company’s history with the EPA.
• Ask for your state’s environmental enforcement database.
4. Workplace accidents:
• OSHA inspections available at www.OSHA.gov/oshstats/index.
• If your state has a database of workers compensation claims, it
could provide a good follow-up story.
5. Crimes:
• Pacer system (requires a subscription) provides online access to
federal cases, including bankruptcies and other civil actions:
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov. Some pleadings are available.

•

6.

For online access to local courts across the country, check
www.searchsystems.net, an index to free and fee-based public
records on a national, state, county and city basis.
• Request jail booking and crime incident data from your local
police department.
Political scandals:
• Congressional campaign contribution data available at
www.fec.gov and in a more user friendly format at
www.opensecrets.org
• Check to see whether your state has its contribution data
computerized. If so, get it. If not, consider forming a partnership
with another paper to pay for data input.

7. Where to go for help:
• www.powerreporting.com has a lot of good links for journalists
plus a database training library so you can practice.
• A list of databases sold by NICAR is available at
http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/
• Newsengine’s Uniquery is a great product if you want to get a
newsroom intranet up and running to share your data with the
staff. Allows users to search all databases at once by name,
address or whatever variable you select. Go to
www.newsengine.com for more information.

What’s on the Tulsa World’s intranet?
We used Uniquery to set up an intranet with 78 tables of data available to the newsroom
and all bureaus. This program requires very little specialized programming knowledge.
The intranet is used on a daily basis by our reporters to find people, background people,
verify names and addresses etc.
1. City licenses: pet licenses, burglar alarm permits, sexually oriented businesses,
taxi cab permits etc.
2. Campaign contributions to state lawmakers, statewide officeholders
3. City employee payrolls
4. County employee payrolls
5. School employee payrolls (statewide)
6. Tulsa utility account holders
7. City code violations
8. Jail blotter data (1997 to the present, updated monthly)
9. Statewide death certificates (1990-2002)
10. Census data for Oklahoma
11. Department of Corrections inmates
12. Individual and business sales tax permits
13. Individual and business income tax filers.
14. FAA pilot licenses and service difficulty reports
15. Secretary of State corporation records
16. Statewide voter registration data

