Working with reporters on a project
We all view our jobs and roles differently. Maybe you see yourself as a coach or
teacher, offering insight and encouragement. Maybe you're more a parental figure,
or the wise aunt or the big brother.
Perhaps you see yourself as a general or a Mafia don, providing strength and
motivating with fear. Sometimes these jobs can feel like a three-ring circus, and
you're the ringmaster. Or if things are going well, it's the Love Boat and you're just
there to order the drinks and arrange the menu.
But whether you dish out wisdom or threats, whether you're laid back or in your
face, whether you've gone through the project process a few times or a hundred,
you will constantly be surprised by how your reporters hold up and fall apart, how
relationships come together and wither and how a huge part of your job is keeping
people sane and on track.
With that in mind, here are few tips on dealing with your reporters during a project.
There may be no way to make them deliriously happy (after all this is a newsroom)
but this might just prevent calls to a 24-hour psychiatric hotline or the homicide
division.
--Give them group therapy. This is another way of saying, try to build a good team
and set the tone from the start. If you start out with compatible personalities and a
plan for working together, you'll be better off in the long run.
--Give them structure. It can be a lonely process, with no end in sight. But regular
meetings, deadlines for memos and drafts, planning sessions with graphics and
photo help everybody stay on track and see the progress that is being made.
--Give them your time. Simple, right? But time can be hard to come by in a
modern newsroom marked by meetings and multiple management responsibilities.
So it's not enough to have hour-long meetings and an open door; wander the
newsroom, make sure you're having five and 10 minute conversations every day,
not just hour long meetings once every two weeks.
--Give them access. Not just to you and the graphics department, but higher up the
chain. Let the reporters occasionally attend your meetings with higher-ranking

editors. If possible, let them know they can talk to the company lawyer about
FOIAs and other legal concerns.
--Give them a break. Don't just reward your people at the end of the project with a
nice dinner or lunch. Take them out during the long weeks in between, for updates
or just a chance to eat somewhere other their desk. Make sure they're taking days
off, seeing their families. Score some tickets to the ballgame and take your team.
--Give them hope. Every project has its valleys. Still it's hard not to show your own
disappointment when things go badly. That's a natural reaction, but immediately
set out to rebuild confidence and let people know that you still believe in them and
what they're doing.
--Give them the truth. Don't make up deadlines that have no meaning. Don't
sugarcoat it if you think the project is in trouble or you've decided to tinker with
the idea or change the team. Deliver bad news compassionately but directly. And
include the team in planning how to move on.
George Papajohn
Chicago Tribune

