Responding to Disasters - TIP SHEET
Wade Rawlins, The News & Observer, Raleigh, N.C. 919-829-4528 or
wrawlins@newsobserver.com

Congress recognized the vulnerability of the nation’s coastline to development by passing
the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (CBRA) commonly called the Cobra Act. By
restricting federal expenditures and financial assistance which have the effect of
encouraging development of coastal barriers, Congress aimed to minimize the loss of
human life, wasteful expenditure of federal revenues, and damage to fish, wildlife, and
other natural resources associated with coastal barriers along the Atlantic and Gulf of
Mexico coasts. The act was passed in 1982 and significantly expanded in 1990 to include
the Great Lakes, Florida Keys, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
Which States have CBRA communities?
FEMA has a website for the Coastal Barrier Resources System. It contains a copy of act
and database with 21 states and two territories that have CBRA designations. Select the
appropriate state to retrieve a listing of CBRS communities.
The CBRA database current as of April 30, 2004.
http://www.fema.gov/nfip/cobra.shtm
Full text of CBRA act and synopsis of main points at:
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/cmfp/reference/Coastal_Barrier_Resources_Act.ht m
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Resources also has a CBRA site with a summary of 1982 law and
1990 expansion of law
http://www.fws.gov/cep/cbrtable.html
For more information on CBRS, questions should be directed to the Coastal Barrier
Coordinator at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service at:
* (413) 253-8657 CT, DE, MA, ME, MD, NJ, NY, RI, VA
* (404) 679-7106 AL, FL, GA, LA, MS, NC, PR, SC, VI
* (612) 713-5350 MI, MN, OH, WI
* (505) 248-6454 TX
You can order maps of CBRA communities from U.S. Fish and Wildlife

For more information about the Coastal Barrier Resources System send e-mail or contact:
Katie Niemi
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Division of Federal Program Activities, Room 400
4401 N. Fairfax, VA 22203
Phone: (703) 358-2183
Coastal Development
Expert Sources:
The H. John Heinz III Center for Science, Economics and the Environment prepared for
FEMA an evaluation of Erosion Hazards with recommendations of policy changes.
Report available at www.heinzcenter.org
Dr. Rutherford H. Plant, Dept. of Geosciences, University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Rebuilding The North Carolina Coast After Hurricane Fran: Did Public Regulations
Matter? 1998. A thought provoking report, prepared under contract with the John H.
Heinz III Center with applications to many coastal states.
Orrin Pilkey, professor emeritus of earth and ocean sciences at Duke University. Always
a colorful quote. Strong opinions on beach renourishment, hardening shorelines and the
migration of barrier islands. Contact him at the Division of Earth & Ocean Sciences,
Duke University, 103 Old Chemistry Building, Durham, N.C. 27708. His research
associate Andrew Coburn is helpful also.
Prof. Raymond J. Burby, Dept. of City and Regional Planning, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill. 919-962-4774. Burby’s expertise is federal flood insurance
program, land use and environmental planning, development impact assessment and
hazard mitigation.
“Residential Flood Insurance and Floodplain Management: Lessons from the United
States.” Interesting research paper.
How clean is the water?
A partnership between dozens of states and communities and several groups including
US EPA, and Earth 911 provides specific information regarding the most recent water
quality conditions at your local beaches. You will also be given access to communityspecific actions that you can take to help keep local beaches, coastal waters, and lakes,
streams, and rivers clean and safe. Earth 911 provides information generated and
uploaded directly by local government agencies.
Go to www.earth911.org
Click on Beach Water Quality, then click on a state on the map, then click on the county
where the beach is located.

Surf Rider Foundation issues annual state of the beach report. It collects information on
beach access, surf zone water quality, beach erosion, beach nourishment, shoreline
structures, and surfing areas in 21 coastal counties.
http://beach.com/stateofthebeach/1-intro/index.asp
Check to see if your state requires local communities to report to the state division of
water quality or environmental regulatory section when they dump untreated sewage into
rivers and lakes. These discharges occur frequently after floods and severe storms
because sewage treatment plants get inundated and they start bypassing the treatment
process.

