BROADCAST SKILLS: BLENDING CAR IN TO TV
Joe Ellis, KDFW – Dallas / Ft. Worth
214-720-3365
jelli246@foxtvcom
1. Go to NICAR Bootcamp! This training will change your career and the way you find
and do stories. Learn how to seek, obtain, and analyze spreadsheets and databases for
bigger, better news stories.
2. Make a list of “must have data” to have in your newsroom (ie. campaign contributions,
municipal code violations, criminal convictions, state and city budget info, government
employees, registered voters, etc). These are datasets you’ll maintain and keep current to
help with daily stories and enterprise investigations.
3. Don’t rely solely on fishing expeditions with data you obtain. Just because you have a
database doesn’t mean you have a story. You should always have an idea of what you
might find in your data, when you obtain data. Have a reason for getting the data.
Sometimes, maybe a story you’re already working on could simply be better with certain
data to provide additional information.
4. Select, don’t compress the information from your data query to be used in your story.
Keep it simple and use only the most important elements of your data findings that add to
your story. Stay away from minutia. Don’t let the data bog your story down.
5. Bring the data to life. Your data should lead you to good subjects to include in your story
(ie. victims, or others effected or somehow involved) and help drive your story. Make
people care about what your data shows.
6. Find a balance between the information you found from your data and what the subjects
in your story have to offer.
7. Avoid too many numbers. This can be confusing for viewers. Stick to most important
facts and audio/visual elements. Always make sure you can visually present the facts you
want to convey. Only use graphics to visualized facts you can’t present with pictures and
sound.
8. Focus on doing one story at a time. You may find plenty of interesting facts in your data
that could lead to great follow-ups or a running series of stories. Stick to what’s
important to each individual story and avoid the rabbit trails.
9. Seek input from others. Data stories for TV aren’t difficult to achieve but can be
challenging sometimes. Share your vision with your photographers, producers, editors,
etc. Let others who are disconnected from your story check out your script and put their
eyes on the story to ensure that you have clarity.

10. Don’t stop with just the datawork. You’re always a foot-soldier. Seek records to back up
your findings and talk to as many people as possible to help support your findings. All
data is dirty.

