Freelance investigations: Methods and strategies – IRE 2004
Tipsheet part 1: Getting Started, and Getting Paid
By Vince Beiser vincelb@att.net www.vincebeiser.com
1. Get Started: Finding and developing story ideas
-Read a lot, of all kinds of different publications
-Talk often with activists, advocates, researchers involved in issues that interest you. Make sure
they know to tell you when something new is going on in their area
-Sign up for lots of email lists
-Keep folders handy to throw ideas into. I have one for paper – things I tear out of magazines,
flyers, ads, etc. – one on my computer for storing stuff found on the Net, in emails etc. – and one on my
Palm for things that occur to me at random moments. Whenever I’m gearing up a round of query letters, or
to meet with an editor, I go through all three folders and pull out ideas that could work for that publication.
Developing ideas: You always need to do a certain amount of research before you have an
assignment, to make sure there really is a story there; but you don’t want to end up doing weeks worth of
reporting only to find out that no one will buy the story.
How much advance work you should do varies depending on the story, and on your relationship
with the editor or publication. Basically, the less connected you are to the editor, the more work you have
to do up front. So if you’re developing an idea to send to an editor you’ve haven’t worked with before, you
need to have a pretty detailed grasp of the material, enough to essentially write a compressed version of the
story as a query. The more established your relationship gets with that editor, the less prep you have to do.
The first question to ask is always: who else has done what on this? You may have a great feature
idea for Rolling Stone, but if Spin just did the same story, you’re wasting your time pitching it. You need to
know how much play this story has already gotten, especially in publications that compete with the ones
you want to pitch to. The fact that it may have been covered elsewhere certainly doesn’t make it impossible
to sell, but it may mean that you have to work harder to come up with a unique angle.
2. Get paid
Ask for more – on your second assignment. Many publications will pay you more than their
original offer if you just ask. But it can seem rude or pushy to ask for more on your first gig with them.
Get a contract, with kill fee and rights spelled out. Kill fee should be at least 25%. Avoid signing
away anything beyond first North American publishing rights. Don’t be shy about asking for changes to the
contract they send you; they may say no, but often they’ll bend on issues like this.
Expenses: make sure the publication will cover story-related expenses – travel, phone calls, etc.
Keep receipts, and don’t forget to send them in. They add up fast.
Send an invoice, even if they say you don’t need to. A piece of paper in your editor’s hand
reminding him to send a check does wonders for speeding up the payment process.
Tax breaks: everything you aren’t reimbursed for can be deducted from your taxes as a business
expense - computer, Internet service provider, office supplies, etc. If you work from home, you can also
deduct the portion of your rent that corresponds to the size of the space you work in – ie, if your office
takes up a quarter of your apartment, you can deduct a quarter of your rent. Under IRS rules, though, this
space must be used primarily for work, and clearly separated from your living area.
Resales and reprints: whenever possible, leverage your hard work by reselling the story in another
market. Sell straight reprints through syndication services like Featurewell.com. Also, if your contract
permits, try reworking the story and selling it elsewhere. That piece on girl gangs you did for the local city
magazine, for instance, could be turned into a feature for a national teen or women’s oriented magazine.
3. Free Stuff for Freelancers:
Free newspaper archives: http://www.ibiblio.org/slanews/internet/archives.html . Also try your
local library; many allow you access to Lexis -Nexis and other databases through their websites.
Free books: if there’s a recent book on your topic, call the publishers publicity department. They’ll
almost always send you free copies of recent books if you say you need them for research.
Free business cards: www.vistaprint.com
Free fax numbers: www.efax.com
Free website : AT&T gives Internet subscribers free websites with up to 10 MB of storage. Other
Internet service providers probably do also.

Freelance investigations: Methods and strategies
Tipsheet part 2: Sample query
By Vince Beiser
vincelb@att.net
www.vincebeiser.com
Queries should be short, sharp and engaging. Write them like a miniature version of the story, with a
lead that pulls the reader in, followed by the most compelling information, and then a graf about why the story
matters/will be interesting to that publication’s readers. Editors are always too busy to read much, so I try to
keep queries to a single page. I also include two or three of my most relevant/impressive clips and a resume.
The very best thing to put in the first sentence of any query is the name of a friend, colleague, whatever
kind of contact you can come up with whom the editor knows (and hopefully respects). That will get their
attention more quickly than anything. If you have especially whomping credentials relevant to this story –
you’ve won big awards, you’ve been covering the issue for 17 years – you might want to mention that right up
front, too. Otherwise, I usually include a short graf about myself at the end of the letter.
Example:
Dear Ms. Schmoe,
Joe Yaddayadda suggested I get in touch with you about the following idea for a feature piece in Big
Prestigious Magazine:
EXILED FROM AMERICA: Sam Kim, a 25 year old student at San Jose State University, has
more to worry about this year than final exams: he may soon be exiled from the United States, where he’s
lived almost his entire life. Kim emigrated to the US legally with his parents from Korea when he was six.
As a teenager, he had some low-end scrapes with the law, arrested first for breaking into a tool shed, then
for shoplifting $100 worth of books from Costco. His crimes were barely enough to merit jail time, but in
today’s America, they are enough to get him deported to Korea – a country where none of his family live
and whose language he barely speaks.
Kim is just one of thousands of lifelong United States residents who, in the name of homeland
security, are being deported to countries they barely know and told they can never come back. In the wake
of the 1996 Oklahoma City bombing, Congress passed laws expanding the list of crimes that could get an
immigrant deported, and drastically limiting appeals against deportation orders. The post- 911 Patriot Act
further strengthened immigration agencies’ powers. Result: Immigrants who are here legally but lack full
US citizenship are being deported for such picayune offenses as drug possession and shoplifting - even if
those crimes were committed before 1996, and even if the person has already served time for them.
Last year alone, the INS (recently reconstituted as the Bureau of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, part of the new Department of Homeland Security) deported over 70,000 legal immigrants
convicted of crimes. Some have committed serious offences; many others, however, are just small-time
scofflaws. Forty percent of last year’s total were drug offenders.
We’re not talking here about illegal aliens, nor of immigrants who have been linked to terrorism.
This is a story about people who were legally welcomed into this country, who have chosen to make their
lives here – but who have become collateral damage of the war on terror.
I am an award-winning Los Angeles based magazine writer specializing in criminal justice issues.
My work has appeared in The Los Angeles Times Magazine, Rolling Stone, The Village Voice and many
other publications. I would be happy to discuss this idea further with you at your convenience.
Thanks very much for your time. I look forward to hearing from you soon.

