Drilling for Oil in Teams

Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / cohensh@washpost.com
When editors put together project teams that they expect will include database work, they
usually leave the specifics to us. No one tells us what to do or how to split up the work. But
the work typically falls into four phases, with the team coming together and striking out
independently at different points. The phases are less clear-cut than this list suggests. We
often go back and forth among them.

Early Exploration
Engage a CAR or database reporter early in brainstorming sessions about where the story
might lead and what key questions the investigation might answer. The team will all be
working toward the same (achievable) goal if everyone is together from the outset.
During start-up, everyone is interviewing sources who can lead us to other cases or other
sources. At the same time, the database reporter will interview government officials and
experts not for facts or cases but for methods and data sources. If it’s a well researched
field, we’re also seeking a rabbi – an expert who can help us throughout the development of
any study. Avoid tripping over one another at this stage. Either alert sources that they will
be called by another member or visit them together.
Here and throughout the project, everyone on the team should be keeping an eye out for
documents that might lead to databases. They include a wayward form sitting on a source’s
desk or a printout from a helpful official.
One key mistake that many experienced beat reporters make is to make records requests
too limited or accept data that is missing key pieces of public information. Instead, we
might only get the portions of a database that answer specific questions or identify one
subset of cases. Avoid this. It could add months of delay or even kill some opportunities.
When negotiating for public records, make sure to include someone who knows database
reporting.

Core Sampling
Like a geologist, we need to take core samples from any databases we get, bring them back
to the lab and compare them with the rest of the field. Then we have to go find some more
samples.
During this phase the line between street reporting and database reporting is probably at its
most blurred. We’ll usually start by looking at the cases that prompted the investigation.
How do they look in the database? How would we find more? Then it’s back to the streets or
other documents to check them out, hone the sampling and repeat the process. We’re
seeking the M.O. If there is a perfect example buried in this morass, what might it look like?
This stage can mark the end the database work. We may discover that it’s impossible to tell
the cases we care about from those that are more routine. Or that every case we identify
has to be reported out, at least through court or similar documents.
It’s best if each member of the team can do at least a little of both types of reporting at this
stage. The good news is that this can be the most productive stage in the project because it
often yields at least a few perfect cases for fuller reporting and can help direct the story. It’s

also often the source of great serendipity – it turns out we’ve found diamonds, not oil. It
also makes triangulating to find good cases easier.
The process also points out the inevitable flaws in both the data and our own initial logic. So
don’t get upset when some samples don’t yield diamonds or oil. That’s part of the process
and it will help us get it right in the end.

Deep-sea drilling
At this stage, the database work and the street reporting tend to diverge the most so it’s
important to take the time to keep one another updated. Writing story memos together for
periodic editor meetings can help. So can just taking a team coffee break a couple of times
a week.
The database reporter is looking for broad trends and authoritative statements that can be
made in the final story: How often have judges assigned lawyers to new cases after they’d
been disciplined for poor service? How many children under the care of the city have
committed new crimes during that time? How do we know whether that is a lot or a little?
This is where insufficient original public records requests come back to haunt us – without a
“compared to what?” we often can’t say much. It’s also when we realize the we might need
to fill out a database with more detail derived from other databases, documents, court files
or surveys of many government agencies.
We may decide that the effort involved to get to the broad statements is simply impractical
– it would take longer than the rest of the story if it could be done at all. It could be risky in
that the attempt might not yield anything we can use in the end. The team and its editor
ought to agree as a group whether to pursue it and how the work will be split up.

Refining
Writing story updates and memos for editors gives teams a chance to put together, in a
quasi-story form, what we know so far. The analysis should also be written in story-ish form
and at best should illustrate the broad themes with some concrete examples. The reason is
that the editors and reporters working the streets are familiar with the cases but don’t know
how representative they are.
There will also usually be at least one confrontation interview going over the results. Include
the person who did that data work in those interviews. We want to be able to answer
questions about how we got to this conclusion as honestly and as openly as possible. And
we need to hear the complaints. They might be valid.
Sometimes the database reporting helps shape the structure of the stories by identifying
discrete themes. But even when it doesn’t, the results don’t exist in a vacuum. The data
work isn’t over until the person doing it has spent some time with all of the drafts, looking
for places to help find secondary examples or strengthen some broad conclusions.
Finally, the database reporter will be keeping a keen eye out for any mismatch between the
analysis and the more anecdotal portions of the stories, and either suggest minor changes
that make the transitions more on point or adjust the analysis to answer the specific
question raised in the stories. If everything else has gone well, this is painless!

