INVESTIGATING THE PAST: TIPS FOR REVISITING OLD CRIMINAL CASES
Phoebe Zerwick, Metro Columnist
Winston-Salem Journal
pzerwick@wsjournal.com; 336-727-7291
journalnow.com

2004 IRE National Conference
Atlanta
“Civil Rights: Digging into the Past”

Darryl Hunt spent 19 years proclaiming his innocence in a 1984 rape and murder. Some people listened;
many others did not. Last April, after he won a court order for a new round of DNA testing, the WinstonSalem Journal decided to investigate the cas e itself. The newspaper had diligently reported the case over
the years, giving equal play to each side, but it had never talked to witnesses, reviewed the entire record or
pieced the case together from beginning to end. The result was an eight -part series that laid out the flaws
with the police work and a judicial system that had kept Hunt imprisoned for 18 years. In December the DNA
testing identified a new suspect, who is awaiting trial, and Hunt was released from prison. He has since
been pardoned by th e governor of North Carolina.
Here are a few tips for reporting and telling such stories
Retelling the old
Just because a story’s been told before doesn’t mean it was thoroughly investigated. Don’t be afraid to take
a fresh look at a story that’s been kicking around the newspaper or the community for a long time.
Start with the court record
Reread trial transcripts, motions, appellate court decisions. You may be the only person who’s ever read the
entire case, from beginning to end. In old cases the cour t record isn’t always complete. Don’t ignore other
sources of public records. The medical examiner’s office, for example, keeps autopsy reports. Lawyers may
have transcripts, exhibits and may even be willing to share their own notes. Start your source list.
Police reports
In some states investigative reports are public record. In North Carolina they’re not, but ask for them
anyway. Add to your source list.
Remember the newspaper’s morgue
Read old news coverage about the case. Reporters covering a trial may pick up on nuances that don’t come
through in a transcript. Keep adding to your source list.
Sources
Organize your source list. There will be some obvious people you will need to interview — the police,
prosecutors, lawyers, the defendant, the victim’s family and any witnesses you can track down. Don’t
overlook jurors in criminal cases. Canvass neighborhoods where the defendant lived. Talk to family. You
may turn up witnesses never interviewed by police.
Be careful to maintain your neutrality. Even if y ou suspect a miscarriage of justice, don’t make any promises.
The people you interview need to know that you will treat them fairly. And above all, stop talking and listen.
Be persistent. Time doesn’t erase the pain in these cases, and many people will be reluctant to have you reopen old wounds. Even if someone has hung up on you and canceled interviews give them one last chance
to respond.
Double check your own work and the police work
Double check everything. If a website says that someone was in prison, check with the prison. Sometimes
things get miscoded. If you have questions about an autopsy get an outside medical examiner to take a
look. Don’t gloss over technicalities. If you’re writing about DNA evidence, talk to a DNA expert to make sure
you understand the basic science that’s involved. Double check the obvious. For 19 years the Winston Salem Journal referred to the victim of a brutal rape and murder as a 26-year-old copy editor. She was 25.
Storytelling
Remember the power of a well-told tale. Don’t waste all your effort on a dryly -written report. You can’t bring
justice or help a community face its past if no one reads what you’ve written. These are epic, character
driven tales. Do your work justice.
Remember that strong narrative writing requi res extra reporting. You will need to know facts that may not be
relevant to the case itself, but will help you set the mood, establish character and set context. You’ve heard
this a million times, but strong writing is in the details. Show, don’t tell.

