Writing about Economic Development in Low-income Areas
(With emphasis on supermarkets)
*
1. Hard numbers are difficult to come by. Marketing firms rarely study
spending patterns in income brackets below $30,000. Look for Census
numbers and academic studies instead.
*
2. Work the church-based food charity groups. These are the people who
know the day-to-day lives in neighborhoods. They know the reliable sources
and the special problems of particular areas. They know angles that might
never occur to you. (One thing I learned about was the thriving business of
local jitneys in housing projects. Whoever has a car sells rides.)
*
3. Find food distribution charities, such as food banks, and get them to let
you ride along while they pick up and deliver food. That's another way to
turn up activists you may not find on official lists.
*
4. Drive and look. Nothing beats shoe leather for finding people who really
live a problem.
*
5. Finding faces to put on problems is best, but not always easy. When we
couldn't find anyone who would let us go along to shop by bus, I did it
myself. I took a charity's list of food for a family of four and parked my car
in a housing project. Then I went shopping by bus and documented it in a
first-person column, right down to how many eggs were broken when I got
back to my car.
*
6. If you're doing a chart to compare prices at stores, build flexibility into
your list of items. A six-pack of Ivory soap may be common at eight out of
10 stores. But in the ninth, it won't be a six-pack and in the 10th, it won't be
available at all. Be prepared to make comparable substitutions or make
repeated store visits to get a final version of the list. Decide in advance if
you're willing to break items down to the price per ounce if necessary.
*
7. Beware of databases. At the last minute, we found several big mistakes in
our marketing department's list of store locations. Supermarkets do move
around. Check everything against an independent list, such as a phone book
or city directory.
*

8. If you think you know your city well, sit down with a 20- or 30-year-old
city directory. It's a great way to document changes or spot trends in
population and development.
*
"Nowhere to Shop," The Charlotte Observer, February 2003.
Kathleen Purvis or Nancy Stancill
The Charlotte Observer
kpurvis@charlotteobservercom
nstancill@charlotteobservercom
704/358-5236 or 704/358-5066

