DOING A MAJOR BUSINESS INVESTIGATION
SCAMS AND FRAUD
June 2004 IRE Atlanta Conference
Jenni Bergal, Sun-Sentinel (South Florida)
(954) 356-4592 jbergal@sun-sentinel.com
Business scams come in many forms. Among the most common are boiler-room
rip-offs and Ponzi schemes.
There are many places where you can check out individuals who are pitching a
new company or selling securities or commodities, to see whether there are any red flags.
Here are some places to look:
-- Check federal court records, both civil and criminal, to see whether your subject has
any cases. Don’t forget to look up bankruptcy records. You can find all of this on the
Internet by logging onto PACER, the on- line federal court records system. If your paper
doesn’t have a PACER account, find out if it can get one. It only costs 7 cents to print out
each page. For more information, go to http://www.pacer.uscourts.gov.
-- Check state and county court records. Some scammers have been arrested in the past
by local cops for fraud or other economic crimes. Don’t forget to look at civil lawsuits as
well, including contract disputes and divorce cases, which can include interesting
financial information about the subject.
-- Log onto the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website. The regulatory agency,
which is responsible for administering federal securities laws, lists litigation releases and
some orders against brokers and investment advisors at www.sec.gov. Look for them
under “Litigation.”
-- See if there are any prior enforcement actions by the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, which regulates commodity futures and option markets, at www.cftc.gov.
-- Check out the site run by the National Futures Association, a self-regulatory
organization for the U.S. futures markets. It lists disciplinary action against individuals
and companies that handle customer funds or give trading advice, and also has
background information and links to both the original complaint and the follow-up
orders. You can find it at www.nfa.futures.org. Tip: When you log on, go to
“Information about Futures Professionals” to start your search.
-- Check out a broker’s registration and disciplinary history by going to www.nasd.com,
the website for the National Association of Securities Dealers, a self- regulating group.

-- Contact your state’s securities regulatory agency to find out if it has taken any previous
action against your subject. The National Association of State Securities Regulators has a
website that lists the name, contact information and web address for each state agency
that regulates securities. You can find it at http://www.nasaa.org.
-- Look up your Secretary of State’s Office website. Most list information about
corporations that includes the names of officers and registered agents. In Florida and
some other states, you can also punch in a person’s name and find any companies with
which he was associated as an officer or registered agent as well as incorporation
paperwork.
-- Don’t forget to contact state Attorneys General, who prosecute white-collar crimes and
might have filed an action against your subject in the past. Log onto the National
Association of Attorneys Generals’ website, www.naag.org, to find the names and web
addresses of each state Attorney General.
-- Get in touch with the receiver appointed by the federal court in cases in which
investors’ money remains. Receivers often have lists of victims, as well as copies of
checks written by the defendant and interesting documents, such as sales pitches.
-- If your subject isn’t selling securities or commodities but is pitching phony
sweepstakes, work-at-home schemes or similar white-collar scams, check with your
county and state’s consumer affairs departments to see if they’ve taken any action against
him. Don’t just give them the company name; give the individual’s name, as these fraud
artists often create a company, rip off victims for a few months or a year, then shut down
and start another scam under a different company name.
-- Contact your Better Business Bureau to see if it has gotten any complaints. Some
bureaus are better than others, but often you can at least get victims’ names and contact
information.
-- Check to see if the Federal Trade Commission has taken action against your subject’s
current or previous company. The FTC is supposed to enforce federal consumer
protection laws and combat telemarketing fraud and Internet scams. You can check out a
company, but not an individual, on its website at www.ftc.gov.
-- Find experts and information about white-collar fraud and forensic accounting by
contacting the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. Its website is www.cfenet.com
-- It may be obvious, but don’t forget to plug your subject’s name into Google or your
favorite web search site. And if your research center has access, also check out the person
in Nexis to see if anything has been written about him in other publications or on the PR
newswire.
-30-

