State and Local Campaign Finance
Derek Willis, Center for Public Integrity
IRE 2004 Conference

The Rules for State Parties
This is the first election cycle that state parties are without national party soft money,
which accounted for about 25 percent of their contributions during 2001-02 (see the
Center study on that period). Although state parties have long had two sets of books (a
federal account and a state account), it’s more important than ever that reporters track
both. Federal filings can be retrieved from the FEC, and in some cases may provide more
information in a shorter time frame than state records.
State parties can still mix federal and non-federal money in some circumstances (salaries
and other administrative costs, for example), so don’t be surprised to see that in records.
But if you do use both state and federal data, be aware that you may have to account for
internal transfers between the two accounts – these should not be counted as
“contributions” or “expenditures” since it’s a bookkeeping entry rather than a transaction
involving new money. The bad news is that nearly every state party has its own practice:
some do most or all of their spending through a federal account, others repeat on the state
filings the “non-federal” portion of expenditures listed on the federal report. We’ve gone
through this, so don’t hesitate to email or call for advice.

Levin Funds
State and local party committees can raise a special type of money called Levin funds for
use in GOTV activity involving federal candidates. Levin contributions are limited to
individuals only (something some parties apparently don’t understand quite yet) and to
$10,000 a donor. It may not be transferred to other committees and appears in the FEC
data labeled as transaction type “10”, the old soft money code.

Local Parties
We’re now seeing an increase in the number of county parties opening federal accounts,
especially in California and Michigan. Ostensibly this is so that those committees can do
more to help local federal candidates, but it’s worth looking into. These committees tend
to get less scrutiny than state and federal parties, yet they transfer hundreds of thousands
of dollars into state parties in many states.

New Soft Money
Many states permit parties and candidates to accept contributions larger than what is
permissible on the federal level – that hasn’t changed. Most state parties can also take
money from the 527 organizations that you’ve heard a lot about. There are national
organizations set up to raise money on behalf of state parties and candidates.

Story Suggestions
•

In prior elections, state parties have come to the aid of each other, especially when
a significant federal race exists in a small state. So even if you have no major
Senate race or cover a non-competitive presidential state, your state party might
be helping out elsewhere in the nation.

•

State and local parties are adjusting to the new legal realities, incursions by
GOTV groups and other factors – how are they coping? Are the presidential race
527s using current and former state party staffers in your states?

•

Administrative and other “non-state” state committees – some states (Colorado,
Michigan and Florida are examples) are especially friendly to these types of
committees that don’t necessarily report to state authorities (most are 527s).
Check to see what the law is in your state and whether legislative caucus
organizations or elected officials are using this type of committee to raise funds
otherwise prohibited by state law.

