“A Lesson in Excess”
By Chris Davis and Matthew Doig
Sarasota Herald-Tribune
IRE story archive No. 20237
Chris.davis@heraldtribune.com
As states and school districts respond to increasing pressure to raise their students’ test
scores, the way our governments spend money on public schools is fundamentally changing.
Pay-for-performance schemes are popping up everywhere in the form of merit pay, salary
bonuses for teachers who excel and cash payouts to schools that ace standardized tests. These
programs may make up a tiny fraction of a state’s education budget. But over the years, they
can add up to tens of millions of dollars. Who is watching all that money? The answer for
one such program in Florida was no one.
Summary:
Florida's School Recognition Program, the reward component of the state's Florida
Comprehensive Achievement Test, is part of a broad effort to hold schools accountable.
Under the program, schools that score well on the test, get $100 per student.
State law says that money can be spent on staff bonuses, educational equipment or temporary
educational personnel. But no one was reviewing how the money actually got spent.
An investigation of financial documents revealed that the program had no accountability of
its own:
*The state didn't keep track of how the money was being spent under the program, which had
grown to more than $120 million in awards per year when the story was published.
*At least $9 million had been spent unlawfully on non-educational items, such as pizza
parties, clowns, PlayStations and gasoline.
*State officials said they knew that there was misspending, but never made an effort to audit
the program, track money or enforce the spending restrictions set by statute.
Where to start:
Find out what pay-for-performance programs your state or district has. Most of these will be
widely known. But a call to the state education department or your school district should get
you a quick answer. The budget office is a good place to start because they will be dealing
with the money from any of these programs. Rewards programs will likely be the most high
profile. But many states are offering bonuses to teachers whose students show improvement
on standardized tests. In some cases, the money only goes to teachers who move to highneeds schools. To get a perspective on the type of legislation that has been passed nationwide
check out The Education Commission of the States’ Web site at http://www.ecs.org/. Look
for the State Policy Developments link.
Following the money:
Who is getting the money? Are schools in wealthy, white communities getting more of it?
Are rewards programs actually attracting experienced teachers into your district, or into
schools with at-risk children? Are districts following the intent of the legislation, spending
the money as required?

If you’re lucky, your state or district will be required to track how much money is spent and
where it goes. If not, tracking the money could be difficult. Our project involved a review of
more than 10,000 pages of documents stemming from public records requests made to about
1,500 schools that received recognition money in 1999, 2000 and 2001. These documents
included payroll lists, purchase orders, invoices, receipts, meeting minutes from School
Advisory Councils, memos among administrators and budget documents kept by districts.
We used Excel and had several reporters enter the data into a spreadsheet.
Tips of chasing the money trail:
1. We made the mistake at the start of sending out our inf ormation request statewide before
we knew how the financial data was kept. As a result, we got back a chaotic mix of
documents. Some schools sent us copies of invoices and receipts that were almost impossible
to decipher. We also got reports generated by school districts that were not detailed enough.
Looking back, we would have done better by requesting the information from a few districts,
looking at how the data came in and tailoring our public records request to get a more
uniform response.
2. We relie d heavily on a survey that we sent to every school in the state that received A-plus
money. But the survey was offered up as an alternative to a public records request that we
sent to every school. The records request gave us a legal stick to force schools to give up the
information that you can’t get with a survey alone. We presented the survey as a way to make
everyone’s life easier.
3. Stay organized. Early on we created an extensive filing system to track schools that had
sent complete information, incomplete information or hadn’t responded. We also had to
carefully track the data we had and hadn’t entered into the database. In the end, we took over
a conference room with a couple of filing cabinets. We created a file on every school and
kept a drawer of those that had responded and a drawer of those that had not. We attached
our survey worksheet to every school file, even if the school had chosen not to use the
survey. In those instances, we filled out the survey form ourselves based on the receipts the
schools had sent. That made it easy during data entry. We also created and regularly updated
a spreadsheet that tracked each school’s response.
4. Flag interesting anecdotes that surface as you slogged through replies. We made notes on
the hard copy and also created a column in the database to flag schools that we wanted to
focus on after we crunched the data.
5. When we started entering data, we used very detailed categories for expenditures. We
thought we would record how much money went to Pizza Hut vs. Domino’s, for example.
After entering a few hundred records, we realized that recording such detail was problematic.
Schools reported their spending in different levels of detail. We started collapsing the
detailed entries into wider categories. The Pizza Hut and Domino’s entries morphed into
“Pizza Parties” and ultimately were included in the category “Student Rewards,” which
contained all parties and gifts to students. Because we had multiple people doing data entry,
it was important to make sure we had clear definitions for each category we created.

