IRE Atlanta 2004
CAR Broadcast Skills: Finding Story Ideas
Chris Cantergiani
WSB-TV

What form of Computer Assisted Reporting?
Not just Databases - include Internet research, requesting and tracking huge
volumes of information.
What type of story are you looking for?
• Breaking News – Business licenses, Criminal Records & Background
• Quick Turns – Databases you acquire or create
• Sweeps Series – Large Databases, matching
Do you have a budget?
Some databases are free. Some databases are preposterously expensive. The
process can be time consuming and may involve lawyers.
What are your state laws like?
You need to know about Open Record Requests and using FOIA. It’s your
“constitutional obligation” - Jim Steele (Time) & Joe Stephens (Washington Post)
Where can you find data?
Everywhere. Think on city, county and state levels. Some essentials: Inmate,
Pardon and Parole data & voting records
Worth mining: Sex Offenders, Salary Info, Tax Delinquents, Restaurant
Inspections, Campaign Finance, and Dangerous Dams
Places to look:
• Local - School Districts, City Hall, Police
• Federal - FAA, GAO, FBI Files
• Internet - reporter.org/desktop, Followthemoney.org, guidestar.com
• Not so obvious - cell phone bills, credit card receipts, appointment calendars
Things to consider:
Storytelling - You need people/anecdotes, Graphics & Photographers, Collaborate with
people at your station or do a partnership with a local newspaper.
Negotiating data - Get the code info and a sheet with an example with the data. Data is
often dirty. Agencies may not be willing to give it up, say it doesn’t exist, try to out-price
you. Insist on talking to the person who holds the data.
Creating your own data - Check for errors, Step away from the computer
Ideas:
Criminals In the Classroom, School Bus Driver Backgrounds, Traffic Court Petty Cash,
State Travel Records, Tax Cheats, Peanut Subsidies, Dams, School Administration Costs,
FBI Files on Civil Rights Leaders (Ralph Abernathy & Hosea Williams), School
Violence Reports, Near Mid-Air Collisions

