IRE Las Vegas 2004 - Homeland Security: The Stories We Are Missing
Deborah Sherman, Investigative Reporter
KUSA-TV Denver

303.871-1803
Deborah.Sherman@9News.com

September 11, 2004
*Homeland Security Funding: The Federal go vernment has awarded more than $6
Billion to states in homeland security grants to protect them from terrorism. States have
held press conferences to show off the gear they have purchased. Follow the money.
The Washington Post did and in 2003, reporters found “much of the money remains
unspent or is funding projects with questionable connections to homeland security.” The
District outfitted police with leather jacks. The Des Moines Register in April 04 found
money was used to buy traffic cones, a wall clock, underwater cameras and paper
shredders. The Ohio Columbus Dispatch this year found Ohio bought a $1,000 heated
and air-conditioned portable toilet, and 3 boats worth more than a $550,000. The sheriff
admitted “We’re buying toys for boys.” KUSA-TV & The Denver Post found a
volunteer fire department that needed a rescue boat spent $100,000 on a new gym.
-Narrow your focus. There are dozens of anti- terrorism grants. Ask to review ODP
(Office of Domestic Preparedness) grants, which are intended for first responders, such
as police, fire and medical emergency personnel. Also review “Urban Areas Security”
grants, which are for cities that face unique terrorist vulnerabilities. The grants are
administered by the Office of U.S. Homeland Security.
-The grants should only be used for planning, equipment, training and exercises.
-Questions to ask:
How have the federal grant monies been spent? If the law enforcement agency
applied for the money to purchase personal protection suits, did they buy them or
something else? Check the equipment applications against actual receipts. Did they pay
top dollar for their supplies or were contracts put out for bid? Did the contracts go to
family members or people with political connections? Does the equipment work; is it
quality? Did every county buy the same kind of equipment when they could have shared
some of it?
Has your state set up any guidelines or rules for what can be purchased? Do the
purchases have questionable connections to homeland security? How was the money
allocated in your state? Was it distributed according to population or was it distributed
based on terrorist threat levels? Urban versus rural. Was it fair distribution or is it driven
by politics? Is the money focused on responding to an attack or prevent one?
Is the money being used for their first priorities, such as communications, or for
other extravagant issues? Could this money be better spent? Is the money meeting
routine and every day needs of the government such as uniforms, as local governments
grapple with deficits and cuts? (It should NOT be.) How much of the money hasn’t been
spent? (Any unspent money must be returned to the federal government).
Do the areas have their equipment yet? Some gear is backordered for months or
longer.

Notes:
-States are only required to sub-allocate 80% of homeland security funds to cities and
local governments. What do States do with the 20% of those grants that they keep?
-In April, A U.S. House committee on Homeland Security found that $5.2 billion of $6.3
billion in security grants had yet to be distributed to local emergency agencies.
-a House committee in April, 2004 found that at state and local levels, there are no
standards to guide the spending of funds leading to many instances of questionable
expenditures. Also, it found almost one-third of the states allocated money to local
jurisdictions without regard to need or risk.
-State offices have been largely free to distribute their share of the grants as they see fit.
-A survey found 1/3 of states have released these spending records, 1/3 aren’t, and 1/3
will release some.
Other Stories We’re Missing:
*Hospitals: Do they have enough medication on hand, generators (should electricity go
out) and staff. How prepared are your local hospitals for an emergency attack?
*Anthrax and other such feared agents of bio-terrorism: The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention issue grants to states in order to “train the public health workforce
to respond to threats to the nation’s health from bioterrorism, infectious disease outbreaks
and other health emergencies.” Find out which university or state health departments
have received this money and how it was used. Ask some of the same basic questions
listed above for homeland funds.
*MANPADS: Protecting Aircraft from incoming shoulder- fired missiles, called
manpads. Israel’s El Al airline has been testing an on-board system, but the US is still
studying the issue, laser versus flares. Two companies have been given contracts for $45
million each to develop this technology. This will be a big story in the near future as the
technology is tested on simulators by pilots and applied to aircraft.
*Protecting Businesses: A new Associated Press report finds that nearly half of midsize
US companies surveyed they have not spent money on security since 9/11. Also, DHS is
preparing to assess the vulnerability of businesses in DC. What about your state; does it
know if your local big companies are prepared? What businesses have taken steps to
increase security and at what cost? Which haven’t done anything?
*US Immigration Customs & Enforcement or “ICE”: oversees Federal Air Marshals,
focuses on drug smuggling, human smuggling, counterfeit documents, immigrant
pedophiles or sex offenders, protects federal buildings and landmarks and oversees Air
and Marine branches that protect the borders. Is very concerned about the proliferation
of smuggling and bogus documents including social security numbers and green cards
that can be used to enter the country or restricted areas.
*Customs and Border Protection Agency: This agency has been very concerned that
terrorists, not just aliens, are trying to enter the country along the Southern border.
*Transportation/Cargo Issues: Truckers are now being required to file info about their
cargo electronically with Customs and Border Protection before they reach the border
under new Homeland Security rules. What is the agency finding? More busts—terrorism
issues?

*Unprotected computer data: The stories have been done about laptop experts driving
by homes and coffee shops while they tap- into unscrambled or unencrypted personal
wireless information. You could also check out the systems at your airport and other
such ‘sensitive’ facilities for corporations or government agencies. In Denver, KUSA-TV
found that the airport was sending its work orders out wirelessly on an AT&T wireless
network that allowed some to legally look at employee names, badge numbers, passenger
information along with their flight informa tion.
*Learning to be safe: According to the Washington Times, several universities are now
offering classes, even graduate degrees, in protecting yourself against terrorism. What’s
being offered in your state. Investigate the value of the class and the teacher’s
credentials.
*Federal Air Marshals: FAMs complain about poor management, rules that require
them to dress in noticeable sports coats and the entire program in disarray. What is the
future of this program? How is it affecting safety?
*Aviation Security Issues: With Russian airline bombings, it’s obvious terrorists still
want to disrupt airline travel. TSA is only screening less than 1% of air cargo that goes
onto airplanes; is beginning to test that equipment nationwide. This is a huge hole that
could still be exploited by terrorists.
*Don’t forget: Food & Drug Administration which is still working to create a security
plan for the food we eat….and Agro terrorism or agriculture bioterrorism which is also a
threat that is still being assessed on farmlands all over America.
Resources:
1) US Dept. of Homeland Security www.dhs.gov ; in charge of distributing federal
money to states. The Office of the Press Secretary is 202.282.8010.
2) www.twotigersonline.com/resources.html This is a great homeland security
website full of links to federal and state homeland agencies and organizations, and
information about nuclear, biological, chemical and natural disaster emergencies.
3) The Homeland Security Institute issues a weekly homeland security newsletter
that you can sign up for and receive by email. It tracks homeland security stories
from across the country and the world. The website is:
http://www.homelandsecurity.org/
4) “Gateway to Global Political Risk Resources”, a website that shows how
terrorism could impact businesses and supports a proactive stance such as
increasing security and anticipating likely targets. http://www.politicalrisk.net
5) http://www.AviationInsecurity.com – Web Source for Aviation Security News
and Analysis. A lobbying group of pilots. Most recently, rose concerns about
TSA rules that restricted the way pilots could carry their weapons in the cockpit.
This group got some of those rules changed.
6) http://www.fleoa.org/ Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association,
represents 22,000 Federal Agents. Most recently issued a report to Congress
about the “gross mismanagement of Federal Air Marshals” including poor
leadership, lack of communication and bad judgment by DHS & ICE officials.
7) http://www.AirRage.org Website of aviation expert Andrew Thomas, author of
several books on terrorism and aviation problems. He’s an expert to tap into.

8) Upcoming seminars: There are sessions on emergency response, biometrics,
technology, etc. happening all over the country. Find out what’s happening in
your state and meet a trove of experts.
9) http://www.pogo.org/ The Project on Government Oversight website. It has a
page dedicated to homeland security investigations from across the country. It
does its own investigations as well.
10) The Des Moines Sunday Register investigation by Bert Dalmer: “Cities Grumble
about terror money”, dated 4/25/04 (available on IRE website IRE.org)
11) The Washington Post Investigation by Jo Becker, Sarah Cohen and Spencer Hsu:
“Anti- Terrorism funds buy wide array of pet projects; some of regions’ unused
millions could be lost”, dated November 23, 2003
12) Columbus Dispatch investigation in 2004 “Most homeland security funding
unspent”
13) The U.S. House Select Committee on Homeland Security report April 27, 2004
analyzing first responder funding. www.hsc.house.gov The report finds that
most grants are being made without a rigorous assessment of risk and that 85% of
the terrorism preparedness grants have not yet been utilized.

SAMPLE PUBLIC INFORMATION REQUEST FOR FUND RECORDS:
Under the Colorado Open Records Statute, C.R.S. 24-72-201 et seq., and under the provisions of
the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, we would like to obtain the following information:
1) A list of the total amounts of federal grants/funds received by Colorado, per year distributed,
of
a) The State Homeland Security Grant Program aka SHSGP aka "ODP grants", which
are intended for "first responders".
b) Urban Areas Security Initiative Grants, which come from DHS.
2) County by County, City by City or Region by Region (depending upon how OPSFS reallocates the funds) grant allocations or distribution, per year or grant (depending upon what is
available) in Excel or other computerized format. This worksheet should show how much
county/region received of the above two grants and when.
3) The dollar amount from the two above grants that was kept by the State and not re-allocated.
4) Equipment requests from the state and counties, cities and/or regions
5) Access to review grant applications for each particular county/city and/or region for funds.
6) Access to review documents about any other specific training, planning, equipment or such
requests that are made in order to receive the grant funds or that explain how the grant funds
were used in each particular city, county and/or region.
This request is limited to fiscal records only. I am not seeking any investigative records. I am not
seeking any plans for dealing with terrorist attacks. My request is focused solely on reviewing
fiscal records that detail how the federal grants were spent. If my request is denied in whole or
part, I expect you to justify all deletions by reference to specific exemptions of CORA. I will also
expect you to release all segregable portions of otherwise exempt material.

