The Zen of Documents
IRE Regional Conference
Las Vegas
Sept. 10, 2004
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
rcampbell@ocregister.com
There are a couple of basic rules on the paper trail:
1. Find every conceivable document.
2. Read every single sentence of every document you find.
Reporters and editors – adrenalin junkies all – are poorly prepared
psychologically for the paper trail. We expect instant results and tend to get
distracted when we don’t find something exciting quickly. By contrast, a recent
law school grad, inured to hour upon hour of boring reading, is perfect for the job.
Doing well on the paper trail requires a mental adjustment. Donald L. Barlett
and James B. Steele of Time Magazine preach a “documents state of mind,” a
mental attitude that proclaims that there is a document or Web site somewhere
with exactly the information you need. Since I’m from the Left Coast, I prefer to
describe this mental adjustment as “the Zen of documents.”
A reporter just starting on the paper trail has many resources to guide him or
her to promising documents. The handouts at this conference and the Reporter’s
Handbook are magnificent guides. The purpose of this handout, however, is not
to point yo u to particular documents; it is to help you make sense of them.
The Zen of Documents starts with Barlett & Steele’s “documents state of
mind” and goes on from there. It emphasizes three mental habits that I think are
vital to effectively using documents in reporting. I don’t know anyone who is good
on all three Zen levels; certainly I am not. But these are all habits that can be
learned and, with time, become instinctive.
•

Patience. Let’s get this straight right at the start. Most documents are
boring. Make that all documents, unless you are reading the police reports
that inspired Edna Buchanan’s The Corpse Had a Familiar Face.
o Remove distractions. If possible, work at night or away from the
office or in a storage closet away from the newsroom. If not
possible, make deals with yourself; promise to spend a half-hour
surfing the web or answering e-mail or reading newspapers for
every three hours of straight reading.
o Make your editor or producer an ally so that you get the necessary
time. If he or she has no investigative experience, explain why you

-1-

need time to read the documents. My mantra: No document ever
accused me of misquoting it; no document ever changed its story;
no document every claimed after the fact that what it said was off
the record. Documents can and do lie, but for my money they are
far more reliable than human sources.
o Keep the physical documents in proper files. “Proper” means that
you can find any important piece of paper in a few minutes. If a
manila folder contains more than 50 pages it probably is too big.
Managing files is one of the most important (and boring) aspects in
reporting an investigative story.
•

An ability to see patterns. Reading everything will do you absolutely no
good if you don’t systematically explore the documents for hidden
relationships.
o Start by creating a people file (a detailed list of every individual and
business, including information about relations and business deals)
and a chronology with your word processor. Do this for every
investigation that is likely to take more than, say, a week. Be sure
to list sources for each and every item in the people and chronology
files.
o Keep your people and chronology files open as you read
documents. Update them constantly.
o Set aside time to read and re-read the people and chronology files.
You may be surprised at the patterns that leap out at you at the
third reading.
o Read your paper files occasionally. Don’t be surprised if you see
new details that you never bothered to put in your electronic people
and chronology files.
o Look for what’s missing. The people who inspire investigations
often are pretty good at keeping things hidden. Remember that
wealthy people usually buy real estate and that businesses
invariably do deals with other businesses. Just because you can’t
find la nd or deals in the targets’ name doesn’t mean they don’t
exist.
o Look for relationships. I know a flamboyant guy (now in prison) who
used to drive a Jaguar with personalized plates. I checked the Jag’s
DMV registration; it was registered to a business partner that I
thought had dropped out of the picture a decade earlier.
o Use checklists. Whether you have five or a dozen or 30 people on
your list, make sure you do the same basic check on each and
every one of them. (You may, of course, do more detailed checks
on a handful of characters.) Excel is a great tool for this. Create a
grid with names running down the first column. Across the top list
the documents you need to check (for example, Civil Court Index,
Assessor’s Office, Recorder’s Office). Mark each document as it is

-2-

checked. If you are working with another reporter, share the load by
initialing each item as it is done.
•

Openness to new ideas. Almost by definition, documents lead us in
dozens of different directions. One of the most important disciplines in
writing a story is to choose a couple of themes and stick relentlessly to
those themes. This is absolutely necessary for our readers or viewers – to
say nothing of our editors or news directors. But in following a paper trail,
be mindful that a sidetrack may be more productive than the main road.
o Don’t be afraid to get off-trail. Go where the documents lead. If one
record includes a name you are not familiar with, get in the habit of
pulling records on the new name. If you come across a new
address, pull records on the new address. Don’t let yourself think
that you know where the trail is going until after you have spent
some time exploring it.
o When we ask one set of questions, we tend to look for answers in a
particular set of documents. Ask a different set of questions, and
we look for an entirely different set of documents. Don’t be afraid to
pose some what-if questions a third or halfway through an
investigation, even if they require looking at documents that initially
seem unpromising.
o Test your limits. The vast majority of investigative reporting
revolves around a relatively few types of documents. Don’t tell
yourself that grant deeds or court records or SEC forms are the
only fonts of knowledge or that, having learned how to read them,
you have mastered the paper trail. There are many thousands of
types of documents that few reporters have ever looked at. I am
convinced that with a little patience and the ability to see patterns,
these untried documents will lead to great stories.

-3-

