TIPS FOR COVERING ORGANIZED CRIME

Jason Kandel, staff writer
Los Angeles Daily News
jason.kandel@dailynews.com
(818) 713-3664

2004 IRE Regional Conference, Las Vegas
Organized Crime: New Angles, New Faces

Organized crime comes in many forms. But it usually has a pyramid structure with a ringleader at
the top who oversees captains or lieutenants, who oversee workers or street soldiers on the front
lines. Their businesses run from burglary to drug trafficking - generally, any enterprise that will
bring in lots of dough. I use the following guidelines:
1. Develop key sources. Start with your local detectives who specialize in commercial crimes
and organized crime. Develop a good rapport with state and federal agents as well, and
regularly contact the US Attorney spokesperson in your area. Get the detectives you know to
put in a good word for you with other detectives to extend your network of sources. Ask your
sources if they have any organized crime or big time conspiracy cases working. Let them
know you're interested in getting the story behind the drug bust or the arrests of thieves.
2. Try to spot unusual crime trends. I began noticing that smoke shops and pawn shops were
getting hit every week earlier this year and began writing incremental stories about them.
Eventually, I built a relationship with the detectives working the case, and they tipped me off
that the heists were the work of an organized crime syndicate. As a result of my work and my
interest, the detectives opened their case files to me.
3. Follow the case through the courts. Make time to go to court and read the case files. Cover
the trial. Pass your business card out to the attorney of the defendant, his family members and
friends.
4. When you get the name of a suspect or suspects, run the names through Google on the
Internet. You might be surprised at how much there is already out there. Also, run names
through your own newspaper's archive and in your competitor's. I ran the name of a drug lord,
and found that his wife had been killed and he had been left for dead years ago during a socalled robbery. That case led me to a detective who said the suspected robbery was actually a
suspected hit by the Mexican Mafia for the drug dealer's refusal to pay taxes to the prisonbased gang. Also run the suspect's name through your state's corrections department. The
suspect may have already done time in an unrelated case.
Helpful websites:
The California State Attorney General has an annual report on organized crime:
http://caag.state.ca.us/publications/org_crime.pdf
Drug Enforcement Administration, Major Operations:
http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/major/major.htm
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Organized Crime:

http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cid/orgcrime/ocshome.htm

