Money Talks
Tracking Businesses on Paper and Online
Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Register
714/796-5030
ron_campbell@link.freedom.com
Whether they are public or private, businesses produce reams of public records.
Here are some of my favorites.
The federal Securities and Exchange Commission is the Mother Lode of
documents on public companies. Private companies come under SEC jurisdiction the
moment they announce an initial public offering of their stock – and even when a company
abandons plans to go public, its offering statement remains public. Many scamsters create
paper trails when the SEC opens enforcement proceedings against them.
Paper: The SEC maintains a reading room at its Washington headquarters. It also
handles about 3,000 FOIA requests annually.
Online: The SEC Web site (www.sec.gov) is clunky but informative. Search EDGAR
(short for “Electronic Data Gathering And Retrieval”) for corporate documents
(www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/srch-edgar). Search enforcement records for individuals and
companies that have run afoul of the agency (www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/txt-srch-sec).
Online alternative: Edgar Online (www.edgar-online.com) offers a nicer search
engine and some specialized services, including a people finder I really like. All that is free.
Edgar Online charges for extra services.
Key documents:
♦ Form S-1 (initial public offering) – contains financial statement, management’s
assessment of the business and competitors, bios of key officers and directors
and sometimes their salaries.
♦ Form 10-Q (quarterly report) –financial statement and management’s
assessment of the business. Currently (and for the next few years) includes
assessment of Year 2000 readiness.
♦ Form 10-K (annual report) – financial statement, management’s assessment of
the business, accountant’s opinion and summary of pending litigation. Words to
watch for: “going concern.” If you find this phrase in the accountant’s letter, it
means the company is teetering on the edge of bankruptcy.
♦ Form DEF 14A (proxy statement) – contains salary information for top officers
(salary, options and perks), bios of officers and directors, list of largest
shareholders and the number and percentage of shares they own, proposals for
shareholder adoption and, often, a graph comparing the stock’s performance
over the past five years against a leading index and a group of peer companies.
Words to watch for: “certain transactions.” This is the code phrase for insider
deals between the corporation and its officers and directors.

-1-

♦ Form 4 – purchases or sales of stock by insiders and major shareholders. So
the big boss is selling half his shares. Maybe his daughter just got accepted into
Stanford and he needs some quick cash. Or maybe, just maybe, he knows
something the employees and shareholders don’t.
♦ Form 8-K (material event) – an event that could materially affect the company’s
performance. Bigger companies sometimes issue 8-Ks that are nothing more
than copies of major press releases, for example merger announcements. But
companies also issue 8-K’s to put the official stamp on events that they never
write press releases about: for example, the resignation of the outside auditor,
often a danger sign.
♦ Form NT-10K or NT-10Q (late filing) – filed when a company cannot make the
statutory deadlines for filing its quarterly or annual report. These deadlines are
45 and 90 days, respectively, after the quarter or year closes, so the corporation
can hardly claim it forgot. For that reason, an NT is almost always a story. If a
company is having problems tidying up its books, the gory details will
sometimes turn up here first.
♦ Litigation release – found on the non-EDGAR side of the SEC site. Issued by
the commission when it initiates or settles litigation. A scan of the non-EDGAR
archive is sometimes the quickest way to find out if somebody has a history as a
“bad actor” in the eyes of the SEC.
U.S. Bankruptcy Court is where businesses go to die and, occasionally, to be
reborn. A case filed under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code is a “straight bankruptcy,”
meaning the business will be handed over to a trustee and liquidated for the benefit of
creditors. A case filed under Chapter 11 is a reorganization; the filing prevents creditors
from seizing assets and gives the current management (or “debtor in possession” in
bankruptcy-speak) time to figure out how to solve its problems. A business in bankruptcy
loses most of its privacy. It must disclose its top creditors (usually suppliers and often
former top employees), its assets and details of payments it has made in the months
before filing. A business in Chapter 11 also must disclose in detail how it got into trouble
and how it intends to recover.
Paper: Records are separately maintained by each court. Closed cases go to the
nearest office of the National Archives but remain public.
Online: Spotty coverage. Dockets are widely available, but key documents are not.
Key documents:
♦ Schedules (listing assets, debts, pre-petition payments, shareholders, officers,
directors and major creditors). The starting point for all bankruptcy stories.
♦ Service list (attorneys representing the debtor and all major creditors). A great
place for finding sources. In Chapter 7 cases, look for the trustee and the
attorney representing the trustee. In Chapter 11 cases, look for the attorney
representing the creditors’ committee.
♦ Reorganization plan. How the company plans to get out of the hole it dug itself
into. Which creditors it plans to pay and which ones it intends to blow off (and
send straight to the nearest reporter).

-2-

♦ Fee applications (bills submitted by attorneys for the debtor and the creditors’
committee). Wonderful reading, though time-consuming.
♦ Examiners’ reports, filed in exceptional cases where creditors allege
wrongdoing by management. In the rare cases where a judge appoints an
examiner, his or her report is often the highlight of the case.
U.S. District Court and state courts are playgrounds for businesses, public and
private. While business leaders publicly complain about lawsuits, they privately indulge in
courtroom warfare with zest. In every business-vs.-business lawsuit, a lot of formerly private
information becomes public. Don’t forget divorces; I learned from one divorce case that an
executive I was writing about collected antique clocks and gold bars.
Paper: Court papers are kept by local clerks in each courthouse; archiving
arrangements vary.
Online: Spotty. Dockets are widely available. Documents are not. Occasionally,
however, appellate rulings (which generally are online) contain valuable summaries of key
facts.
Key documents:
♦ Complaints.
♦ Exhibits, particularly contracts and partnership agreements.
♦ Financial statements (often filed with divorces).
♦ Depositions. Sworn, pre-trial testimony. Depositions rarely are filed in court;
business litigants frequently agree to seal them as a condition of settling. But
while the litigation is going on, one side or the other may give you its favorite
depos. Warning: Many attorneys will try to feed you partial depositions.
♦ Summary judgment motions. Each side presents its best summation of the facts
and law, asking the judge to end the case before a trial can begin. Although
summary judgments rarely are granted (prominent exception: Paula Corbin
Jones vs. Bill Clinton), they’re a great place to turn for excerpts from unreleased
depositions.
State secretaries of state or corporate commissioners register corporations,
limited liability corporations, partnerships and limited partnerships. Corporation
commissioners in many states police offerings of securities. They occasionally ban
particularly abusive offerings. While the SEC focuses solely on disclosure – did the offering
disclose all material facts? – many states focus on fairness – whether a particular deal
treats investors fairly. So shady operators who design their deals to avoid federal scrutiny
sometimes run afoul of the states.
Paper: Each state maintains copies of corporate charters, bylaws and the name of
each corporation’s agent for service of process – the guy authorized to accept lawsuits on
behalf of the corporation. Many also list current officers and boards of directors.
Documents on limited partnerships are spotty.
Online: While pay services routinely provide scads of state corporate documents, I
have yet to see anything worthwhile from the state government itself. Of course, I live in
California, a state with a famously backward attitude toward electronic disclosure of public
records. You may be luckier.

-3-

Key documents:
♦ Articles of incorporation – contains name of company, date incorporated and
names of the incorporators. Often, these are just attorneys who represent the
real incorporators.
♦ Officers and directors – the people who run the corporation.
♦ Partnership records – the names of the partners. Each member of a partnership
holds unlimited liability for the partnership. In other words, if a jury awards a $1
million verdict against the partnership, and partnership assets are insufficent, the
partners are personally liable.
♦ Limited partnership records – the names of partners in a limited partnership.
Some states provide this; others do not. In a limited partnership, the limited
partners are liable only for the money they invested. The general (or managing)
partner has unlimited liability.
♦ Enforcement records – including cease and desist (or desist and refrain) orders,
which require sellers of a security to stop what they’re doing within the state
lines. Years ago, I documented a series of wireless cable TV scams by
matching C&D orders from several states; the same names appeared in many
of the C&Ds.
County courthouses and city halls are repositories for an enormous number of
business documents. It is literally impossible to open or operate a business without
creating a paper trail at the nearest county or city office.
Paper: The quantity and quality of public records varies widely from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction. Many key business records – for example, revenue-based local business taxes
– often are considered secret. Consult your state public records law for guidance.
Online: Coverage varies dramatically by jurisdiction. Certain widely used public
records, particularly real estate transactions, routinely are filed online. The Reporters’
Committee for Freedom of the Press (www.rcfp.org) has a fine online guide to public
records laws in all 50 states, “Tapping Official Secrets.”
Key documents:
♦ Business licenses and fictitious business name records. Many jurisdictions
require businesses to obtain a license before opening. Businesses also must
register their names; the fictitious business name filing tells you who the names
are behind a business, plus the form it takes (sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation), plus the date it was formed.
♦ Property assessment – the value, for tax purposes, of land or buildings owned by
a business. Property assessment records usually include the mailing address for
the person who pays the tax bill. Assessment appeals will tell you what a
business says its property really is worth.
♦ Local tax collection records – how much in property taxes were levied, and
whether they were paid.
♦ State and federal tax liens – how much a business or individual owes in unpaid
taxes and when the taxes were due. One of the first signs that a business is in
trouble comes when it fails to pay income tax withholding on behalf of its
employees to the state and federal tax collectors. (The business most likely is

-4-

using the withheld tax money as a hidden, interest-free loan from its employees.)
Another early warning sign: failure to pay unemployment insurance taxes. Failure
to pay triggers a lien, which becomes a public record in the county where the
business is located.
♦ City and county land use records – including building permits, zoning changes
and zoning appeals. These records can give you insight into how quickly a
business is growing. It also could help you see who its friends and enemies are
in the local power structure.
♦ Mortgages – businesses mortgage their land and buildings to raise money. In
addition, many entrepreneurs finance their businesses by taking out second
mortgages on their homes.
♦ Uniform Commercial Code filings – filed by the lender to document loans on
movable property such as office furniture and computers.

-5-

