GROWING PAINS: DIGGING UP THE DIRT

Darcy Spears
Investigative Reporter
KVBC-TV
dspears@kvbc.com
702-657-3177
www.kvbc.com

2004 IRE Regional Conference
Las Vegas
“Urban Sprawl: Investigating
Land and Water Issues”

When I first came to Las Vegas, I immediately noticed something amiss with the pace of growth
and it’s impact on the environment. How much were taxpayers spending to keep up with
unchecked deve lopment? What price were we paying in health as fallout from environmental
impact? I found constant dust pollution due to construction activity going on unchecked, little to
no dust control on the sites, no laws requiring smog checks of diesel construction vehicles. My
reporting became almost a beat for awhile, under the umbrella title, “Deadly Dust.” Any city
with lots of growth likely experience the same growing pains.
POLLUTION POLICE
Every city has a government agency in charge of policing the polluters. When I arrived on the
scene, the Clark County Air Pollution Control Board was doing little in terms of citing and fining
polluters. Stake out any construction site and it’s simple to catch the culprits in the act. If you
know some of the big polluters, check their local records of citations and fines. The EPA has
federal jurisdiction over all major polluters and may have taken action over and above your local
agency. That federal action could point to a failure to act locally. Our coverage forced new
penalty amounts, increased crackdowns, institution of dust classes to educate the industry on
what’s required of them, and new dust control signs at each site listing contact persons and
numbers to call to report pollution. We even succeeded in forcing the County to add more staff
inspectors. This kind of coverage also helped me develop whistleblowers within the Air
Pollution Control Division who were sick of watching upper management do favors for highpowered friends.
HIGHWAY HAZARDS
Big rigs run through every city, and where there’s construction and urban sprawl, there are
trucks. Most cities have a law on the books requiring trucks to tarp their loads, but here in Las
Vegas, no one enforced it until our coverage of the damage to motorists and lack of
responsibility taken by construction/trucking companies forced County Commissioners to renew
enforcement efforts. Now nearly every truck in town is tarped. It’s easy to find motorists to talk
about this one. Check complaint records with your local government agency to find construction
debris complaints and get in touch with victims that way.
FIELD OF STREAMS
Especially in the West, water and drought conditions are major concerns. Growth and urban
sprawl takes water, and that precious resource is not being renewed to keep pace with rapid

growth. Water is the latest big issue for many Western states. What is your city doing to combat
drought conditions? The answer to this question may open your eyes to some serious taxpayerfunded boondoggles. I found one, and you can see the story online here:
http://www.kvbc.com/Global/story.asp?s=668995
DUST DEVILS
Consider a franchise. I did one called “Dust Devils,” which was sort of a “shame on you” series
where we kept tabs on who the polluters were and how much they were being fined, then showed
up on construction sites, with the camera rolling, to ask them why they couldn't comply with the
law. This almost always resulted in good TV.
THINGS TO REMEMBER
1. The tenacity and constant, nearly beat reporting I did on these issues was the only reason, I
believe, that things started to change. A few reports here and there wouldn't have done the trick.
2. Notice what wasn't happening, i.e. laws not being enforced, penalties not being issued, and
shame local officials into doing their job, or alert other officials that things need to change.
3. Look at permits: what's being allowed in comparison to what the law provides? Who are the
developers and what connections do they have? Are those connections leading to favorable
treatment? If one polluter is a constant repeat offender, dig deeper there. And follow the money
trail on big projects. It often yields interesting information.

