Maurice Tamman
Atlanta Journal Constitution
(404) 460-7813/mtamman@ajc.com
Investigative stories using Census data
Despite the best efforts of the Census Bureau’s relentlessly effective public information
office, data from the 2000 Census is becoming increasingly irrelevant. And it’s time to
start planning for the 2010 Census.
Wrong.
Census work as we know it is changing and soon enough the long form will likely fade
away, to be replaced with the annual American Community Survey.
(http://www.census.gov/acs/www/index.html)
For those unaware of the details, the ACS is a massive public survey. In July the CB will
start mailing a 66-question survey to 240,000 households every month. They expect 1 in
40 households to get the survey ever year.
If the Census Bureau has its way, the ACS will replace the long form, which will go the
way of Friends and Sex and the City.
And here’s what we get in its stead: Annual numbers for on income, housing,
employment, age, race, ethnicity, poverty, nativity, transportation and education.
For areas above 65,000 or more: Annual numbers
• All states
• Almost all metro areas
• Most counties
• Many cities/state
Between 20,000 and 65,000: Three year rolling average
• Smaller Counties and cities/places
Rural areas and small urban areas less than 20,000: Five year rolling average.
• Tract level and some block group level data
For municipal, state, federal planners, demographers, and journalist it will be a gold mine
of data that, until now, was only been refreshed every ten years.
Potential and benefits:
Allow for evolving Census coverage that will eliminate much of the reliance on estimated
data. Generally, Census estimates of population are fairly accurate. As the decade moves
on, however, race/ethnicity and age-group estimates become less reliable.

Broad changes in populations can be detected quickly allowing for changes in coverage.
Other data that needs reference census-type data to analyze will have significantly more
current data to work with.
It comes every year, probably in August.
Limitations:
Tract level data will not be as current in the first couple of year after the Decennial
Census data is released.
The results will have a higher margin-of-error, especially when working in small
geographies.
Race will once again be changing: No more “other” category
Because of the confusion in the last Census regarding ethnicity, Hispanics will be forced
to check one (or more) race categories. This will undoubtedly cause much hand ringing
when comparing race backwards.
When compared to other surveys, such as the CPS, the questions will not dig very deep.
Like the long form, this is a million-mile-wide-but-just-a-few-inches deep product.
It comes every year.
Dealing with the data:
No embargo of the data and the entire nation will be released at the same time.
Currently the data will be released on the same day the national income and poverty
numbers. (This year on Aug. 26.)
How the data will be released remains an open question and something that we should all
weigh in on.
The data will be available on Factfinder (http://www.factfinder.com). They also plan to
make the tables available through something they call WDS
(http://dadso01acs.dads.census.gov/trainingpage/wds_train_home.htm)
JUST MAKE IT AVAILABLE IN A FORMAT WE ALL CAN IMPORT IT.
Planning for the data:
Keep your historic SF3 (long form) data available.

Be ready to grab the data, import it and churn out numbers on deadline.
The annual release will likely become a dreaded day for data-heads so the more
preparation, the better. Editors need to be trained that this data is coming and get them
thinking about it before the first AP story moves over the wire.
Sign up for the ACS alerts: http://lists.census.gov/mailman/listinfo/acsalert

Keep telling yourself this is an opportunity.

