Subject 'Protecting and Cultivating
: Sources'
'Protecting and Cultivating Sources'
from Brian Maass
KCNC-TV, Denver
bmaass@cbs.com
303-830-6472
In 20 years of investigative reporting, I've developed some ideas and guidelines on how to
cultivate news sources, and more importantly, how to protect sources. I fully believe we have a
moral obligation to fully counsel potential sources on how their information will be used, and on the
potential consequences they may face.
Sources frequently act out of anger, emotion, passion or revenge. But they don't always think
things through first and they don't always consider the consequences of their actions.
How would you feel the day after you broke a big story to hear from your confidential source,
'After your story, I was called into the bosses office and got fired. They figured out I was the one
who talked to you'.
That’s why the first section on this tipsheet is on protecting your sources.

Protecting Sources:
-Watch out for them since they can't watch out for themselves.
They just don't always know what to expect after a story breaks. They don't think through how
embarrassed their employer will be, and how desperate most employers are to 'find the leak'.
Probe their potential vulnerabilities. Did they use their work computer to contact you? If so, that
can be tracked. Will your phone number/pager number show up on their work cell phone or even
their desk phone? Another problem.
-Promising them confidentiality/anonymity should be the start of the conversation, not the end.
The burden is not on them to ask what might happen after the story breaks, the burden is on you to
tell them, based on your experience, what kind of reaction you anticipate. Its only fair they are
fully aware. We can't take advantage of their naivete.
Explain the witchunt that may follow.
-Don't forget, they may be risking their livelihoods, and their families' income. You know what’s
going to happen the day after your story appears, they don’t

-Don't speak the way they speak, change the language.
When you contact their supervisor in the company/government agency, don't use their distinctive
speech patterns or idioms. It’s a temptation when they say over and over, 'this policy/investigation
etc. is all jacked up' to use the same phrasing with someone else in the company. But they may be
the only one who talks that way and using their figures of speech may give them away. Flatten out
their distinctive speech.
-No gender identifiers. Always refer to your source(s) in conversation, and in stories as 'they' or
'what this person said.' or in some neutral fashion. Never him or her.
-Silhouette interview. How sure are you your source can't be indentified? Facial hair? Do they have
curly hair? Do they wear distinctive jewelry? Did you alter their voice?
Figure that if your story is important, someone on the losing end of the story is going to tape it and
break it down frame by frame to try to figure out who that is in the shadows. You need to take the
same view of what you put on the air.

Cultivating Sources:
-Where are they? Everywhere
-Be prepared for the source relationship to cross over into friendship. This gives rise to a whole
other set of issues.
-Remember that you can gain more currency with a source by what you don't do than what you do.

-Today's dry hole could be tomorrow's gusher.
The person who calls or emails you with a lousy tip or goofy story idea may know something far more
valuable down the road. If you call them back promptly and treat them well the first time around,
they'll remember that. I can't count the number of decent leads and tips we've received from
people who referred to an earlier time when we responded promptly and courteously and others did
not.
Always call back.
-Talk to them at home, on weekends, after hours. People are not comfortable talking at work about
sensitive issues. You need to talk to them when they are in their comfort zone.
-Give them your home number- How can you ask for their home number if you're not willing to
provide yours?

-Don't talk to them only when you need them. People know they're being used. I try to set out
specific hours during the week where I will do nothing but e-mail or call sources. Set up coffee or a
lunch. They'll realize you are around for the long haul.
Some call it 'checking your traps'.
-Meet at your house. Share what you are going to report and how you are going to report it.
Be prepared to spend time well outside of normal business hours. Nights, weekends, whenever it’s
convenient for them.
-Always let them know your strategy for approaching a story they told you about. Let them have
input. What do they think about this approach? If they didn't catch your story, send them a copy.
Its proof of performance.
-Send them things they might be interested in- affidavits, warrants, public documents they might
not otherwise see that were not in the story or may pertain to their agency. They will be grateful
and it helps create a bond.

