Covering & Uncovering Child Neglect Stories
Eric Frazier
The Charlotte Observer
1. Learn your ground rules. These stories are always complicated by the often-frustrating laws sealing
child welfare and juvenile/family court records. Don’t expect child welfare officials to help you. In fact,
expect them to get in your way. So, you’ve got to know your rights. Go to your state legislature’s online
Web site, look up the state’s statutes and read the juvenile code. Or, find a friendly/knowledgeable child
welfare lawyer or activist who can walk you through it. Without knowledge of how the system works as a
whole, much of what people will say to you will sound like gobbledygook.
2.Get into your juvenile courts. As soon as a child is removed from a home, the case becomes a juvenile
(or family) court battle. Find ways to spend time in juvenile courts, just watching as cases are handled. (It’s
a completely different animal than covering criminal courts). You’ll get a better understanding of the
system and possibly notice recurring problems. If your juvenile courts aren’t open, or if judges illegally try
to bar you, get your paper’s lawyers on it. Often, these courts are closed much more tightly than they need
to be. Extra hint: Make friends with the chief judge! Nothing makes your life easier...
3.Be careful with complaints from families. One common way reporters find out about these child
neglect cases is when birth parents feel their children have been unnecessarily removed. Proceed with
caution. Often, these families will give you tons of information, but you can’t get any in-depth response
from social services because those agencies will decline to comment, citing confidentiality rules. Ask the
families for any official documents they might have kept (copies of DSS letters, juvenile court records, case
plans, anything). If you can’t get confirmation through official documents or sources, you only know half
the story.
4.Ask about child fatality reviews and other post-death records that might be available. Most states
now conduct multidisciplinary reviews into abuse or neglect-related deaths of children. Often, the results of
the reviews are public information. Some contain precious little information, others contain enough leads to
get your reporting going. Some states open entire case files after children die, which is obviously the bestcase scenario for a reporter trying to see what went wrong.
5.Be Careful with National Statistics. There is no uniform national standard for reporting child abuse and
neglect numbers. The state-by-state statistics that do exist, such as those in NCANDS,
www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/cb/publications/cm01/outcover.htm, come from states where the definitions of
abuse and neglect are different, and the ways of compiling the information often don’t match. You must do
your own top-to-bottom check of the methodologies to make sure they match those in your state, otherwise
you can wind up drawing wildly inaccurate conclusions about how well or badly your state compares to
others.
6.Check the Adoption and Safe Families Act reviews. These “ASFA reviews” require the federal
government to come in and basically audit the performance of your state’s child welfare system, checking
for safety, permanence and well-being of children. Since the law was passed in 1997, all states have failed,
to my knowledge. The review results can make a good leveraging point to begin asking officials why things
aren’t up to snuff. See http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/laws/pi/pi9802.htm for a description of the law,
and http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/cwrp/geninfo/index.htm for information on the reviews, along
with a schedule showing when your state’s review is due.

