12 Steps for Clearer Stronger Writing
2004 IRE Convention-Atlanta
AL TOMPKINS z POYNTER INSTITUTE GROUP LEADER, BROADCAST/ONLINE

Tompkins@poynter.orgz www.aimfortheheart.comz 727-821-9494
1.

Tell the Story in 3 Words. (OTPS-one theme per story-one thought per sentence). Select-don’t
compress what goes in your stories. The stuff that does not make it in makes great tags, follow-ups or
additional material for Internet sites.

2.

Tell complex stories through strong characters. Viewers remember what they feel longer than
what they know. Characters help me understand how the complex facts you uncovered affect people.

3.

Objective Copy-Subjective Sound. Let the characters evoke emotions, express feelings and
opinions in their soundbites. The journalists’ copy should contain objective words, facts, and truths.

4.

Use active verbs-not passive: who did what? Consider the difference between “the gun was
found” and “the boy found the gun”, ask “who did what?” and you will write stronger and more informed
stories. Don't use active verbs to convey action where there is none. Avoid words such as
"vowing," "hitting", "rebuking," or "standing firm on" when the person is really just making a speech or
routine political statement.

5.

No subjective adjectives. Your lawyer and your viewers will thank you. No more “fantasticunbelievable-gut wrenching or mother’s worst nightmare.”

6.

Give viewers a sense for the passage of time in your story. Make me feel you have spent some
time by showing me the character in more than one setting, in more than one situation.

7.

Remember-leads tell me “so what”, stories tell me “what” and tags tell me “what’s next”.
Use the information from your second best soundbite as your lead. What about this story made you feel
something? That is your lead-it is the Velcro the viewer needs to stick to. When going “live” you must
include news in your first sentence.

8.

The words and the pictures “hold hands”. Avoid “see dog-say dog”. Tell the viewer
something they might miss even if they were standing next to you when you were shooting the story.
Open your senses. Tell the viewer what they can't see or hear.

9.

Stories need context. What is, what was, what ought to be. Spin a yarn, put the viewer on your knee
and tell them a story.

10. Use simple, clear language. Avoid complex medical terms, fancy phrases, legalese and cop-speak.
Edward R. Murrow said, “I don't want to talk down to the college professor, but I don't want the plumber
to turn away either.”
11. Every story needs surprises. Think of them as little gold coins you sprinkle down the trail, allowing
the viewer to collect them as they go through a story, or a newscast for that matter. Don’t load all of the
gold coins at the top of the story and don’t make the viewer wait too long to get rewarded.
12. Build in silence and natural sound moments. Great stories are not wall-to-wall gabfests. Let the
viewer catch up to you once in a while. This is especially true if you have many characters, intense
action, confrontation or remarkable video.

