Investigating child abuse and neglect
IRE Conference, Atlanta, June 2004
Donna McGuire
The Kansas City Star

1. Learn your state’s open records laws pertaining to child abuse and neglect files.
Obtain open records whenever possible.
Many states have Child Fatality Review Panels, some of which open their records. A
few states have open juvenile court and/or family court proceedings. Missouri usually
will release child abuse investigation records in cases where children have died or nearly
died from abuse or neglect. Kansas recently passed a law opening some records for foster
children who die.
2. Federal and state privacy laws protect most child abuse and neglect records. In
Missouri, for example, it is a misdemeanor to ask for someone’s closed case file, even if
he or she is willing to show it to you. However, federal law (CAPTA) actually tells states
to open the files after children have died. Many states fail to comply. Information on
CAPTA is available through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
3. Learn how the state system is supposed to work – then find out if it does.
In Missouri, we borrowed five manuals, each several inches thick, that tell case
workers how to investigate abuse, work with foster families, etc. We photocopied each
page then built our own manuals. Know your state’s rules and protocols so you can write
about how the state breaks its rules.
4. Federal reviews of state child protection programs are under way. Has your state’s
review been completed? Read the result. Compare them to other states.
5. Study statistics.
Compare your city or county to past data or to trends in other cities or counties. Are
foster care numbers increasing or decreasing? Why? Are some counties terminating
parental rights at greater – or lower – rates than other counties? What areas of your state
have the highest rates of child-abuse hotline calls? Why are the rates high? How quickly
do courts return children to their families? How does your state compare to other states?
One caveat: Much of the nationally available data is old, and some of it us
downright inaccurate.
6. The Child Welfare League of America operates the National Data Analysis System.
THIS IS A GREAT PLACE FOR DATA. You can ask the database to create tables. The
web site asks you to sign in, but you can register as a guest. See http://ndas.cwla.org/
State information is listed, but if you go to pre-defined tables and graphs, you can create
tables. Child fatality data is included, though it is not complete.
7. Spend time surfing the National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
Information web site. http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/. State statutes, statistics, publications

and databases are available here. This information also can be reached though the Child
Welfare League of America site.
8. State-by-state data also are available through AFCARS – the Adoption and Foster Care
Analysis and Reporting System. This can be found within HHS and the Administration
for Children and Families. See http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/dis/afcars/ This
information also can be reached through the CWLA site.
9. There’s no shortage of experts willing to talk about child abuse and neglect.
Many speak from a specific point of view. For example, Richard Wexler of the National
Coalition for Child Protection Reform (703-212-2006)is a strong advocate of keeping
children in families. Other agencies, especially those serving foster children, may lean
strongly toward taking children from what they consider to be dangerous families. It’s
good to have a diverse set of experts to call upon.
10. If possible, try to spend a day with a child abuse investigator, a family preservation
worker or a state worker who licenses foster families. We did this in Kansas City, when
the state began a program called, “Walk in My Shoes,” that gave members of the public
an inside view of the child protection system. We worked out a confidentiality agreement
in order to write about what the workers saw and did.
11. Police reports and prosecutors’ records are a great way of learning more about abuse
and neglect cases.
12. Child welfare programs usually are underfunded, which can lead to high case loads
and other problems. Follow the money – or the lack of money. What impact does it have?

