A Teaching Tool: Covering Nonprofits through back doors
By Jay Perkins
Nonprofits are a great unexplored area of coverage at most media operations. They also are a
great resource for teaching student reporters the basics of using financial records and
governmental documents to pierce the veil of secrecy that private groups work behind. Unlike
private businesses, nonprofits do have to file a public income tax return and this can be a great
starting point in the teaching process.

What is a nonprofit?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

A nonprofit is simply a different way of funneling money to people. You will notice the
two key words – money and people – are the same two key words you deal with
every day. Start thinking like a reporter.
An ever expanding area of funding projects by govt. May be the biggest expansion
of any now occurring.
An easy way to circumvent public bid laws, public disclosure laws and another other
type of law that normally is designed to protect the public’s interest..
A recipient of political patronage. Don’t assume that because it’s got nonprofit
associated with the term that politics is not involved. It is.
Often not monitored well by government either because it is a step removed from
process. City council will raise hell for small insignificant amount by a housing
authority but usually doesn’t look at how the nonprofit that is carrying out the
housing projects performs.

Why reporters don’t cover nonprofits properly.
a.
b.
c.

Most think of covering traditional governmental bodies, seldom look at the way those
bodies disburse money.
They don’t apply the same critical tools to the nonprofits that they use when looking
at governmental agencies.
They assume that nonprofits operated by different standards than profits.

How to cover nonprofits.
a.

b.

c.
d.

Find out how many nonprofits are out there. Check Guidestar’s advanced search
(www.guidestar.com) to see how many operate in your area. A check of Louisiana
shows 12,484 nonprofits operating in the state. A check of Baton Rouge found 1,427
nonprofits exist. Check of zip code 70808 found 158 nonprofits. They included my
daughter’s swim club, a nonprofit that provided day care for 35 low income families
with $79,000 in funds from a local governmental agency, and the multi-million dollar
LSU Foundation.
Look to see how much they are getting. Don’t just look at the contributions—look for
governmental agency grants as well. If they are receiving money from a grant, find
out which agencies are likely suspects and then go to the agency. Look for contracts
and correspondence between the agency and the nonprofit. The nonprofit doesn’t
have to tell you squat but the agency is subject to the public records law.
Use form 990s as a starting point. You can get them at www.guidestar.com. In
addition, the nonprofit is required to keep them on file and make them available to
you.
Look for contracts between the agency and the nonprofit. Get incorporation records,
who is on the board of directors, staff members, annual financial reports. Look for

e.
f.

g.

h.

i.

cooperative agreements and other documents that spell out the arrangements
between the agency and the nonprofit,
Look at salaries and other benefits. Are the officers enriching themselves?
Remember nonprofit doesn’t mean that nobody makes a profit – it just means the
organization doesn’t have to declare a profit. Most people I know of want money.
Look at performance. Few reporters think to look at how well a nonprofit is
delivering. Few agencies look at how well nonprofits deliver. The trend with reporters
is to check for exorbitant salaries or perks. But seldom do reporters think about the
performance. Performance is the key.
Performance is impacted by several factors. Sometimes nonprofits find themselves
hampered by governmental regulations. Check to see if the problem is the nonprofit
or the governmental agency refusing to sign off on the nonprofit proposals.
Oftentimes, governmental obstructionism can be a profit for smaller nonprofits.
Look to see who is getting the benefits of the nonprofit. Oftentimes, nonprofits serve
the moderately sick rather than the deathly ill. Easier to sell politically but a
disservice to those they supposedly serve. This is particularly true in low income
housing, for example. It’s easier to get funding and easier to sell housing for
moderate income people than for the really low income people.
Start thinking like a reporter. The Tiger Athletic Foundation built a $90 million dollar
addition to Tiger Stadium at LSU. There was almost no public scrutiny of the way the
project was financed or how the contractor and subcontractor was picked, etc. Why?
Because by going the non-profit route, LSU managed to avoid having to deal with
competitive bid laws and other procedures designed to insure the public is getting its
money's worth. It was a smart business deal for LSU but it wasn't any service to the
public's right to know how its money is being spent.

