Teaching investigative techniques in
a mass communication curriculum.
Professors often find themselves in schools where there are limited skills courses and
(seemingly) unlimited lecture classes. Don’t despair. Investigative techniques still can be taught –
even in this curriculum -- as long as you think outside the box. Here are 10 suggestions that can
be dropped into almost any reporting course, from the most basic to more advanced.
1.

Assign a public records scavenger hunt. If you are untenured and the class is
basic, tell the students to do a public records search of you. If you’re tenured and the
class more advanced, let them do any faculty member they want. If you’re at the top
of your pay scale anyway and the class is advanced, tell them to do the governor and
to match up board appointments, legislation, etc., with the major donors. Guaranteed:
some student will find something interesting about even the dullest faculty member
(yourself included). Also guaranteed: some student will find something that you didn’t
know was out there. One of my students found, for example, a couple of years ago,
that I received a vaccination for yellow fever at a public health clinic. Another found
one of my dogs was listed as foundation stock at the American Kennel Club
webpage.

2.

Let them do some group projects. I know, it’s harder to grade group projects and
some loafers will play off the group and get a grade they don’t deserve. But students
usually are fearful of government. Letting them go as a group gives them positive
reinforcement and the courage to tackle those fearsome bureaucrats. And if some
students get a better grade than they deserve, so what? They probably also learned
a few things they wouldn’t have learned at all. I even let students share information
and their techniques with other teams (but I also tell them that if everyone has the
same information, they’ll all get a C. And I also tell them about the students one year
that decided to separate their group from the others by making up information about
the “target” and passing it on to other groups. It worked, of course. Some groups just
printed the false information without checking it and ended up with very low grades.

3.

Don’t limit their choices. The tendency in doing investigations is to think in terms of
public policy. It’s a mistake I made for years. Don’t be as stupid as I once was. Let
them investigate anything they want (as long as you have discussed it with them in
advance to make sure there’s a story somewhere). Males often want to write nothing
but sports stories. Don’t turn them off by saying “no sports stories” – instead, turn
them on by showing them how sports is a business and how traditional business
investigative techniques can open up new avenues for them to explore. One of the
best stories ever done by one of my students dealt with an LSU football player who
was prohibited from playing in a bowl game because he tested positive for
performance enhancing drugs. He parlayed that small story into a major investigation
of drug usage by athletes across the NCAA.

4.

Teach investigative techniques no matter what the subject. Some of the best
personality profiles my students have done came as a result of the application of
investigative techniques to a standard personality story. One student who did a story
on a local politician started by doing a records search on him and assembling a list of
places he had been. Then he started calling those places to see who might
remember the politician at an earlier point in his life. It’s amazing how much grade
school teachers (we won’t even mention ex-wives here, will we?) can remember
about you. And it’s amazing how much insight they often have into your personality
and what makes you tick as a person. Personality profiles don’t have to be puff
pieces – and they won’t be if you teach investigative techniques.

5.

Host a brainstorming session about back doors. Students (and most reporters)
often think about going directly to the source. When the door is slammed in their face,
the result all too often is a statement “well, I tried but they wouldn’t talk.” Get around
this by talking about back doors, how you can use documents and sources to get
around people who won’t talk. Make yourself look literate by talking about Socrates
and the doctrine of opposites and then explain that he really was talking about how
you can use Democrats to find out what Republicans are up to, etc.) And then open
up the classroom discussion and make them come up with a list of people and
documents that might provide information about a person or group that doesn’t want
to talk. I use nonprofits frequently in teaching back door reporting techniques since
nonprofits don’t have to tell you much of anything. Once students start thinking about
using form 990s, or pulling building permits to find out which contractors are working
on a nonprofit’s project., they begin to think of obstacles as something to overcome.
Reporting no longer is drudgery: it becomes a battle of wits.

6.

Make computers easy. Students don’t have to know how data gets parsed and they
don’t have to know how to concatenate fields (at least not at the start.) They do need
to know that there’s a lot of information out there in Excel format that they can grab
for free. They do need to know that there’s a magic button in Excel that lets them sort
data by column. And they do need a modest exposure to the five basic commands of
SQL and to the point and click interface of Access. Teach them just enough to get
them interested. If they’re interested, they’ll learn the rest themselves.

7.

Make them use governmental search engines. I recommend they forget about
Google and go straight to http://www.firstgov.gov or to www.gpoaccess.gov. I
particularly push the Catalog of U.S. Government Publications search engine at
(http://www.gpoaccess.gov/cgp/index.html) so they can quickly see what the
government has published on the subject. I also recommend “Hearings before….”
(http://www.gpoaccess.gov/chearings/index.html) as a great source of quotes and
expertise. But the key here is to make certain they learn to look for authoritative
sources of information first instead of wandering around general search engines.

8.

Help them develop a search strategy. I usually suggest they start the Internet
research by searching
a. Journalistic groups (Poynter institute, etc.) or journalistic tip sheets (such as
Barbara’s News Researcher Page at http://www.gate.net/~barbara/) to see if
someone already might have done the work for them and developed a set of
useful links.
b. Governmental think tanks such as AEI, Brookings, or Rand to see if there might
be any concise research done on the subject. For example, in preparing this tip
sheet, I wandered across a nicely done research paper at Rand on insurgency in
Iraq that traces the problems the U.S has in dealing with insurrections,
insurgencies and guerrilla warfare and what mistakes the U.S. is making in Iraq. I
haven’t seen anything like it in the newspapers.
c. Governmental search engines such as www.firstgov.gov.
d. And finally, general search engines. The goal is to keep them away from Google
and the non-authoritative sources as long as possible. Google, after all, serves
up web pages by popularity – and we all know that the most popular sites aren’t
going to have that nugget of hidden truth that they’re looking for.

9.

Give them concrete examples. Make up specific examples of how they can use
Internet resources such as reverse lookups, mapquest, government sites and
commercial sites) to help find sources and to gather information for a story or to get
the phone numbers for the story. Here’s an example I put together for my students
(www.manship2.lsu.edu/perkins/nycplane.htm) using a Washington Post story on an
airplane crash. You can do this with any story.

10.

Show them how to climb a mountain. Most students (and far too many reporters)
think that stories are done by going straight to the authoritative source and
interviewing him. Explain to them that mountains are best climbed from the bottom
up. Teach them to cast a broad net of research first, to interview secondary sources
second and to interview the main source at the end. If they’ll do this, at least they’ll
have enough information to ask a decent question once they do get to the guru at the
top.

And finally, not a tip but a warning: keep their eye on the ball. Reporting is always local and
while internet sources are fabulous, they’re only a secondary part of the story. Students love
to write stories from Internet sources but they usually end up doing nothing more than a
research paper and calling it a news story. Push them to develop the local legs and the local
sources to make research into news.

