LAND GRAB: PROPERTY RECORDS TIPSHEET
CAR CONFERENCE, HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA, MARCH 2005
Lisa Vorderbrueggen/Knight Ridder/Contra Costa Newspapers/California
lvorderbrueggen@cctimes.com
1.
Wine and dine your local planners, or at the very least, send flowers on their birthdays. Such people possess documentation on real estate
developments such as environmental impact reports, specific plans and general plan amendment studies. These reports appear ominous, but they will
yield key nuggets of information such as assessor’s parcel numbers that will lead you to owners’ names.
2.
Sit down with your local property assessor and/or recorder and learn how they do their business. For a quick lesson, write a story on the
top 10 landowners in your area, either in acreage or assessed value. Ask the assessor for a spreadsheet, which will allow you to sort and query the
numbers. These are often the same people that attempt to influence land-use decisions in order to obtain windfall development entitlements.
3.
Periodically check the delinquent property tax lists; they can offer clues into whether developers or powerful landowners are in financial
trouble.
4.
Federal agencies also play a prominent role in many development projects. Housing and commercial projects often require permits from
agencies such as Army Corps of Engineers or U.S. Fish and Wildlife. But these permits don’t usually generate a public hearing, so you may not
know about these issues unless you request these documents.
5.
When you file a request for public records, don’t forget to ask for e-mail and Blackberry messages. Many jurisdictions discourage
employees from saving these records but how often do workers follow the rules?
6.
Go “GIS.” It stands for geographic information system and many government agencies now have sophisticated computerized mapping
software. In the nine-county San Francisco Bay Area, for example, a transportation planning agency stacked its public transit network layer over the
region’s poorest neighbors to find gaps in service. Many cities have digitized their general plans and zoning designations. ArcView is popular but
others exist. (If you don’t have the software in your office, sweet talk the GIS technicians into helping you . . . odds are, they’ll be flattered you
asked!)
7.
Track powerful landowners’ and developers’ campaign contributions with local or state elected boards’ votes on development projects.
Build yourself an Excel database and over time, patterns of influence will emerge.
8.
Don’t overlook developers and builders as a source of data. Most homebuilders, for example, keep data on their buyers such as their home
of origin, occupation and salary. Some may not want to share their marketing data, but most will be thrilled to obtain a little free publicity. In return,
you provide readers with an interesting glimpse into who is buying in a particular development.
9.
Check your federal lawmakers’ records for real estate conflicts of interest. Called Form 700s, these statements of financial interests are
now available for most states on the Internet at www.publicintegrity.org.
10. If you have a news research division in your newsroom, chances are those folks use Nexis or AutoTrak. Schedule. Sit down with a
researcher and learn what data is available. These databases provide records such as liens, property ownership, assessor’s parcel numbers, assessed
values, etc.
11.

Resource books to have on your desk:
“Paper Trails: A Guide to Public Records in California,” 2nd edition, by Stephen Levine and Barbara T. Newcombe, 1996. It’s a bit dated
now, but it still provides a solid list of the various records associated with real estate and development. (Available on Amazon.com.)
“Public Records Online,” 5th Edition, by Michael L. Sankey & James R. Flowers, Jr., June 2004. Public Records Online helps guide
reporters through the searching of records, including court records, state agencies, other federal agencies and private vendors. It also includes a list of
private company profiles and web sites for use as resources. The coolest thing about this book is that it provides state-by-state information.
(Available at IRE bookstore and Amazon.com)
“Curtin’s California land Use and Planning Law,” by Daniel J. Curtin, Jr. and Cecily T. Talbert and Daniel Curtin. A land-use bible, of
sorts, this book is about to come out in its 25th edition for 2005. Curtin represents developers, but it’s a good source of information about the various
steps required to obtain government approvals for development, and each layer of bureaucracy, fortunately for the press, produces public records.
(Buy it for $50 on Amazon.com or Curtin sends out free copies to reporters that ask for it. Reach Curtin’s office in Walnut Creek, CA at 925-9378000.)

