Dodging Data Bullets: Making Your Stories Error Free
Jennifer LaFleur
The Dallas Morning News
jlafleur@dallasnews.com

Integrity checks for every data set:
Do you have all the records?
Is there any way to double-check totals or counts?
Have you consistency-checked all fields?
Do this by running a GROUP BY and sorting alphabetically by every important field – check it for
spelling inconsistencies. For example, if you’re analyzing a database of highway accidents, GROUP BY
and sort ascending on the road name to check for inconsistencies.
Have you done other basic checks – all states are included, all cities/counties are included?
Do you have any missing data or blank fields?
Have you checked your methodology (if necessary) against other similar research?

Beyond data checking
Know the source of the data
Get similar data from another source
Check against reports
Make sure you’re using the right tool. You may need to do more than counting and sorting.
Check with experts from different sides of the issue
Find similar stories and study what they did. (IRE resource center is great for this.)

Finding the right methodology
Read research reports
Finding an existing data model
Find an expert to bounce your methodology off during the process
Show findings to the targets of the story
Duplicate your work. To make sure you didn’t mess something up along the way.

For more information:
Numbers in the Newsroom: Using Math and Statistics in News by Sarah Cohen for Investigative Reporters and
Editors, Inc.
Precision Journalism by Philip Meyer. Indiana University Press, Bloomington. 4th Edition. 2002.
News and Numbers by Victor Cohn. Iowa State University Press, Ames. 1989.
How to Lie with Statistics by Darrell Huff. W. W. Norton & Company, New York. 1954 (renewed 1984)
Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences by John Allen Paulos. Vintage Books, New York. 1990.
A Mathematician Reads the Newspaper by John Allen Paulos. Anchor Books, New York. 1995. (Also, check out
the tape from Paulos keynote address at NICAR 2002 in Philadelphia)
IRE Resource Center: www.ire.org

