Analyzing Speeding Tickets and Racial Profiling Data
Holly Whisenhunt Stephen, Investigative Producer
News 4 WOAI TV
hollywhisenhunt@woai.com (210) 226-4444 x 426

2005 CAR Conference
Hollywood

By looking at speeding tickets data, you can find some trends and maybe even debunk a few myths like
ticket “quotas.” For our story we analyzed 5 years worth of ticket data.

Things to look for:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Where speeding tickets were issued the most (also great for mapping)
Average speed over limit before getting a ticket
How many tickets dismissed because officer can’t recall
How many tickets dismissed because officer failed to appear in court
Color of car issued most speeding tickets
Is there an increase in tickets at the beginning or end of the month?
Age, ethnic and gender breakdown

Also: Look at tickets in school zones. This worked well with our Speed Patrol segment; viewers let us
know where drivers speed through neighborhoods and school zones. Also: Get a view from the other side.
Our initial speeding story was a type of quiz. We asked a traffic judge what he thought the answers would
be. In the end, we did not discover any “ticket quota” trends at the beginning or end of the month.
Another story idea could be the cottage industry of beating speeding tickets. Just do a Google search and
you will find dozens of books, DVD’s, classes and websites explaining how to get out of tickets. Are there
any in your area? If so, how effective are they?
What you need to know before you start: Watch for dirty data. Remember it is data entry —you can’t
get around the fact that mistakes will be made. So when you’re looking for specifics (race, make of car,
actual fines, etc.) look through the hard copy records for accuracy.
Racial profiling and drivers:
After the speeding story, we decided to take a closer look at the tickets and compare them with the racial
profiling data collected by the police department. This information (state law requires this in Texas) did
not have names or birthdates but we were able to link more than 150,000 records with ticket numbers in
municipal court data.
We found several discrepancies: tickets counted more than once, multiple tickets on the same stop, but with
different races; and overall recording differences between the actual ticket race and the racial profiling data.
After analyzing the data we took it to the police department. We wanted to know how this information
could be a reliable source for a racial profiling study that was released a year earlier and cost over $50,000.
Know the law for your state:
Texas Senate Bill 1074 (S.B. 1074), passed in 2001, requiring law enforcement agencies to annually report
detailed statistics onconcerning the race of drivers who are stopped and searched. What is the law in your
state? Is there one? If not, why?
Things to know when looking at racial profiling data and studies:
The likelihood of finding a “smoking gun” showing a department blatantly discriminates is highly unlikely.
Why? Variables and what experts call “perception”. It is extremely hard to know what each officer is
thinking during a traffic stop. You also need to factor in the racial makeup of the force. Before opening up
this possible Pandora’s Box, I highly recommend getting in touch with someone who studies this subject so
you have a full understanding.

Where to go? Check with local universities. See what type of economic and statistical research is going on.
We found a professor who did an analysis of the search rates of minority and non-minority Texas motorists
a few years ago. He now has a consulting firm and we interviewed him for our story. Having another set of
eyes looking at our data helped confirm inaccuracies we thought we had uncovered.

Helpful links:
The Institute on Race and Justice is an interdisciplinary research institute at Northeastern University in
Boston. This site is awesome! Through a federal grant the university has created a web-based Racial
Profiling Data Collection Resource Center. You can use a new interactive report generator that contains
comprehensive information on traffic stop reports from most states.
http://www.racialprofilinganalysis.neu.edu/
The Texas Criminal Justice Coalition (TCJC) just completed a 2005 racial profiling report. It claims this is
the largest set of racial profiling data and it is the first inter-departmental review of contraband data
collected by Texas law enforcement agencies. http://www.criminaljusticecoalition.org
Dr. Dwight Steward of Austin, Texas, provides economic and statistical research on employment and
discrimination issues to the legal, business, and governmental communities. http://www.stewardresearch.com/
The Justice Research and Statistics Association (JRSA) is a national organization of state Statistical
Analysis Center (SAC) directors and researchers throughout government, academia and criminal justice
organizations. http://www.jrsa.org
The Council on Crime and Justice is a non-profit agency that studies criminal and social justice.
http://www.crimeandjustice.org
Civilrights.org is a collaboration of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights and the Leadership
Conference on Civil Rights Education Fund. It offers civil rights news and information.
http://www.civilrights.org
Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice looks at criminal justice policies that reduce incarceration and
promote long-term public safety. http://www.cjcj.org/index.php
The Vera Institute of Justice works closely with leaders in government and civil society to improve the
services people rely on for safety and justice. I found this to be a good website for research concerning all
types of law enforcement issues. http://www.vera.org
These following links may be some of the more “obvious” places to look when researching racial profiling.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
It has links to local contacts as well. http://www.naacp.org
League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) http://www.lulac.org
Check for your local representative.
The Alliance of South Asians Taking Action (ASATA), located in California, has several helpful links to
organizations across the country. http://www.asata.org/resources/hatecrimes/
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) http://www.aclu.org/ The ACLU also has a special section called
“Racial Justice” and “Police Practices.” http://www.aclu.org/RacialEquality/RacialEqualityMain.cfm
The Institute on Race and Poverty (IRP) at the University of Minnesota Law School. While IRP focuses on
racialized poverty, it has plenty of info about other issues. http://www.irpumn.org/website/

