Analyzing speeding tickets
Prepared for the IRE/NICAR 2005 Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference
March 17-20, 2005, Hollywood, Calif.
Paul Overberg
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427

A CAR 101 staple: Get and analyze the local list of unpaid parking tickets. It has everything to
sell a data-leery editor: open-and-shut findings; clear villains; a whiff of public service; guaranteed
high reader interest; even the possibility of finding the powerful abusing their positions.
Think of speeding tickets as a CAR 301 staple. The methodology is a bit more complicated. So
is the analysis. But the breadth of story possibilities is much broader, and the public service
component is real. Consider: Speeding is cited as a contributing cause of fatal accidents about as
often as drugs and alcohol (There is some overlap.). Now think how much various government
agencies spend preventing one vs. the other. Speeding ticket data also can be used to probe for
racial profiling and discriminatory policing.
Why analyzing speeding tickets is a little tricky:
-- You can’t get a rate. Not only is there no good denominator (licensed drivers? miles driven?),
you can’t tell how much the number of tickets reflects changes in police effort vs. real changes in
the number of speeders.
-- It’s hard to tell if speeders are going faster from one year to the next. Just because the median
ticketed speed rises doesn’t necessarily mean speeding is getting more flagrant. Police might be
giving up on less flagrant cases and focusing on the worst abusers. However, measuring the share of
ticketed speeders who top some benchmark – 100 mph or 15 mph over the limit – can help pin
down if there’s a trend.
-- There’s no clear villain, except us. No evil bureaucrats, no greedy corporation. (Racial
profiling is the exception.) That can be a handicap in getting approval.
-- There’s little social outrage. No one in your news meeting will admit, even sheepishly, to
getting caught driving drunk, but listen to how people talk about getting caught speeding. Then
there’s the “speed limits are unconstitutional” crowd. See, for example,
http://www.motorists.org/index.html.
But considered in public health terms, speeding is a major cause of premature death, disability
and economic loss. (http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/pdf/nrd-30/NCSA/TSF2002/2002spdfacts.pdf) .
And there’s no mistaking that this topic is a talker. Remember to leave room for a sidebar on
excuses. Every cop and judge has a list of favorites, including:
-- "I was picking up a sick child."
-- "I had a sick child in the back seat."
-- "I had to make a midnight curfew."
-- "I didn't know how fast I was going because it wasn't my car."
-- "I was going downhill."
Here are just some of the most recent packages on speeding ticket data:
-- The News-Journal, Wilmington, Del. (February 2005): Mike Chalmers found that blacks
ticketed for speeding paid 7 percent more in fines that did whites. Blacks were charged more

frequently with higher speeds, which produced the higher fines. The newspaper analyzed 877,000
speeding tickets issued from 1994-2003.
http://www.delawareonline.com/newsjournal/local/2005/02/27blackdriverspay.html
-- WSMV-TV, Nashville (May 2004): Nancy Amons painstakingly stitched together files from a
dozen cities and towns to reveal that some of the worst speeders had clean driving records because
they had repeatedly been able to erase their offenses by sitting through a class designed to teach
better driving.
http://www.wsmv.com/Global/story.asp?S=1884244
-- Boston Globe (July 2003, ongoing follow-up): Analyzing 166,000 tickets and warnings, Bill
Dedman and Francie Latour were able to show how citation rates varied for exactly the same
offense for men and women and whites and minorities. So-called “all stops” data like this is the
gold standard because it allows examination the level of discretion police use for people of all kinds
who are stopped for exactly the same kind of offense.
http://www.boston.com/globe/metro/packages/tickets/
A note on racial profiling of drivers: It’s not easy to do a good analysis because of all the
confounding variables and weaknesses in available data. But a growing number of state highway
patrols collect “all stops” data – information on the race, gender and approximate age of each driver
who is stopped and the reason why. Some states have done so voluntarily, and others at the
prodding of the ACLU and other groups. Just last month, the ACLU won Arizona’s agreement to
collect all-stops data as part of an agreement that settled a 2001 lawsuit. For more info, search for
“profiling” in the IRE Resource Center story database (http://www.ire.org/resourcecenter/). Read up
at the Racial Profiling Data Collection Clearinghouse at Northeastern University
(http://www.racialprofilinganalysis.neu.edu/)
-- St. Paul Pioneer-Press (September 2004): Rick Linsk and Janet Roberts analyzed 3 million
tickets issued by the state patrol from 1990-2004. They focused on the growing defiance of speed
limits, the surge in speeding over 100 mph and the growing role of speeding in crashes.
-- St. Louis Post-Dispatch (July 2003): Kevin McDermott used a geographical focus in analyzing
44,000 speeding tickets by Illinois State Police in five Illinois counties. He found that the spot
where interstates 64 and 55 meet near East St. Louis – milepost 4 -- “is the site of by far the largest
number of speeding tickets issued” in the region. Most ticketed speeders were driving about 20 mph
over the limit, while fewer than 1% were less than 10 mph over the limit.
-- USA TODAY (April 2004): We compared 1.2 million speeding tickets from 18 states issued in
2002 with archived data on tickets from 1991 and 1996. We found that overage – speed over
whatever the limit in effect at that time and place – had risen steadily, even though most states had
rolled out higher speed limits in the 1990s to try to legalize the mass of drivers flouting the old 55
mph limits. We also found younger men still the most likely speeders, but a much narrower malefemale gap in Generation X than among baby boomers or older drivers. For details, see my article in
the November-December 2004 issue of Uplink, NICAR’s newsletter.
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2004-02-23-cover-speed_x.htm

