MaryJo Sylwester
St. Paul Pioneer Press
Database Editor
Mjsylwester1971@yahoo.com

Revised: March 2005

My Favorite (Excel) Things
Month-Day-Year:
This is one of my all-time favorite tricks. It works in both Excel and Access. It allows you to grab
just one piece of a date. So if you have a series of dates and you want a new field that just gives
the year. Or if you want a new field to just list the month.
=Year(Datefield)
=Month(Datefield)
=Day(Datefield)
So if you have 4/3/04, here’s what you’ll get with each formula:
Year: 2004
Month: 4
Day: 3 (it gives the date, as in the 3rd day of the month)

Weekday:
This works much the same way as the above formula, but instead it returns the actual day of the
week (Monday, Tuesday, etc). However the results come out as 1 (for Sunday), 2 (for Monday).
=Weekday(Datefield)
Here’s what the answers look like for one week in January:

Note: If you want the 1 value to represent Monday (then 2 for Tuesday, 3 for Wednesday, et), add
a 2 on to the formula like this:
=weekday(datefield,2)

Rank:
Instead of simply sorting your results to put them in “order”, this is a more sophisticated way to
rank your records and to account for ties.
=RANK(This Number, $Start Range$:$End Range$, Order)
• This Number should be the cell where your data starts.
• Start Range should be the cell where your data starts. Anchor with dollar signs.
1
- -

•
•

End Range should be the last cell of your data. Anchor with dollar signs.
Order is either a 1 (smallest value will get assigned #1) or a 0 (largest value will get
assigned #1).

Example: =RANK(B2,$B$2:$B$100,1)

DateValue:
If you imported some data and your Date field stayed as text and is not being recognized as a true
date (which is necessary for proper sorting), here’s how you can fix it. The date has to appear like
a real date --- in other words, either 3/4/04 or March 4, 2004 or 4-March-2004 or one of the other
recognized date formats. You can tell that Excel is not recognizing it as a date if the text is pushed
all the way to the left of the cell. See picture:

=DATEVALUE(String)
The String that goes inside the parentheses is the cell where your data starts.
Example: =DATEVALUE(b2)

Datedif:
Useful for calculating ages from birthdates. It gives you the difference between two dates in
whatever unit of measure you specify.
=Datedif(Date 1, Date 2, Unit of Measure)
Units of Measure:
“y” --- years
“m” ---months
“ym” ---number of months since the last year
You can use the TODAY() function to refer to today’s date. Or you could put a specific date in
there (with quotes around it)
Examples:
=Datedif(b2,today(), “y”)
=Datedif(b2, “1/1/2004”, “y”)

String Functions:
These are extremely handy tools that you can use for data cleanup (particularly splitting names)
or during analysis. They allow you to grab only a piece of the information in a field based on
certain criteria. These functions are also available in Access, however there are a couple slight
variations in syntax. Once you know one, learning the other is a breeze.
LEFT: This tells the computer to start at the first byte on the left side of the field. Then we have
to tell it how many bytes (or characters) to take.
Syntax: LEFT(celladdress, number of bytes to take)
2
- -

Example: LEFT(B5, 5) --- this will extract the first 5 characters of the contents of cell B5
MID: To use this function, you have to tell the computer which cell to do its work, where to start
and where to stop. If you want to take everything that remains in the field, just put a really big
number in that will likely encompass all possibilities.
Syntax: MID(celladdress, byte number to start at, number of bytes to take)
Example: MID(B5,10,4) --- this will start at the 10th byte and take 4 bytes.
SEARCH: This works as a sort of search tool to tell the computer to either start or stop taking a
“string” at a certain character (or space). This is how we can tell the program to split a name field
at the comma, for example. For this type of work, it is used in conjunction with the MID function.
The character you what to find should be enclosed in quotes.
Syntax: SEARCH(“character we want to find”, celladdress)
Example: SEARCH(“,”,B5)
You can combine this with Mid to explain that you either want to start or stop at a certain
character (even if the character isn’t located at the same byte in every record).
EXAMPLE: MID(b5, search(“,”, b5), 100)
**the above example uses the search function to find the “start” position, then tells the
computer to take 100 bytes from there.
EXAMPLE: MID(b5, 10, search(“,”, b5))
**the above example uses search to find the “end” position.
**Note: If you don’t want to include the character that you searched for in your result, use a –1 or
+1 just after the search phrase to either go back a space (-1) or move forward and start a space
farther (+1). Here’s an example that will start at the comma, then move one space forward and
take 100 bytes from there:
=mid(b5, search(“,”,b5)+1, 100)
There is also a RIGHT function, which starts at the first byte on the right side of the field and
then you can tell it how many bytes to take. (it isn’t as useful as the others, however)

IF Statements:
The functions I’ve listed above are essentially a menu of things you can do within the power of an
IF statement. It gives you an impressive range of possibilities!
A basic IF statement consists of:
1) What we’re going to measure as being either true or false
2) What to do if it’s true
3) What to do if it’s false
=IF(criteria, true, false)
So here’s an example from a list of football games. We want to identify whether the visiting team
or the home team won the game.

3
- -

This formula will insert the word “Visit” in the G cell if the measurement is true and will insert
“Home” if the measurement is false.

You can also have it grab information from other cells, instead. This will put the VisitAbbrev (i.e.
“NYJ”) in the H column if the measurement is true and will grab the HomeAbbrev if it’s false.

Using IF to copy down blank columns:
I use this quite frequently when I get data that lists a team name as a title, then all the players or
all the game dates below that. But I want to apply the team name to each record. The trick is that
you need to have a pattern to follow. In the below example, the pattern is that the B column is
always blank on the lines where the team name is listed. And it’s not blank anywhere else.

So this formula is going to look to see if the B cell is blank:
4
- -

=IF(b2= “”, a2,c2)
Then it’s going to put the contents of A2 (in this case, “Arizona Cardinals”) in the field if it finds
it to be true. If it’s not true, it looks to the cell directly above (c2) to essentially copy down the
team name.

Combining other functions:
Now that you know the basics of an IF statement, you can jazz it up with all kinds of other
functions. You just place the function as either the criteria, the true part or the false part. Of
course, you can use multiple functions in the same IF statement if necessary.
Examples (I’ve just made these up!):
If a date (located in b2) is for a Monday, then put the word Monday in a new cell, otherwise do
nothing:
=if(weekday(b2)=2, “Monday”, “”)
If a date (located in b2) is equal to another date (located in c2), then put the word “Same” in the
new field, otherwise calculate the difference in months:
=if(b2>c2, “Same”, datedif(b2,c2, “m”))

Using a wildcard search:
You can use the SEARCH function to look for a word or symbol contained within other text,
however it gets a little tricky to make it work properly. You have to add the ISERROR function.
If you want to get in this deep, I recommend checking out the help file on these functions.
Otherwise, here’s a quick hit to get you started:

This example assumes you have a list of
cities and states and you want to flag all of the ones that are in Texas. In this case, the state name
is written out in full.
So if it finds Texas, this formula instructs it to put an X in the C column, otherwise leave it blank.
=IF(ISERROR(SEARCH("*Texas*",B4,1)>0)=FALSE, "X","")
The criteria part of this stretches from the ISERROR all the way to the FALSE. The ISERROR is
necessary because it will give you an error message if it doesn’t find the word. It’s the only way
you can instruct the computer to do something in the false portion of your answer (even if that
means just leaving it blank).
The following portion:
SEARCH(“*Texas*”, b4, 1)
5
- -

If used alone, this portion will return a 1 if it finds the search term and an error message if it
doesn’t. So then you need to add the IF portion to give it two options. By adding the ISERROR
and the =FALSE, you can sidestep the error message.

Nested IF statements:
Once you understand basic IF statements, then you can really do some complex stuff with nested
IF statements. In other words, we can say: if something is true, then check to see if something
else is true. If both are true, do this. If the first is true, but the second is not, then do this. If both
are false, then do this. You can nest multiple statements (I’m not sure if there’s a limit).

The above example contains the point spread (used for betting and set before the game is played)
and the resulting game scores. In this case, the spread is based on the home team (positive
meaning the home team is favored by that many points, negative meaning they are the
underdogs).
To demonstrate how a nested IF function works, I’d like to fill the last column with “Underdog
Won” for any records where the spread was negative and the home team won the game. And
“Favorite Won” if the spread was negative and the home team lost the game. (we’ll do the rest
later)
The first IF statement is this:
=if(c2<0
The second IF statement represents the TRUE portion of the first one:
=if(f2= “won”
Then you need a TRUE and FALSE portion for the second IF statement. In this case the true
portion is “Underdog Won”, the false portion is “Favorite Won”.
Then you need a comma and the FALSE portion of the first IF statement. In this case, a blank set
of quotes to indicate do nothing (we’ll revise this in a minute)
6
- -

Here’s the full formula and below that what each chunk represents:
=if(c2<0, if(f2= “won”, “Underdog Won”, “Favorite Won”),””)
=if(1 criteria, 2 criteria, 2 true, 2 false), 1 false)

As you can see, it only gave results for those with a negative spread. That’s because the
first IF statement dictates whether it goes on to the second one or not. In the case of the
positive spread games, Excel jumped straight to the end where we told it to do nothing as
the FALSE portion of the first IF statement.
So let’s go back into the formula and add another set of nested IF statements to tell it
what to do in case of a positive spread.
Remove the double quotes at the end of the formula and put a new IF statement there.
This becomes the False portion of the first IF statement. It looks to see if the spread is
positive:
=IF(C2<0,IF(F2="Won","Underdog Won","Favorite Won"),IF(C2>0,

Then we need the TRUE and FALSE portions of this new IF statement we just added. In
this case we want “Favorite Won” if it’s true and “Underdog Won” if it’s false.
=IF(C2<0,IF(F2="Won","Underdog Won","Favorite Won"),IF(C2>0,IF(F2="Won","Favorite
Won","Underdog Won")
Not quite done yet. We still need the FALSE portion of the Third IF statement (the one that looks
to see if C2>0). Basically this will only be used if the first IF statement is false (C2<0) and the
third IF statement (C2>0) is false — in this case, only if C2=0.

The final formula (the bold section is the new one):
=IF(C2<0,IF(F2="Won","Underdog Won","Favorite Won"),IF(C2>0,IF(F2="Won","Favorite
Won","Underdog Won"),"No Favorite"))
7
- -

=IF(1 criteria, IF(2 criteria, 2 true, 2 false), IF(3 criteria, IF(4 criteria, 4 true, 4 false), 3 false))

SUMIF Function:
If you’ve got a long list that you want to essentially do subtotals for, this is a way you can do it
without moving it to Access or doing a lot of repetitive typing of formulas. The example uses a
list of player salaries for the NBA. I want to know the total for each team.

The formula requires three pieces:
=sumif(range to evaluate, criteria, range to sum)
In this example, let’s say we want to subtotal the Dallas Mavericks salaries. So the range to
evaluate will be the C column (c2:c424). The criteria would be “Dallas Mavericks”(put it in
quotes because it’s a text string). And the range to sum would be the E column (e2:e424). Here’s
the full formula:
=sumif(c2:c424, “Dallas Mavericks”, e2:e424)
To do this for all teams in one sweep, I put a list of the teams in a separate worksheet and then
“link” the formulas between the two worksheets. The worksheet with the player-by-player
salaries is named “Salaries” and the team names are in the A column of my new worksheet.
Here’s what the formula ends up looking like:
=sumif(Salaries!c2:Salaries!c424, a2, Salaries!e2:Salaries!e424)

8
- -

There’s a similar function called COUNTIF that will do the same thing, only it will count the
number of instances rather than adding numbers together. The formula is a bit shorter:
=countif(range to evaluate, criteria)

Copying down a single date:
Excel’s wonderful feature of copying down (or across) formulas becomes a bit of a nightmare
when you simply want to copy down the same date. Excel will think you want to go on to the
next day, then the next, and the next, etc. Here’s the trick for disabling that:
**Hold down the Control (Ctrl) key while dragging/copying down the first instance of the date.

Custom lists:
If you’ve got a list that you use frequently in Excel — such as state names or city names — you
can create a custom list that will allow you to use the copy-down function in Excel to insert those
names into a new worksheet. (This is why you can type a day of the week or month and get it to
change as you copy down or across)
To create a custom list from an existing list in Excel:
1) Highlight the list.
2) Go to the Tools Menu and choose Options. Navigate to the “Custom Lists” tab.

9
- -

You should see the range of your data in the “import list from cells”
3) Push the “import” button and you will see your list added to the others that are already there
(the days of the week and months are defaults)
You can also type the list directly into the “list entries” box and push the “Add” button.
To recall the list and insert into a new worksheet:
Simply type the first item in your list, then use the copy-down tool.
Hint: For my lists of sports teams (see picture) I decided to make the first item in the list the
sport, such as baseball, football and basketball, so that I merely have to type the sport and I will
get the list. I don’t have to remember which team is the first one in the list.

10
- -

