Advanced mapping strategies: Density analysis
Janet Roberts, Database Editor
The New York Times
janetroberts@nytimes.com

2005 IRE National CAR Conference
Hollywood, Calif.
Panel: The Latest in Mapping

So you’ve endured the pain and suffering of
geocoding a large data set, and you have
the addresses plotted on a map in ArcView.
Ah, how satisfying!
Or is it? Do you have a useful map, or a
Rorschach ink blot test? Here’s what I got
after a week of editing address data so I
could geocode 911 calls related to drugs
and other street crime in St. Paul, Minn.

This map certainly shows that this type of
crime is a bigger problem in some
neighborhoods than others.
I could show even greater detail by using the
St. Paul Police Department’s grid map,
which slices the city into almost 200
quadrants, each four or five square blocks in
area.
I had acquired 10 years’ worth of 911 data to
help gauge the results of a highly publicized
police roundup of drug suspects, which had
followed a summer-long sting operation that
targeted dealers in St. Paul’s Frogtown
neighborhood. Police and prosecutors
lauded the operation, saying it would go far
to return safety to the streets.
I had geocoded the 911 calls so I could
identify the city’s trouble spots and see what
had changed after the sting. This blob of
points didn’t do much to illuminate the story.
The usual solution to this Rorschach
problem is to turn the points into a thematic
map by quantifying the points for distinct
geographic areas. In this case, I did some
spatial joins so I could count points by
neighborhood and by police quadrant. With
those counts, I could create a standard
thematic map, shading the neighborhoods
according to the number of 911 calls.

But both of these maps are limited by the
nature of how they were drawn: to fit
geographic boundaries. The quadrants are a
convenient way to assign police patrols, and
the neighborhood boundaries are helpful to
the city planning department, but do streetcorner drug transactions follow those

boundaries as neatly as these maps
suggest?
Consider the neighborhood-level map, which
paints large areas of the city as “problem
areas.” Is that accurate? Or is the problem
most intense in certain pockets within those
neighborhoods? Likewise, some
neighborhoods look fairly safe on such a
map, when in reality, they could have a
pocket that is a trouble spot.
This is where density analysis can help.
Using an ArcView extension called Spatial
Analyst, I was able to draw “hot spots” – the
areas where 911 calls were most
concentrated in the city, regardless of
artificial geographic boundaries. The result
looked like this:

What is important to note – and difficult to
grasp -- is that Spatial Analyst will produce
entirely different maps depending on the cell
size and search radius you choose. So a
police chief who wants to make his city look
crime-free, could play with the settings and
do just that. A muckraking journalist could
do the opposite.
There are no “right” or “wrong” settings.
Your aim is settings that produce a
defensible map – one that is backed up by
your reporting.

A few pointers
Spatial Analyst is complex, expensive
($2,500) software and it’s not intuitive.
Unless you are confident running with
scissors, it’s wise to find a professional
geographer willing to walk you through
the process and evaluate your results.
For a good explanation of density
analysis, get a copy of the Crimestat
manual. Crimestat is a free density
analysis program, available at:
www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/crimestat.
html.

If our aim is to show readers the trouble
spots for these types of crimes, which of the
maps – the earlier thematic versions, or this
one – is the easiest read?

How Spatial Analyst works
The density tool in Spatial Analyst looks at a
point layer and shows how the points
cluster. It does this by using a grid – which
would look much like the police quadrants
on the previous page.
From within each cell on the grid, using a
search radius that you specify, the software
looks for all the points within that radius and
uses an algorithm to compute the density of
those points. The software offers two types
of density analysis: simple and kernel. The
kernel technique weights points near the
center of the cell more heavily and produces
a smoother result.

As with all mapping that requires
geocoding, expect to invest a lot of time
in address cleanup before you even get
around to density analysis.
Project your points. You can’t do density
analysis on an unprojected theme.
The search radius is defined in map
units. My map was a UTM projection,
and the map units were meters. I
wanted a half-mile search radius, so I
typed 854 in the search radius box. (1/2mile = about 854 meters).
Your legend display will be based on
whatever you set as your output units
(square miles usually makes the most
sense). Remember that what you’re
seeing here is a rate: number of points
per square mile. Even so, the numbers
are hard to grasp. When we ran these
maps in the paper, we left the numbers
out and simply labeled the legend mostconcentrated to least-concentrated.

