Hunting for Trends in Data
Using Microsoft Access
Data used: hunting.mdb

When Bob Imrie, an Associated Press reporter in Wausau, WI, went searching for information about
hunting accidents, he ended up right on target. The state filed hard-copy reports on every accident
detailing information such as weather, topography and the number of pieces of orange the victim was
wearing. lmry had no way of digging out trends from the voluminous hard-copy reports and he had never
used a computer database. But with some help over the phone fiom some nerdy colleagues, he created his
own database to look at trends in hunting accidents in Wisconsin.
Here's what his database ended up loolung like:

Access Training

The record layout, which is the map to any database, is below. It shows the fields Imry created in the
database, whether they were characters or numbers and the width of each field:
Field Field Name
1 CASE
2 DATE
3 TIME
4 COUNTY
5 AREA
6 WOUND
7 INJURY
8 TYPE
9 CAUSE
10 SAGE
11 VAGE
12 FIREARM
13 FACTION
14 ALCOHOL
15 ALCOLEV
16 WEATHER
17 TOPOGRO
18 SEXPER
19 VEXPER
20 SGRADUATE
21 VGRADUATE
22 SSEX
23 VSEX
24 GUNBRND
25 GUNGUAGE
26 TEMP
27 MUZDIS
28 LAND
29 VORANGE
30 GUNSIGHT
31 VACTIVTY
32 LOCATION
33 PRECIP

Access Training

Type

Width

Character
10
Date
8
Numeric
4
Character
11
Character
6
Character
6
Character
5
Character
2
person)
Character
Numeric
Numeric
Character
Character
Character
Numeric
Character
Character
Numeric
Numeric
Character
Character
Character
Character
Character
Character
Numeric
Numeric
Character
Numeric
Character
Character
Character
Character

Description
This is an identifier he created
Date of accident
Time of accident
County of accident
Region of state (he created the areas)
Part of body wounded
Severity of injury
Self-inflicted, or other (si=self-inflicted, sp=second
Description of cause
Age of shooter
Age of victim
Type of firearm
Faction of gun
Alcohol involved
Alcohol level
Weather
Typography
Years of shooter's experience
Years of victim's experience
Shooter graduate of safety school
Victim graduate of safety school
Sex of shooter
Sex of victim
Brand of gun
Guage of gun
Temperature
Muzzle distance
Private or public
Number of pieces of orange worn by victim
Open, scope or other
Victim's activity
Location of victim
Precipitation

To bring up the data yourself, go to FILE/OPEN and in the data directory, open a file called Hunting.mdb.

In Access a database may contain several individual data sets called "tables." To open the Deer table,
select it and click OPEN. Access will open the database to a browse window.
Interview your data.
Just as you do with people, you must get to know your data. Study it, look for patterns, look for special
codes, upper case, lower case: all this will help when it's time to ask questions.
Just looking at this database triggers many questions. But let's start off with some basic queries.
Remember, to bring up the query form select INSET/NEW/QUERY. You'll then see the following
window. Then tell Access you want the DESIGN view.

Let's review the query form because it's the place you'll hang out the most in Access:

1. Field... Select Fields: this is where you pick the pieces of information you want to see
2. Sort...Put in order: do you want the most at the top, the oldest at the top?
3. Criteria: Pick the records you want. This allows you to limit your data to just part of
the records.
4. Group by Pile up the things that are alike.

...

Access Training

These four steps may seem overly fussy, but if you follow them in more complex queries you can save
yourself some trouble. Let's practice the first step by doing a query to show the following fields: DATE,
COUNTY, WOUND and INJURY. Do this by clicking the FIELDS check boxes on the main query
window. When you choose a field, Access automatically adds an X to the checkbox. This means it will
show in your result.

Click

from the button bar to run your query.

Access Training

Your result should look like this:

The second step to any query is to sort it. In this case, we could organize the records by DATE. To go
from your results back to your query window, hit the VIEWIQUERY DESIGN. Or use these buttons to
toggle between the answer and the query form:

A

A

design table
To sort the data click in the box right below the field name. In this case, click below date. The query form
also says "sort" on the left end of this line.

Access will prompt you to specify the order of your sort.

Run the query. Your answer should appear in descending date order.

Access Training

Limit the records
Step three of any query lets you take a bite out of your data. Say you didn't really care about all the deer
hunting accidents in Wisconsin, you just wanted to see them for Jackson County. That's where the
CRITERIA line of the query comes in handy. Click on the criteria line, in the COUNTY field and type:
Jackson
Remember, Access is case-sensitive, so if Jackson is upper case -- type it that way in your query.
Other comparisons:
If you're screening your data, but you don't know the whole word in a field, Access will let you estimate
using a *, which is called a "wildcard." A wildcard stands for any combination of letters or numbers.
Typing this in the cause field would pull out all causes beginning with Careless:
Careless*
This would pull out all causes containing the word wife:

Let's get Boolean
Sometimes you want more from a selection criteria than just one county. You might want the records for
Jackson and Door counties. That's where OR comes in handy. Type OR between each item. In this case,
type Jackson OR Door in the Criteria:

Now run the query again. You told Access you wanted all the records where the COUNTY was either
Jackson or Door. This might be useful if you covered a multiple county area. Using the OR to connect
criteria is called Boolean logic. Another Boolean word is AND. AND is more restrictive than OR: with
AND both lines must be true in order for a record to be selected. We could use the AND if we wanted all
causes containing both the word wife AND careless.

Access Training

This example also uses the *. This is a bbwildcard"that stands for any combination of letters and numbers
in Access. Careless* stands for any cause starting with Careless. *wife* stands for any cause containing
the word wife.
You also can use criteria in two fields at the same time. For example, we might want just self-inflicted
accidents from Jackson County. Click in the field area below COUNTY and choose TYPE. Then
EXACTLY LIKE. Then si for self-inflicted:

Practice Exercises

1. Do a query to show all the injuries occuning physically on the body below, and including, the ankle.
Hint: here's a list of all possible wounds: abdomen, ankle, arm, back, butt, chest, ear, eye, face, finger,
foot, groin, hand, head, hip, knee, leg, neck, scrotum, shoulder, stomach, thigh, thumb, toe.
2. Do a query to show all self-inflicted accidents caused by shooters 50 and older.

3. How old was the oldest victim in Jackson County? What wound did they have? How old was the
youngest? What wound?
4. How many accidents occurred overall on the first day of deer hunting season in 1994?

Access Training

Answers

1. Do a query to show all the injuries occurring physically below, and including, the ankle.

The answer contains 46 injuries.

Access Training

- - --

2. Do a query to show all self-inflicted accidents caused by shooters 50 and older.

Access Training

3. How old was the oldest victim in Jackson County? What wound did they have? How old was the
youngest? What wound?

Oldest: 62, thigh Youngest: 14, foot

Access Training

4. How many accidents occurred overall on the first day of deer hunting season last year (November 19,
1994)?

1abdomn -- I maior
p ~ . . . i fatat

11/19/94/ Calumet
.................

..................

-.

............. .
........

minor

!
j

abdomn

pal

ii

..j-al.r~ .....................................

.

d

....

f foot

1maia!

......................................

9 injuries

Calculations
Just as in spreadsheet, sometimes you want to do calculations between columns or "fields." Because a
database has no cell addresses, you have to use the names of fields. In Access you use the ZOOM window
to type in a calculation.

To get this window go to a new column on the query form an hit the -SHIFT- key then the F2 key. In this
database, let's say you wanted to find cases where the shooter is older than the victim and compute their
age difference. In the zoom window you would type:

sage-vage
Then click the OK button.

Access Training

