I

'

Microsoft Access
To browse your file, make sure the TABLE tab is
selected, then doubletlick on the file you want to
read.
To create a new query (remember, you can only
in a query). Click the new object
choose NEW OUERY. From the
window that pops up choose QUERY DESIGN
('cause query wizards are for wimps).

3. Filter the data. If you only want part of your
database, you do this using CRITERIA.

To run your query, click this button:
To reuse your query

-

ack to ask something

else click this button:
Every query consists of up to four steps:

1. Select the fields you want to show. You do this
by double-clicking on the item from the table list
in the top left comer of the query window.

4. Summarize your data. If you don't just want to

see individual records, click this button:
Access will add a TOTAL line to your query and
stick in the nerdy tern "GROUP BY." Group by
just means you're making piles of certain types of
records. Below we've made piles of counties.

Access will put the field name on the field line of
it also checks the SHOW box so
the query
you'll see it in the answer.

-

2. Sort the data. On the second line of the query
grid is the sort box. If you click on it, it gives you
the sort options.

Once you have your piles, you can go back at them
and count, sum, average. Here's what you'd do if
you wanted to count the number of counties in this
database:

Joining tables: When you need to join two or
more tables, they must have some field in common
(it doesn't have to have the same name, just the
same data) Click and hold on one of the field
names and drop it on the other -- Access gives you
this great line to illustrate the join:

WARNING: This only counts non-blanks --if you
want to include blanks in your list use COUNT(*)
and change your total line to EXPRESSION.

Here's what you'd do to average the ages by
county:

BIZARRE RULE #57: When you want to filter
data that is in a summary query, use WHERE on
the TOTAL line:

Putting the results in a table: Most queries are
called Select Queries -- that means you just see the
answer on the screen, but it's not saved anywhere.
To take the result of a query and put it in a table,
BEFORE YOU RUN THE QUERY, click
QUERY, Make Table -- you won't see the answer.
Access &ill tell you that it copied so many records
to the table.
Importing text files: To import a text file, click
FILEAMF'ORT -- access will prompt you for the
type of file you want to import. Most text files are
either FIXED or DELIMITED. Access will then
ask you for the file name.
If it's a fixed file, you also will have to create a
SPEC file -- basically the record layout for the
database. If you don't have that information, you
can't use the data. Once, you've typed in the spec,
save the spec file -- then Access will do the import.
For more information, get a copy of Importing
with Access.

