March 18, 2005

Jennifer Vigil

CAR conference

San Diego Union-Tribune

Hollywood, CA.

Social services/Govt. reporter

"Getting Inside the Non-Profit World"

6191293-1248

Tips for covering charities in the wake of a disaster:
Try to convince your editors that at least one reporter should be assigned to catalog the
various collection sites and charitable efforts that crop up immediately after a
fire/flood/hurricane, etc. This effort will result in immediate stories, and also allow you to
create a huge list of resources for when you need to start digging to find how much
money and how many goods were collected and whether it all went to the right places.
Touch base with the financial directors of charities quickly. Though executive directors
will know the overall goals of their organizations, the numbers crunchers will be the ones
you need to forge relationships with to learn how much money was collected and how it
was accounted for on the spreadsheets.
Realize that traditional sources to investigate charities - IRS 990 forms, annual audits,
Guidestar - may not be available. New organizations crop up specifically because of
disasters. Watch to see if they do the basics, like filing for 501(c)3 status, one of the IRS
designations for non-profits, create boards of directors, etc.
Check early and often with churches. Many early aid efforts are based in local
congregations, and religious groups affiliated with local churches are the backbone of
disaster-relief efforts. National Voluntary Groups Active in Disaster (NVOAD) maintains a
list of these groups online, at http://www.nvoad.org/members.php.
General tips:
Check their math. This seems basic, but even accountants make mistakes and you don't
want a smart reader to find the error you should have spotted.
Be aware that sources are probably happier to cooperate with you when they think you
are doing a story on how wonderful their charity is. They are likely to react with suspicion
when they realize you are asking more probing questions about numbers. That's why the
early relationships are important.
Go to the Western Knight Center for Specialized Journalism's archive site. The center
held a March 2004 charities seminar and maintains lists of speakers who participated,
with video of their presentations at http://www.wkconline.org/index.php/seminars/inded.

