Internet 202: The Invisible Web - Beyond Google
Kelly Guckian / kauckianBexwess-news.net
Database Researcher 1 San Antonio Express-News

What is the Invisible Web?

0

Information on the Internet that most search engines can't find.
Estimated to be at least 40 times the size of the visible Web.
Narrowly focused Web sites with deeper content.
Greater quality of content than the visible Web.
95% of which is publicly accessible -- without fees or subscriptions.
Consists of dynamic archives and databases containing directories, articles, data, statistics,
and government documents..

Why the content is invisible:
The Internet address (URL) has not been submitted to a search engine for indexing.
No pages currently covered by search engines link to it.
The page is too deep within a site and presumed to be less useful.
The page changes so often that indexing the content would be meaningless.
The page is generated dynamically.
The presence of a robots.txt file on the site that instructs search engines not to index the site,
particular pages, or certain content.
Search engines do not have, or do not utilize, the technology required to index nm-HTML
content - i.e. databases.
Accessing the content requires user input, such as a password or registration.
So how do you find Invisible Web (unindexed) content?
0

Directories of Invisible Web sites:
03 ResourceShelf: httv:Nwww.resourceshelf.com/
Resources and News for Information Professionals. Covers a wide range of topics.
The best way to keep abreast of useful new online resources.
DocuTicker: httu:Nwww.docuticker.com/
New reports from government agencies, NGO's, think tanks, and other goups.
Price's List of Lists: httu:Nwww.suecialissues.com/lol/
A database of ranked listings of companies, people and resources, freely available on the
Internet, organized by industry (now maintained by Trip Wyckoff of Speciallssues.com).
03 CompletePlanet: httu://www.com~1eteulanet.com/
A directory of 70,000+ searchable databases and specialty search engines.
03 Librarian's Index to the Internet: httv://lii.org/
A searchable, browsable collection of over 16,000 high-quality Websites.

Meta-search engines - cross database search tools:
03 ProFusion: httu:Nwww.~rofusion.com/index.htm
Search hundreds of specialized search engines and databases using vertical search groups.
Also offers functionality to set up page alerts.

Tips for searching the visible Web to find the sources, or references to the sources:
03 Use advanced search strategies to find references to sources. Note the references.
Then go directly to the sources to search for the content.
-3 Use broad search strategies to find sites suitable for your topic which lead you to
reputable sources.

