Examining long-term care with CAR
For the Hollywood CAR 2005 conference
Rick Linsk
St. Paul Pioneer Press
rlinsk@pioneerpress.com
65 1-228-5371
Even after 30 years of shoclung exposes about care facilities that mistreat,elderly people, nursing
homes remain a persistent and well-deserved target for investigative reporting. The IRE resource
center has 167 projects on file. Computer-assisted reporting can begin to crack open the system.
The St. Paul Pioneer Press recently reported that nearly 4,000 people had died from possibly
avoidable conditions such as dehydration and pressure sores over a 15-year period.
(httv://w ~~.twincities.com/rnld/twincities/news/local/10707205
.htm)
Below are some of the record sources instrumental in that project and others.
State inspection data: State agencies inspect nursing homes every 9 to 15 months on behalf ofs
the federal government. The results are fed into a database available from the state,.any-or,you 1
can get nationwide files from "Medicare.gov," the web site of the federal Centers for-~edicare
& Medicaid Services: httv://www.medicare.~ov/Download/DownloadDB.asv.
The state data is
likely to have more detail, including the text of the inspectors' findings. You can also spot-check
inspection results on the Medicare web site: http://www.medicare.gov/NHcom~are.
Inspectors record "deficiencies" - violations - in dozens of categories known as F-tags. Each
violation also gets a code indicating its scope and severity. Government watchdogs and advocacy
groups say the inspectors often assign milder codes than the violations justify.
Paper reports are maintained on each individual inspection (Form 2567), or "survey" as the
regulators call it. This reading can be run to extremes - sometimes harrowing, sometimes
bogged down by bureaucratic and medical gibberish.
Complaint data: State agencies, under contract with CMS, investigate consumer complaints
about nursing homes. Ask your state for the complaint database and, if necessary, documents
about each complaint. The federal regulators have complaint data too. Complaint records often
come with substantial privacy hurdles, but you can check the scraps of information you have
against obits and death certificate data to identify victims.
Inspection agency fine data: The bureaucrats usually call fines "civil monetary penalties." State
agencies propose the penalties and federal officials approve them. The data can help you identify
problem places, repeat violators, and reveal the aggressiveness or timidity of your state's
regulators.
Death data: Abstracted death certificate databases can be a mother lode, if available in your
state. Ask locally or look it up at httv://www.searchsvstems.net. A list of agencies is also on the

CDC's web site at htt~://www.cdc.~ov/nchs/data/misc/w2w02-23-05.
For each death, up to
20 conditions or injuries are listed, represented by International Classification of Diseases
("ICD") codes. Family members of the deceased are also identified. You can specifically
pinpoint deaths in nursing homes by a few means, including matching addresses to oversight
agencies' nursing home facility databases. You can get national death data from the CDC, but be
it lacks personal identifiers. You may be able to also identify nursing home residents who later
died in hospitals.
Realize that as with other data sources, the death certificates are not sacred texts. Some
academics have noted flaws in them; some death records that I studied did not reflect the fatal
conditions cited by family members and lawyers.

Medical examiner data: Your medical examiner or coroner should have even more detailed
information about specific cases. Or you can ask for their entire database of cases. Note that
nursing home deaths are rarely autopsied.
Hospital discharge data: About two dozen states collect and will provide data summarizing
every hospital inpatient discharge. Some states use the data to publish physician and surgeon
report cards, and others have loaded it into interactive web sites. Several media outlets have us&
t
so-called "UB" data for projects. The data files can be very large, and expensive. Patient
information is redacted, and some states withhold doctor or hospital identifiers & well. Look up
your state on pp 18-19,

http://www.nationalpartnership.org/portals/p3Aibrary~ealthCareQualityPatients~ghts/Abou~i
s~losure.~df
Lawsuits: You can look up facilities one by one at the courthouse, but consider obtaining your
state's entire civil court database from the court system (and criminal too, for that matter). Then
you can check individual facilities as needed, or try to match the database against a list of
facilities in one shot. Court files can contain revelations and help you connect the dots.
Police reports: Can yield details about violent incidents. Also, thefts are commonplace at care
facilities. Try address-matching incident databases to nursing home facility lists to discover
which facilities come up most often.
Staff registries: Look up abusive staffers with data from the nursing board and whatever agency'

oversees nursing aides. Offenders can bounce around in the system for years.

Staffing hours: Also downloadable from Medicare or your state oversight agency.
Look at which facilities (and chains) are way below or above the average staffing per hour.
Worker safety: Check whether the facility has been investigated for unsafe working conditions:
htt~://~~~.osha.novloshstats.
Get detailed time and payroll information on workers at publicly
owned care facilities. Huge amounts of overtime can be unsafe both for the workers and the
residents in their care.

