February 26,2004
Ms. Michelle Marcucci
Oakland Tribune
40 1 13th Street
Oakland, CA 946 12
Subject: CPRA Request

Dear Ms. Marcucci:
This is in response to your request under the California Public Records Act for a copy of
the state's recent application to the federal Department of Homeland Security for
terrorism grants and for the related progress reports. We are-providingthe following
sections of that application and progress reports:
The state application for State Homeland Security Grant Program, Part I, for 2003
The state application for State Homeland Security Grant Program, Part ZI, for 2003, with
progress report
The state application for the Urban Area Security Initiative Grant Program, Part II for 2003.

Our intent is to be as responsive to your request as possible without affecting public
safety. As we have with your previous request for records, we are providing a significant
amount of information about the grant program. Specific information about facilities or
the infrastructure whose function or value could make them potential targets of terrorists,
however, has been redacted or not provided in the documents. Further, the names and
descriptions of specific types of equipment that have been or are being purchased by
governmental agencies to thwart or respond to terrorist h e a t s or attacks have also been
redacted or not provided in the documents.
Such information is not being provided on several grounds. including Government Code
secs. 6254(f),6254(k) and 6255. The records withheld are exempt from disclosure
because the public interest served by not disclosing them clearly outweishs the public
interest served by disclosing them. The release of detailed information about potentially
vulnerable facilities and the equipment that would be used to address acts of terrorism

could make the public more at risk to terrorist attack. There is little doubt that terrorists
will try to determine where an attack would have the greatest impact on our society and
how public officials might respond to these potential threats. Disclosure of this detailed
information would only assist the potential terrorist in exploiting vulnerabilities and
harming Californians.
Furthermore, individuals in law enforcement and the critical infrastructure communities
were assured that the information they provided for these applications and progress
reports would not be distributed outside of government. This confidentiality was assured
in order to protect the sensitive systems identified. Without this confidentiality, the
dialogue between the emergency response community, law enforcement, and decisions
makers would be chilled, if not totally quashed.
We are currently working with local government in order to respond to your request for
the quarterly reports filed by nine California counties and the Governor's Office of
Emergency Services (OES).As this is a particularly complex process, we will be using
the 14-day time extension allowed by law. We will provide this information as it
becomes available.
Sincerely,

-8%

MICHAEL J. LEV
Deputy Director

Mr. Michael J. Levy
Deputy Director
California Office of Homeland Security
Gov. Amold Schwarzenegger
Sacramento, Calif. 95814
March 29,2004
Dear Mr. Levy;

Thank you for your Feb. 26,2004 response to our California Public Records Act request. We are
writing to c l a m some points and appeal your determination that any requested records are exempt.
When we sought similar documents in an earlier CPRA request, on Nov. 4,2003 your office
disclosed most of the same information we now seek. Suddenly, your offlce is changing course. On
March 19,2004, public information officer Cheryl Tankersley informed us by phone that large portions
of the public documents requested would not be released. Your letter cited Califomia Gov. Code
subsections 6254 (f) and 6254 (k) as reasons for withholding these records. Neither subsection applies.
Subsection (k) exempts disclosure "pursuant to federal or state law" and portions the Evidence
Code. Our request involves no criminal investigation, so clearly the evidence code doesn't apply. You
cite no other specific laws, so there is no way to evaluate the merits ofwithholding documents, which
are customarily in the public domain, under relevant state and federal laws.
Subsection (f) deals with records pertaining to investigations. It has nothing whatsoever to do
with the type and amount of equipment h d e d by Homeland Security grants. Even if, for sake of
argument only, the phrase "intelligence information or security procedures of the office of the Attorney
General, (et. al.)" had some bearing on our request, again there would be no grounds for withholding
documents. In anti-terrorism circles "intelligence" means law-enforcement sensitive information
gathered in the course of investigating a crime or a plot to commit a crime. Again, we do not seek
investigative records. "Security procedures" means exactly that -- procedures. We did not request you
disclose investigative techniques, nor any procedures for securing potential targets. There is nothing in
subsection (f) that applies.
We asked for an accounting of how federal Homeland Security money would be spent in
California, yet you invoke Section 6255 because, as you claim, "the public interest served by not
disclosing (these records) clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosing them."
We strongly disagree.
The equipment purchased by many agencies for their homeland security mission is, in many
respects, no different than the HazMat equipment they routinely buy to protect the public. Such
purchases have always been subject to public scrutiny as part of every agency's budget process. In
numerous requests for similar records, other states and agencies complied without hesitation. Califomia
alone argues that informing the public about the expenditure of these public funds is dangerous to the
public, an argument the state did not make last year, in response to our earlier CPRA requests.
Disclosure more likely saves lives than threatens them. Lives would certainly have been saved
during the 1991 Oakland Hills Fire had authorities known and acted on the disclosure before those tragic
events that radios and fire hydrant couplers were incompatible.
You suggest "release of detailed information about potentially vulnerable facilities and the
equipment that would be used to address acts of terrorism could make the public more at risk to a

terrorist attack."
Using that logic, newspapers would be encouraging arsonists by reporting that fire departments
have inadequate equipment, or that murderers would kill more people because of news accounts that
police are understaffed. Your argument would allow agencies to stifle public discussion of how to
remedy deficiencies in day-to-day emergency responses. Clearly that is not in the public interest, and
would set a dangerous precedent.
If California spends federal counter-terrorism grant money wisely, the public will be safer, and
safer still if they h o w it. Terrorists will be discouraged from attacking California targets because they
will know the state has taken steps to "harden targets." Deterrence is a classic counter-terrorism
technique, and publicity, not secrecy, makes it more effective.
Conversely, if California spends grant money on equipment that doesn't work or that detracts
fiom the core counter-terrorism mission, the public will be safer by knowing it before too much money
is diverted unwisely. By withholding records, you deny the public any way of knowing whether
California agencies are taking appropriate steps to protect them.
Disclosing such public records, therefore, can only enhance public safety. Clearly, the public
benefits of disclosure clearly outweigh the merits of withholding records relating to Homeland Security
grants.
In sumnlary, there is no basis in fact or law for withholding the documents we seek, and we urge
you to release them immediately.
Sincerely,
Michele Marcucci, Sean Holstege and Ian H o f h a n
Reporters, Oakland Tribune
Michele Marcucci
Social issues reporter
Oakland TribuneIANG Newspapers
ph (5 10) 208-6434
fax (5 10) 208-6477
e-mail mmarcucci~,i).anmewspapers.com

Fiscal Year 2003 State Homeland Security Grant
Program 2003-TE-TX-0167
Proaress R e ~ o r t s

Corres~ondence

Certification

Progress Report
Handbook
R e ~ o r Overview
t
Point o f Contact
Performance
Metrics
Narratives

To the best of m y knowledge and belief, all data in this progress report that
I have provided is true and correct, the document has been duly authorized
b y the governing body of the grantee and the applicant will comply with the
attached certifications.
Your typed name, i n lieu o f your signature represents your legal binding
acceptance of the terms o f your grant and your statement of the veracity of
the representations made i n this progress report. The document has been
duly authorized b y the governing body of the grantee and the grantee will
comply with the following:

Attachments
Certifications
Certification
Submit R e ~ o r t

Mr.

'prefix:
Prefix (Other):
-

Hel~/Frequentlv
Asked Ouestions
Proaress R e ~ o r t s
Home

' ~ i r s tName:

--

George

qiddle Initial:
* ~ a s tName:

Vinson

Suffix
Suffix (Other):

I

*Title:

Executive Director

* ~ d d r e s sLine 1:

1400 10th Street

GMS Home

Loo Off

Address Line 2:
*city:

Sacramento

County:

Sacramento

*state:

California

*zip Code:

95814-2608

*phone:

916-324-8908

Fax:

--

Ext :

--

-

FY03 State Homeland Security Grant Program Part I Subgrants by Category

1

[a-

Performance Report
FY03 State Homeland Security Grant Program - Part 11
OES ID #001-00000
Grant Award # 2003-35
Part IV - Financial Summary
Amount Awarded:

$3.403,9 13

$0

Reimbursements ta date:
Amount Awarded

Categoj
I

Administrative Costs

$102,117

Equipment

$1,476,796

Exercise

$3 50,000

Training

$l,47 5,000

Interest earned on grant funds:

$

Total Amount Expended Through
March 3 1,2004
-- - --0

-- - - - - $1,552.11
0

---

- ---

I

----I

0

n

NOTE: If interest has been earned, please refer to the Grant Guide for Local Governments,
Interest Earnings, and Instruction Sheetfor Subgrantee Performance Report, to determine if the
interest must be returned to the Federal Government

Has your organization requested reimbursement for all grant expenditures to date? Yes

0 No

If no, please explain:

Part V - Certification and Signature of Authorized Agent
Please check Yes or No for the following statement:

Y e s j No
This performance report represents the final progress report for this grant. All grant activities have
been completed, paid for, and accounted in this report. Check "Yes" only f a l l grant activities have
been completed, paidfor, and processed completely through your accounting system.
County and the representations made in this
Signature:
Printed ~ a r n e : & ~

Page 5 of 5

Date:
A

W,. 1 1 7. ;ILq

?,/\3

loq

Title: C a ~ t a i n / P r o ~ r aManager
m

March 26,2004

Performance Report
FY03 State Homeland Security Grant Program - Part XI
OES ID #001-00000
Grant Award # 2003-35

Part 111 - Grant Status Report - Planning and Administration
Is the planning and administration narrative within the original
application still accurate?

Yes

rn

0

If no, please explain:

Please describe significant activities/initiatives your organization is pursuing to enhance the
overall preparedness and first responder capabilities not supported by ODP resources.
Agencies w i t h i n t h e OA c o n t i n u e multi-hazard planning f o r
m i t i g a t i o n , p r e p a r e d n e s s , r e s p o n s e , and r e c o v e r y .

Is your organization generally satisfied with the Homeland Security grant process?
If no, please identify the area or areas that need improvement:

[Needs Assessment Process

Clfl G~antPayment Process

Grant Time Lines

0Equipment List

[Training Guidance

Grant Guidance

[Technical Assistance

[Other

Please comment on those areas identified above:

Page 4 of 5

March 26,2004
-

I ;?

Performance Report
FY03 State Homeland Security Grant Program - Part I1
OES ID #001-00000
Grant Award # 2003-35
Complete this section ifyou have received an awardfor exercises.

Part 111 - Grant Status Report - Exercises
What is the percentage of exercises completed for this grant?

%

0

How many exercises were conducted between January I , 2004 and March 3 1,2004?
Have the after action,reports been prepared and submitted to the
California Military Department?

Yes

0

0

!cl

What activities did the grant funds support?

0Overtime for Participants
0Backfill of participants
0Other

0Contractors
0Supplies
No n

Is the exercise narrative within the original grant application still accurate&es
If no, please explain:

Complete this section if you have received an awardfor training.

Part III - Grant Status Report - Training
What is the percentage of training completed for this grant?
How many individuals have been trained?

0

%

o

Is the training narrative within the original application still accurate?

Yes

El

If no, please explain:

Page 3 of 5

March 26,2004

/

/

Performance Report

i

.

FY03 State Homeland Security Grant Program - Part I1
Grant Award # 2003-35
OES ID #001-00000

Part I1 - OYera11 Grant Performance (continued)

Is the Problem Statement within the original application still accurate?

yes

a

0

If no, please explain:

Complete this section ifyou have received an award for equipment.
Part IU - Grant Status Report - Equipment (see attached)

The attached Grant Status Report (GSR) reflects the most current information provided by the subg~anteeto
the Office of Emergency Services (OES).
Please refer to the Instruction Sheet for Subgrantee Performance Reports for directions on indicating
deletions, additions or corrections on the GSR.
If the subgrantee indicates deletions, modifications or additions on the GSR, OES will consider this a formal
revision request. OES will review this request and will notify the subgrantee of final determination under sepa

Are personnel sufficiently trained in the use of equipment purchased
with this grant?
If no, is federal Office for Domestic Preparedness (ODP) sponsored
training or technical assistance needed?
Have there been procurement problems or delays?

Yes

0

Q

Yes

0

No (XJ

Yes J!

0

If yes, identify which problems your organization has experienced:

0Lack of Funding

a

Internal or Jurisdictional Coordination

Vmdor Supply Shomges

Page 2 of 5

0Inadequate Staffing

Other, please explain

March 26,2004

lb

Performance Report
FY03 State Homeland Security Grant Program - Part I1
OES ID #001-00000
Grant Award # 2003-35
operational Area: Alarneda Countv
Performance Period: January 1,2004 - March 3 1,2004
Mailing Instructions: Please complete the performance report and return it by A ~ r i 15,2004
l
to:
Governor's Office of Emergency Services
Disaster Assistance Division - Grant Management Section
P.O. Box 419023
Rancho Cordova, CA 95741-9023
Questions regarding the completion of this performance report should be directed to the Grant
Management Section at (9 16) 845-8 110 or via email to grant.mana~ement@,oes.ca.~ov. Reports
can be faxed to the Grant Management Section at (916) 845-8392, with a hard copy of the report
mailed to the above address.
Part I - Authorized Agent Information

Are the following people still Authorized Agents for this grant?
Charles C. Plummer, Sheriff
Curtis L. Watson. Undersheriff
Linda L. Elliott, Commander

Y e s Q
Yes /

N O D
No

0

NOTE: For any Authorized Agent changes, please refer to the Grant Guidefor Local
Governments, Appendix C Forms, Instruction Sheet for the Governing Body Resolution,
or call the Grant Payments Unit at (916) 845-8 110.
Applicant's phone number: (925) 803-7803 .
Is the mailing address and phone number still accurate?

Yes /J

If no, please provide correct mailing address/phone number:

Part I1 - Overall Grant Performance

' What is the anticipated completion date for this grant?

41301 2005

If the completion date is after April 30,2005, please explain why:

Page 1 of 5

March 26,2004

".

'

#

.

a

California S t a t e w i d e Critical A s s e t List
As of June 2003, Sorted by County
I ~ a n [k

Site Name

City

I

A h chwen+
I

California Critical Asset List

Function

I

Sector

County
Alpine County, California
Sierra County, California
San Francisco County, California
Modoc County, California
Trinity County, California
Mono County, California
lnyo County, California
Mariposa County, California
Colusa County, California
Plumas County, California
Glenn County, California
Del Norte County, California
Amador County, California
tassen County, California
Calaveras County, California
Sacramento County, California
Siskiyou County, California
San Benito County, California
Tuolumne County, California
Tehama County, California
Yuba County, California
Lake County, California
Sutter County, California
Mendocino County, California
Los Angeles County, California
Nevada County, California
Madera County, California
Imperial County, California
Napa County, California
Kings County, California
Humboldt County, California
El dorado County, California
Shasta County, California
Yolo County, California
Tulare County, California
Merced County, California
San Diego County, California
Placer County, California
Butte County, California
San Luis Obispo County, Californi
Marin County, California
Santa Cruz County, California
Santa Barbara County, California
Stanislaus County, California
Solano County, California

4W%i&$

Population

Targets Top 50 Ep,e&pop

1,208
3,555
776,733
9,449
13,022
12,853
17,945
17,130
18,804
20,824
26,453
27,507
35,100
33,828
40,554
1,223,499
44,301
53,234
54,501
56,039
60,2 19
58,309
78,930
86,265
9,519,338
92,033
123,109
142,361
124,279
129,461
126,518
156,299
163,256
168,660
368,021
210,554
2,813,833
248,399
203,171
246,681
247,289
255,602
399,347
446,997
394,542

- -

- -

d

San Joaquin County, California
Monterey County, California
Sonoma County, California
Kern County, California
Alameda County, California
Ventura County, California
San Mateo County, California
Riverside County. California
Contra Costa County, California
Fresno County, California
Santa Clara County, California
Orange County, California
San Bernardino County, California
CHP B California
UC & Universities
Transit
Misc

TOTAL

....

.....

....

.

Document Retrieval

.

Page 13 of 26

. . .

. . .. .. . .. . .. .. . . .

........

. . . . .

i

the contracts, deliberative processes, discussions, communications,
negotiations with health plans, impressions, opinions,
recommendations, meeting minutes, research, work product, theories,
or strategy of applicants pursuant to Part 6.4 (cdmmencing with
Section 12699.50) of Division 2 of the Insurance Code.
( 2 ) Records obtained pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (c)
---

. ? ~ s ~~+&i%
~ s. .&;:,:; ~~.p. &. .. ~re&W$<t&."'
abi1i5.g
terr~,r,,i.s
t:;.3Xt;+..G,&..pg
y.0t:h:e5;:~~;:;~m;;:n:~l~:~a,g;~:s..;~,~
. &tW0,.
, .
....~
:...... .....
f~oq
..,..
ir+&9y3&;j,:.$,o; : l d ~ ~he.
. -. p. ~. .b ~
i ~ = ~ : ' ~ - I ~ ~ ~ s. ".-and;
.~ ~. ~
that
..~ ~...~is
~ ::!,~ . ~ ~ $ i p n ~ :
. . . . . . <:,
dcse-x
...
2l$$v1rj~:yd'r%o'n side<$ti bii iri : a clbse:d.,
:;yeps&.n. , .. i,
(bb) ( 1) Records of the Manaqed is k ~edi&l "~n'suranceBoard
related to activities governed by Part 8.7 (commencing with Section
2120) of Division 2 of the Labor Code, and that reveal the
deliberative processes, discussions, communications, or any other
portion of the negotiations with entities contracting or seeking to
contract with the board, or the impressions, opinions,
recommendations, meeting minutes, research, work product, theori.es,
or strategy of the board or its staff, or records that provide
instructions, advice, or training to employees.
(2) (A) Except for the portion of a contract that. contains the
rates of payment, contracts entered into pursuant to Part 8.7
(commencing with Section 2120) of Division 2 of the Labor Code on or
after January 1, 2004, shall be open to inspection one year after
they have been.fully executed.
(B) In the event that a contract entered into pursuantto Part 8.7
(commencing with Section 2120) of Division 2 of the Labor Code is
amended, the amendment shall be open to inspection one year after the
amendment has been fully executed.
(3) Three years after a contract or amendment is open to
inspection pursuant to this subdivision, the portion o f t h e contract
or amendment containing the rates of payment shall be open to
inspection.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire
contract or amendments to a contract shall be open to inspection by
the Joint Legislative Audit Committee. The committee shall maintain
the confidentiality of the contracts and amendments thereto until the
contract or amendments to a contract are open to inspection pursuant
to paragraph (2) or (3).
Nothing in this section prevents any agency from opening its
records concerning the administration of the agency to public
inspection, unless disclosure is otherwise prohibited by law.
Nothing in this section prevents any health facility from
disclosing to a certified bargaining agent relevant financing
information puxsuant to Section 8 of the National Labor Relations
,

;

~!,;">

;

Act.

6254.1. (a) Except as provided in Section 6254.7, nothing in this
chapter requires d~sclosureof records that are the residence address
of any person contained in the records of the Department of Housing
and Community Development, ~f the person has requested
confidentiality of that information, in accordance with Section 18081
of the Health and Safety Code.
(b) Nothlng in this chapter requires the disclosure of the
residence or mailing address of any person in any record of the
Department of Motor Vehicles except in accordance with Section
1808.21 of the Vehicle Code.
(c) Nothing in thls chapter requires the disclosure of the results

Page 1 of 5

1643 Senate Bill - Bill Analysis

BILL N
AUTHOR: Johnson
VERSION: 4/9/02

Ef3!gf&ggf&gi3g-2;
.
<-.!

FISCAL: No
CONSULTANT :

Ma

BROWN ACT ~ N DEMERGENCY MEETINGS
Backsround and Existins LawThe Ralph M. Brown Act requires local governments' meeting
to be "open and public," guaranteeing citizens control ove
their local governing bodies. Local officials must post
agendas 72 hours before their meetings and they cannot mak
decisions about topics that are not on the agenda. Loc'al
agencies can hold special meetings with 24-hour notice.
The Brown Act allows closed sessio.ns under certain narrow
exceptions. For example, a legislative body may meet in a
closed session to discuss security matters; notice is stil
required.
The Brown Act also allows local afficials to hold an
emergency meeting when prompt action is needed due to the
actual or threatened disruption of public facilities. An
"emergency situation" exists if the legislative body
determines a work stoppage, crippling disaster, or other
activity severely impairs public health, safety, or both.
The special meeting provisions apply to emergency meetings
except for the 24-hour notice. News media must be notifie
by telephone at least one hour before an emergency meeting
If telephone services are not working, the notice
requirements are deemed waived. However, the news media
must be notified as soon as possible of the meeting and an
action taken. The legislative body can not meet in closed
session during emergency meetings.
The Public Records Act requires all state and local
government documents to be available to the public, unless
the statute specifically exempts them from disclosure.
In two dire emergencies in Orange County current law made
it impractical for county supervisors to meet. On
September 11, 2001, the Orange County Board of Supervisors
had a regularly scheduled meeting so there was no need to

http://www.legmfo.ca.gov/p.../sb-1643-cfa-20020418 -113920-sen-comm.htm 30/03/04

Page 2 of 5

Senate Bill - Bill Analysis
-

-..

,.:

. ..
. . . . . . .. . ..
....
...... . .
-.
.-. . .
. .
. . .. .. . .... . . ..

,. -.

.

give a Brown Act notice of a special or emergency meeting.

SB 1643 -- 4/9/02 -- Page 2

But when the Board wanted to meet in closed session with
the Sheriff and other emergency personnel to be briefed on
the immediate and possible threats, the Board had to wait
until after the posting of the meeting's agenda.

Proposed Law
Senate Bill 1643 extends the definition of "emergency
situation" to include a "dire emergency." A local
legislative body can hold an emergency meeting in the case
of a dire emergency without complying with the one-hour
notice requirement. SB 1643 requires local officials to
notify the media at the same time the members of the
legislative body are notified of the emergency meeting in
the case of a dire emergency, if it is not possible to
notify the news media at least one hour prior to the
meeting.
SB 1643 allows a local legislative body to hold an
emergency meeting in closed session with law enforcement
officials, if agreed to by 2/3 vote of members present at
the emergency meeting, or if less than 2/3 of the members
are present, by unanimous vote.
SB 1643 amends the list of documents that are exempt from
disclosure under the Public Records Act to include
vulnerability or safety assessments prepared by public
agencies.
Comments
1.
Time is of the essence . Legislative bodies should
allowed to hold emergency meetings and to m.eet in closed
session, if deemed necessary, to discuss security matters
for immediate and imminent threats to the public health an
safety. Officials may need to act before it is too late.
SB 1643 waives the one-hour notice before holding an
emergency meeting in the case of a dire emergency during
which the public safety and health may have already been
endangered. SB 1643 gives local officials the means neede
to make necessary and crucial decisions to protect the

http://www.legmfo.ca.gov/p.../sb-1643-cfa-2002041 8-113920 s e n commhtm 30/03/04
--

.

.../
Page 3 of 5

11643 Senate Bill - Bill Analysis
/

health and safety of their citizens.

SB 1643 -- 4/9/02 -- Page 3

time limit or the exemption be limited to those reports
that are prepared to prevent acts as defined in the case o
a dire.emergency?
3.
A step backward ? The Brown Act begins with a stron
statement in favor of open meetings. Without specific
authority in the Brown Act for a closed session, a matter
must be discussed in public. It is not enough that a
subject is sensitive, embarrassing, or controversial.
Closed sessions should always keep those narrow purposes i
mind. SB 1643 allows emergency meetings to include closed
sessions. It requires that the legislative body vote in a
open meeting to ensure that a conscious decision is made
before proceeding with the closed session. The statutory
requirements for post-meeting arrangements
still in
force.
4.
Related bill. . SB 1643 is not the only bill to make
changes to the,BrownAct for closed sessions.
t ,::,d.. allows local legislative bodies to hold closed
, ;.z.. .
sessions with law enforcement officials or a private
security consultant on threats to the safety and delivery
of essential public services, including drinking water,
wastewater treatment, and electricity services. The
Assembly Local Government Committee will hear AB 2645 on
May 8 .
lr"

Support and Opposition

(4/18/)

Support : Association of California Water Agencies,
California Association of Sanitation Agencies, California

http://www.legmfo.ca.gov/p.../sb-1643-cfa-20020418 -113920-sen-comrn.htm 30/03/04

$4

T h c California Anti-Terrorism
Information Center

l-'rcpnrcd 13y The
California A t ~ o i Cici~cral's
~~y
Division of Law Er.ITorccrncnt
And
Gavcrmor's Ofticc of Crimi~lalJustice Planning

In rcsporlsc to acts of domcstic terrorism in CaliSornia and throughout the country over [lie last
scvrrnl ycars, state and local law cnforcc~ncdrgencics have been actively working to asscss and
imprwo uxisting terrnrisni prevention and intelligence capabilities and to develop ihe most cffcctivc
strategies to protect Californians mid property. .The tragic cvcnts of Scptcmber 11, 2001, howevcr,
have dcrnnnslrntcd thc nccd to immediately implement a ncw law cnforccn~cntsystem to assist in
idz~rtiryi~
y and preventing fiiturc terrorist activity. In addition, Unitcd Statcs Attorncy General John
Ashcrclll has directed lhc orcation of fcdcral, state, local task Sorces to bring terrori!;ts to justice and
1.0 prevent i ~ ~ ~terrorist
u r c acts. In responding to this urgent directive, California necds to harness
thc skill and espericnce o r all its law eniorccmcnt pcrsonncl in the cffort to provide speedy,
thoro~rgll,cohcrcnt and reliable
inSorrnation on which to base critical dccisioris to protcct the public.
<.
.,.:;,,,
. .. ...,...,:. .: . . .* . . . : . .. ... ..
. . .
:..'
. ..
. .'.
',>.. .-:.
.,+-&;,.,:;:,;y , :.: ..,
. . . .. .....'. . . . ..,:
. .,,.
'.
..
...,
2;.::;,..,; ;:,,,,,:.:;; ..,..; !:j:~,::;::;~,,~,l~
,:.;:::2:j~~;.?:f?:!::~j~;;~$&i$4
.
.,.
For this purpose, lhc following definition of terrorist nctivities willbc utilizcd: l'crrorism is the
.Q"*L
tbrcat to carry out any act t h a t would be s violation of criminal law in California for the purpose of
#
i\nirrlidhg or cocrcing a civilian population, its govcrnnient or any of its subdivisions; retaliatirq
a g a i ~ ~or
s t influenci~lgtllc policy of thc govcnmcnt; or carrying out any other activities which
8
rerlsonabiy place tlic r~csidcrllsof this state fmr for thcir futurc hcalth, snfcty or wclfarc. (1 8
. . . . . .:,..
: . ::.. ,,.:. . .' : . . . .... . .
:T~:;.>:~~..*~,:~:.:;.~>..~;<:::!,;.,:,:<:.::.>;.i.,:;
.,;:
..:.$?
SCC. 233 1.)
-. ..: . :. r::":.s:.,: . ,. ... ...,.....
.. ..:. .. . l : . i . . .... .
.:.: .... .. ::. - :
,
..
. .; . .:
....- :.. .:. .. ..::$.' ..:: ..' .. ....
.:U.S.C,
.:x:.,.
. . . ..
.
r . . , r . . , . . r ,,.--.-~ y'.. , .-.-..
Whilc Califurnis law cclliorcement agencies currently have in place and strongly rel:y upon
i~~tclligr~\cc-galbcrii~g,
analysis and disse~ninationsystc~ns
to combat illegal narcotics, gang and
o~ganizcdc.rilne activily, tllere arc c~~rrcotly
only h i r e d statewide inlclligence resources to assess,
prcvcnt and rcspond to icrrorist tlirzats, Inforn~ationpertaining to reasonable threats of terrorist
nc~ivilyis not currently collcctcd in a ccntralizcd place for revicw, analysis and dissemination, a n d
s~atcwidcc.ountcr-twrorist data is thcrcforc not acccssiblc to cvcry law cnforcc~ncntagency that
may nceb it. The collcctioti, arialysis, and accessibility to law cnforcernent of this information are
cri~icallyinlporrant to protcct the hcalih and safety of all Californians.

4

:,

::

,,,, ,,

,. .;~;!.,

.<:

'; 7 .

,L

,,

.1""

',"?

:-,

,<

3

',

'

,

:

,

,

, . ! . : '-

:

,

'

' ?

:, , , , ,,

'i

a

,

!,

, A ,..,
X'

,

,

_,

,

,.

,

,

(

,,

.?').

,,:.,!.,,+..:.

.'

',

,:, : ,

:,

,

,

,

,

-?

:.

3 .

_,.

$
1

.u

'

.Providing 111isservice to law cnforccmcnt rcquircs a sophisticated data system that includes welltrainccl and capablc ir~tclligencespecialists, extensive technology infrastructure and strong
safeguards to protect c.onstitutionally guaranteed civil libcrtics. It will also rcquirc thc cooperation,
collal~orationand c,orfuni~n~c:nt
of wcty California law c~iforccmcntagency in order lo make
available tllc shills and observations of California's 100,000 pcacc onicers Such a system would
takc ycars to build from sc~atch.'Thc California l3cparlmcnt of Justice, however, has a statewide
backbone-" systcm alrcady in plilcc that can bc adaptcd immcdiatcly to rncct these demands. While
it will rcquirc a substantial cff'ortto adrninistcr and expand thc systcm, this clfori is ncccssary.
'I'hcrchre, 011 Scptcrnbcr 25, 2001 thcrc will bc crcatcd within the state DOJ a California AntiI'cn-orisrn Infortnation Contcr.
L<

