“Why Covering Homeland Security Is Like Popular Mechanics”
Tipsheet for Homeland Security Coverage
2005 IRE CAR Conference
Homeland Security Budgets, Programs and Boondoggles Panel
Friday, March 18
Hollywood, Calif.

Sean Holstege
Staff Reporter, Oakland Tribune
sholstege@angnewspapers.com
(510) 208-6410
To read the series go to:
www.oaklandtribune.com
and follow the “Missing the Target” link under the “Features” tab at the top
Special Thanks: To my colleagues Michele Marcucci, Ian Hoffman and editor Mike
Oliver, who couldn’t attend. Without their talent, patience and doggedness these stories
never would have seen print.
Overview: “Missing the Target: A Flawed Plan to Protect the Homeland” ran Sept. 5-8,
2004 and hit the mark only because it synthesized computer-assisted reporting with all
the other classic tools. Great enterprise pieces are a bit liking fixing a car. You can’t
rebuild your engine with only a socket set. You need a screwdriver and a cherry picker
and a lot of other tools. It was the same for our reporting. CAR helped immensely, but it
was only one very important tool.
Take Home Message: Build your story like building a car. Use wrenches to loosen bolts,
and screwdrivers to loosen screws. On your story, use documents for proof, sources for
explanation and CAR to find patterns and for independent analysis.
How the Pieces Came Together: Like many good investigations ours started with a
simple question: Where does all this homeland security money go? How much do Bay
Area cities spend, and on what? We wanted to know. Once we found out, we wanted to
make sense of it. How does it compare to the rest of California? That’s when the fun and
the records battle began.
At heart ours was a story based on a public records request. The records told us
what we had, where the money went. (Attachments 2 and 3) We hit unexpected gold: a
partly redacted list of all the targets in California (Attachment 4a) as identified by its new
anti-terrorism center. More on that later. The bulk of documents was a mish-mash of
data, hundreds of pages with hundreds of line items. Like hunting for killer asteroids, we
looked for anomalies, things that didn’t fit.
That’s when we fired up our trusty Excel spreadsheets. First we added up all the
line items for each county for each grant cycle and entered the results in our spreadsheet.
This told us how much each county had spent. At the same time, we summarized periodic
tracking reports in a spreadsheet. This told us that lack of training and late
reimbursements were a common problem. Then we entered and added up all the grants

authorized by the Department of Homeland Security in Washington. With some simple
spreadsheet mathematics we knew how little some counties had actually spent of the
money that was promised.
OK, but so what? And more importantly, why? Time to go to the sources. Only
the counter-terrorism experts who eat and breathe this stuff every day would be able to
make sense of it. There were the usual think-tank, academic-type experts who could put
California’s experience into bigger context. Better were the sources we cultivated in the
three years since 9/11. It was good old-fashioned beat reporting. Hanging out at every
terrorism drill I could get to brought me front-line experts who knew the equipment and
the threats. Going to endless law-enforcement meet-and-greet events and spending the
time to just chat with counter-terror officials, without writing stories, paid off. Our big
breakthrough came when we tried to find out more about that target list. We pried sources
to fill in the blanks. Finally, a long-time source who trusted us, and our judgment, slipped
us an unredacted list (Attachment 4b), knowing we had no plans to publish it. Trust and
integrity matter.
We went back to our spreadsheets and began entering the data on the targets,
crunched the numbers and bingo: We had a story that quantified that the money was
going to places where terrorists weren’t likely to launch catastrophic attacks. For extra
measure we tossed into our spreadsheets demographic data from the Census. Now we
could show that a human life in target-rich L.A. was 27 times cheaper than one in remote,
forested and targetless Alpine County, as far as the state’s terrorism-fighters were
concerned. (Attachment 5)
After we had our findings and the context from experts, it was now just a matter
of asking officialdom for explanations.
Lessons Learned:
1) Use FOIAs to find sources, and sources to refine FOIAs. Example: We didn’t
just ask for homeland security grants. We learned from reporting there were
multiple grants in multiple cycles: Office of Domestic Preparedness grants, State
Homeland Security Grant Program funds and Urban Area Security Initiative
funds.
2) Request the same information from multiple agencies, at all levels of
government. Often cities and counties will fork over what the state and feds are
unwilling to release. Example: We requested grant application documents from
each of the nine Bay Area counties, the state applications for each grant cycle and
the grant documents for California for each cycle from the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security. We also asked for regular audits or performance reports from
each agency for each grant.
3) In terrorism stories, keep half a mind on what not to report. Just because you
know something juicy doesn’t mean you need to put it in the paper or on the Web.
Showing sound judgment endears you to sources. Always use the standard SPJ
ethical balancing test to ask yourself what greater public good is served, because
even though it’s cliché, Osama does get ideas from the media. Perhaps more
immediately, so do domestic lone nutcases. Reporting vulnerabilities is OK if
they are obvious and when officials will only correct them after public pressure.
Port security is a good example. But many facilities have semi-secret Achilles’
Heels and tipping off a terrorist about them is not a good idea. Basically, refrain
from writing a how-to, where-to recipe book for terrorists. Example: Once we had

the entire target list and shared our reporting with our sister papers across
California, editors there quite rightly wanted to know what their targets were.
After heated ethical debates in our newsroom we decided only to publish the top
ten, because they were obvious, and to write about the others without getting too
specific. Many rural counties have only one or two targets. In one case, a county
we cover had only a dam, worth being on the list, but if we reported that, then
terrorists would know that other hazardous facilities _ rail yards, fertilizer plants
and such _ were not on the list. And reporting the dam’s ranking would, we felt,
be too much information. We felt it wise and sufficient to simply report that the
dam was high, low or medium on the list.
4) Think about graphics early. Once you get your core finding, work with your
graphics department to present huge volumes of numbers in a way where the guy
on the bus can say “that’s nuts” after looking at the graphic for one minute. Often,
thinking about how to present information visually helps sharpen your focus when
you write. Example: After extensive discussions with we narrowed a vast amount
of information to the key elements. The money goes here, the people and targets
are there.
5) Don’t fall in love with your CAR. Spreadsheets and computerized files are tools
to understanding, not a sacrosanct end product. Example: We had spreadsheets
showing where overtime money went and how counties assessed the grant
program. We found 70 percent of Bay Area counties had not trained on the
equipment they used. It became a key line in the story, not a published chart for
the sake of itself. The OT information developed into a whole story, where the
anecdotal details, not the numbers, made the piece.
6) Don’t clutter your CAR. Use only the data that makes the story sing. The
temptation, after going blind entering, crunching and analyzing huge volumes of
data, is to use all of it. Spare your poor reader. Focus only on the most salient
points and throw the rest out. Example: Our main spreadsheet had county-bycounty data on money received, population, money allotted, percentage received,
number of targets, number of top targets and how much money was spent and
received per capita and per target. What really mattered was how much money
was allotted per capita because that’s the key statistic showing the state’s
priorities.
7) Test-drive your CAR, early and often. Especially on long projects, information
becomes stale. Update your spreadsheets when new info comes in, not at the end.
Make sure all the team members work off the same information, to avoid late
math surprises. Show results to colleagues outside the reporting team. Fresh eyes
will catch errors of math or logic. Example 1: I was fixated on the finding that
some counties had spent a much higher proportion of their allotment than others.
It turned out that big county bureaucracies were just slower, as you’d expect.
Example 2: Early on I crunched specific county numbers from the line items to
see if they had spent in proportion with the guidelines. I started with the nine Bay
Area counties and they seemed right. No reason to run numbers for the whole
state.
8) Save all the drafts of your computerized files. Once you’ve made changes with
new data or new analysis you can’t go back. Save the files in sequence _
numbering them helps _ so you can reconstruct how you reached key findings.
9) Cross-check data from different sources. Actively seek discrepancies. If you’ve
done your job, you should have numbers from a variety of places. They should

match. If they don’t, why not? By asking that question over and over, you’ll catch
math errors, or worse, reporting errors. Example (for 6-8): Late in the reporting
we got new numbers from an old grant. After the button had been pushed to send
our story and graphics to all our papers in California, we learned that we hadn’t
included all the money in some graphics. Los Angeles was several million dollars
off because of discrepancies between two sources of data. Worse, all the stories
were wrong and had to be reworked with the new numbers. Fortunately we caught
it in the nick of time. We should have double-checked earlier.
10) Hang out with expert sources. Learn to talk like they do. If phrases such as “hot
zone,” “PPE” or “target-hardening” roll off your tongue with ease, they’ll tell you
more. A day on Google can go a long way here. Bone up before you do any
reporting. Example: I went to a three-day WMD drill and wrote only one main
story, but I got to hang out with first responders who two years later became
major sources on our series. I understood from first-hand experience how poor
communications are a constant problem, how Hazmat teams often mistakenly
rush into hot zones and “die” and what the extent and limitations of different
equipment were.
11) Re-interview sources. Sometimes the first thing they tell you isn’t the complete
picture. Example: When I first interviewed Sierra County officials they said their
money went to hardening the county courthouse against pipe bomb attacks from
Constitutionalists and other radical white separatists. After closer examination it
turned out the building wasn’t equipped with “blast doors” after all, but regular
exits for night meetings and emergency fire escapes for judges on the secondfloor.
12) Crunch your spreadsheets just for fun. Sort up, sort down, cross-check
different factors and test non-obvious relationships. Hidden patterns will pop out.
You don’t have to use them, but they will deepen your understanding. Example: I
ran an analysis of money spent per target showing even greater discrepancies
between urban and rural areas. It turned out that the targets just tend to be in
populated areas, so we focused on the population figures.
13) Insist on getting records in electronic format. It makes entering the data much
easier and often it’s easier for agencies to respond to requests quickly. If they
balk, press them. Just about every document is computerized somewhere and
many of the line-item budget lists are saved in spreadsheets. Example: We didn’t
press them. It sucked.
14) Don’t just rely on the primary source documents. Get the stuff that informs
them. Get the org charts, authorizing legislation, grant regs, agency protocols and
anything else that tells you if your agency is following the rules and the intent of
the rules. Example: The California Office of Emergency Services tried to deny
our public records requests, citing new post-9/11 law. (Attachment 6a) We dug up
the new language in the public records law and also the legislative analysis
(Attachment 6b) when the bill moved through. It helped us show that lawmakers
never intended to conceal counter-terrorism budget numbers.
15) Get official definitions of terms. They tell you a lot about an agency’s prevailing
attitudes. Example: California worked off a definition of terrorism provided by
CATIC (Attachment 7). It’s an eye-opener, so vague you could practically end up
in Gitmo for a speeding ticket. Big agricultural states have their own unique slants
on the definition and harming cattle herds, corn crops or forests becomes

terrorism. Some key terms to ask for are terrorism, threat, target, critical
infrastructure, responding agency, information sharing and so forth.
16) Before you write, think of a theme or central image. No more than three words
which tie together all the strands of reporting. It will focus your writing. Example:
We went round and around before realizing that everything we were reporting
was in some way about a system that just missed the point. The money didn’t go
where the targets are. The whole point of homeland security was to protect the
most vulnerable places from the most catastrophic attacks, but it wasn’t
happening. “Missing the target” crystallized our thinking and seemed to sum it up.

Great Stories for the Anywhere Times:
-

-

-

-

What’s not protected? Why? How should it be?
What are the realistic threats to your community? Does law enforcement share the
same priorities as the Dept. of Homeland Security or private enterprise?
What companies in your area benefit from R&D grants or procurement contracts
in the emerging Homeland Security Industrial Complex? How are they
positioning themselves in the high-stakes cash grab?
Regional cooperation. Does it work where you are? Any terrorist attack worthy of
all this money will be, by its nature, a regional problem. Are you ready? Is there a
multi-city, multi-county terror plan? Or turf fights?
Fancy toys. Once the buzz of buying all this new equipment wears off, what
happens to it? Does it sit on a shelf? Is it used for something else such as
surveillance or drug busts? What is the shelf life of the stuff your agencies are
buying?
Communication gaps. Radio failures are a constant problem. What’s being done
locally?
Information sharing. How well does it work in your area? Do all levels of law
enforcement participate in the JTTF? Do they enlist private industry? Where do
tips go? What are some of the false alarms and how did authorities handle them?

