NICAR 2005 Conference Tip Sheet:
Sex offenders in long-term care facilities
By Ziva Branstetter, Tulsa World Projects Editor

The story: Matching one database with another is a classic CAR story that can be
applied to the issue of sex offenders. In Oklahoma, we had several anecdotal cases of sex
offenders being placed in long-term care facilities with vulnerable residents. We decided
to see whether this was a problem statewide. We found at least 18 registered sex
offenders, including 15 on probation and eight labeled habitual or aggravated, living in
nursing homes, assisted living centers or homes for the mentally disabled. In one case, a
sex offender on probation was sexually abusing mentally disabled residents at the facility
but was not removed by the state.
How we did it: We used an existing database, supplied by the state Health Department,
of nursing homes, assisted living centers and facilities for the mentally retarded that are
regulated by the state. We matched the address field of that database with the address
field in a database of registered sex offenders, supplied by the Department of Corrections.
Then we pulled the court file of every one of our matches and called the nursing homes in
an attempt to verify they still lived there. Some homes cooperated and some didn't.
If you want to do this story:

Be aware that address fields of different databases and even within the same
database are not standardized. Do sorts of the address fields within each database
to see how much standardizing you can do. For smaller data sets, you can try to
use the auto filter function on Excel. For larger sets, you need to do update
queries or learn a program like UltraEdit.
It is best to cast a wide net at first and then narrow down later. Do a match using
"like" expressions: select * fiom database A and database B where addressfieldl
like addressfield 2. You will get lots of bad matches but shouldn't exclude any
real matches that way. Be sure when using wildcards to try wildcards at both ends
of the expression: where addressfieldl like "*pine*" will get you everything on
Alpine Ave., Pine street etc.
Once you gather a list of potential matches, do your homework. Make sure the
DOB and other identifiers match up. You don't want to go on just the name alone.
Call every nursing home or facility you plan to mention in the story to give them a
chance to confirm or deny that the person is a resident. How accurate the match is
depends on how good your state is at keeping this information up to date. The
offender may have lived there once but may have died or moved since then.
Pull the court files to see what kind of victims the offender targeted. Were they
elderly or mentally disabled? Even if they were children, keep in mind that many
children visit relatives in nursing homes and are in an unsupervised environment.

Do the probation reports mention anyflung about the offender acting out? Is he or
she complying with treatment requirements? How long ago did the offense occur?
Check with your state licensing agency to see if there are any state regulations
dealing with this issue. There are only general regulations in Oklahoma requiring
homes to protect residents. No federal regulations currently address this issue,
though there is a GAO study in the works.
Does your state require notification of neighbors? If so, has the nursing home
notified other residents? In our state, most nursing homes considered the
information private medical information under HIPPA, despite the fact that the
offender is required to register.
Call the offenders. You might be surprised at what they say.
Check the nursing homes' inspection records, police calls etc. Has the facility
been cited recently for failure to protect residents from neglect or sexual abuse?
Has the facility reported any sexual assaults to authorities? If so, did they involve
the registered offender?
Resources:
1. www.a~erfectcause.orghas loads of data on this subject and has done all of your
work for you, if you want to credit this non-profit group based in Oklahoma. (I
prefer to do my own work so I lcnow that all the matches are valid.) Its founder,
Wes Bledsoe, is very quotable on this issue and has done a nationwide study that
found 380 offenders in such facilities.
2. www.medicare.gov has results of nursing home inspection findings though not the
detail you typically find on a report from the state. Select nursing home compare
and search for homes by name or location.
3. http://www.csom.ordvubs/~ubs.html
is a list of publications by the Center for
Sex Offender Management, a program of the U.S. Department of Justice. There
are downloadable fact sheets available on the site on a variety of related topics.

