Drilling for Oil with CAR
Sarah Cohen / The Washington Post / cohensh@washpost.com / Hollywood CAR 2005

9 ~99

Whether a project is conceived with a single reporter using CAR skills or a team with a more
specialized set of roles, we always have to act a little like wildcatters - balancing risks and
payoffs, moving quickly to capture opportunities, and thinking ahead to the end game.

Early Exploration
Project run most smoothly if the computer-assisted elements are integrated in the early
planning. We're looking at this stage at the level of difficulty and the burden of proof
required- to fully document the story.

* Think early about difficulty or risk versus impact or importance. When it's relatively easy
and important, there's nothing stopping us. When it's difficult or risky and low-impact, we
might want t o back off -- now. We sometimes shoot for a difficult but important story
because it is important and no one has done it.
* Look early for any documents and databases that might inform the story. Wayward
printouts on sources' desks, forms in government offices, annual reports and statistical
summaries are roadmaps t o underlying data, not an end in themselves. Cultivate sources
who can help identify documents and methods along with tips and examples.

* Map out the minimum number of examples needed t o truth-squad a database or
document a pattern. One murder might be plenty; a dozen contracts with a favored
contributor might not be enough. It's much easier to say that we found a dozen cases of
misspent money totaling $100 million than that one-fifth of city money was misspent.
* Make a fallback plan in case public records work fails to produce additional records or
databases in time for the story. Look for others who have obtained or created similar
datasets, public use datasets, databases on the Web that are available one record a t a time
or documents and data that you already have. Can these be used as a start, even if more
records are expected later?
* Take a close look at how far along is the story already is and how quickly will it move. I f
editors and other team members are already reporting out their prime examples and have
identified themes then the CAR work will only moderately inform the story.
* Avoid under-requesting electronic records. One common mistake among even experienced
reporters it t o ask only for the records you want now and not the ones that might provide
unexpected nuggets, comparative statements or different examples as the story evolves.
Core Sampling
Like a geologist, we need to take core samples from any databases we get, bring them back
to the lab and compare them with the rest of the field. Then we have to go find some more
samples.
The line between street reporting and database reporting is probably at its most blurred
now. Start by looking at the cases that prompted the investigation. How do they look in the
database? How would we find more? Then it's back to the streets or other documents to
check them out, hone the sampling and repeat the process. We're seeking the M.O.

Editors might decide to cut off the database element at this stage i f it's become a high risk,
low payoff enterprise. Ifevery case requires difficult reporting to confirm, or the database
doesnt distinguish between newsworthy and routine cases, consider abandoning this
reporting stream at least from the data sources already acquired.
But this stage can also become the source of great serendipity - it turns out we've found
diamonds, not oil. The databases can become great sources for triangulating to nail down
tips. Re-evaluate the themes often t o sieze these opportunities.
This is also a good phase to start planning complex graphics because we are intimately
involved in the details of the cases and exactly what the data means. Begin filling out the
data with an eye for maps, timelines or other elements that will be needed for graphics.
This stage also points out the inevitable flaws in both the data and our own initial logic.
Don't get upset when some samples don't yield diamonds or oil. That's part of the process
and it will help us get it right in the end.

Deep-sea drilling
The database reporting at this stage is seeking broad patterns and authoritative statements
that can be made in the final story: How often have judges assigned lawyers to new cases
after they'd been disciplined for poor service? How many children under the care of the city
have committed new crimes during that time? How do we know whether that is a lot or a
little?
This is where insufficient original public records requests come back to haunt us - without a
"compared t o what?" we often can't say much. It's also when we realize that we might need
to supplement any database work with more detail derived from other databases,
documents, court files or surveys of many government agencies.
We may decide that the effort involved t o get to the broad statements is simply impractical
- it would take longer than the rest of the story if it could be done at all. I t could be risky in
that the attempt might not yield anything we can use in the end.

Refining
I f working as part of a team, make sure that the person who did the database work is at
any confrontation interviews that include a summary of findings. No one knows it as well
and it's important to listen fairly and carefully to any objections. Although they shouldn't be
new t o us anymore, it's our last chance t o make sure we haven't missed something.
Sometimes the database reporting helps shape the structure of the stories by identifying
discrete themes. But even when it doesn't, look for ways to strengthen the drafts by finding
secondary (confirmed) examples from the data, removing extraneous numbers, reviewing
attributions and sweeping statements for slight mischaracterizations, and refining the
coordination between the analysis, the examples and the graphics.
I f everything else has gone well, this is painless!

