INVESTIGATING LONG-TERM CARE
Brad Heath
The Detroit News
bheath@detnews.com
(3 13) 222-2563

2005 N E A R Conference
Hollywood
"Caregiver CAR"

Problems in nursing homes are easy to spot but hard to measure. While bedsores and
bruises can be reliable markers that one patient has suffered harm, a wealth of electronic
data make it possible to take investigations of long-term care beyond anecdotes to
explore the scope of care problems.
In November 2004, The Detroit News used a combination of state and federal health
records to examine malnutrition and dehydration among patients in the nation's nursing
homes, finding a widespread epidemic that killed almost 14,000 patients over four years.
Most of the records used to develop these stories can be used to track other problems in
long-term care facilities. You can use them to do everything from tracking particular
kinds of care problems to quickly checking up on how many serious violations have been
found at nursing homes in your area.
Where to find the information

Death certificates: The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention publishes a
yearly file known as the Multiple Causes of Death database with information from
about 2.5 million death certificates nationwide. The file has summary information
such as the person's state of residence; whether death was in a hospital, nursing home
or at home; and the causes listed on the death certificate. It's readily available - you
can buy the data from IRE or get it free from the CDC. The drawback is that the CDC
removes all identifying information, including stripping out city- and county-of-death
information for smaller areas. But you can query the file to find out, for instance, how
many people died from dehydration in nursing homes.
States keep their own databases of death certificates, usually with more specific
addresses such as names, Social Security numbers and addresses, which can make it
possible to link deaths to specific long-term care facilities. Some states (Mmnesota,
North Carolina and Ohio, among others) readily turned over complete copies of their
databases; others would not. In Michigan, for instance, vital records are specifically
exempt from the state Freedom of Information law.
The databases store cause-of-death information using ICD-10 codes (so dehydration,
or "volume depletion" is listed as "E86").

Inspection summaries: The U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services keeps
a database of nursing home inspection summaries on its web site
(http://~~~.medicare.nov/DownloadlDownloadDB.asp).
You can download Access
databases with tables listing violations found by state oversight agencies during

routine inspections and complaint investigations. You can use the database to figure
out how many homes in your area have been cited for having harmed a patient, or
how many have been cited for a particular type of violation such as medication errors
or unsanitary conditions. (You can also browse the data online, which is a useful way
to get quick background about a particular facility).

-

The databases cover about three years and aren't always complete. Also, the
summaries contain only a generic description of the violation and its severity. To
learn more about what the inspectors actually found, you'll need to read their report.
In a few states (Colorado, Ohio and Pennsylvania, for instance) you can download
those reports from state agencies' web sites; in others, you'll need a Freedom of
Information request to get them. (If you're looking for the most recent report, you can
also go to the facility: They're required to have it posted.)
The CMS databases also include information on the size and location of nursing
homes, their staffing levels and some basic information about their patients.

Hospital discharges: One of the problems with public-use death records is that they
tell you only if someone died in the nursing home, meaning they don't include
patients who are taken to the emergency room first. But you can follow nursing home
patients admitted to acute-care hospitals using public databases of hospital discharge
records, which list patients' diagnosis, the type of facility from which they were
admitted and what happened to them.
A few states (Illinois) put public-use versions of the discharge data on their web sites.

You also can buy a discharge sample database called the Nationwide Inpatient
Sample from the U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality for $200. The
database is designed to create nationwide estimates about hospitalizations. But before
you buy it, read the fine print carefully - and have a lawyer read it too. The data use
agreement is onerous; it includes the phrase "punishable by ... up to five years in
prison." (AHRQ also sells copies of states' discharge data.)

= Minimum Data Set: The mother lode of nursing home data is a database called the
Minimum Data Set, which tracks diagnostic details of most patients. Access to the
data is tightly controlled, but the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services makes
summaries available online (http://www.cms.hhs.~ov~states~mdsre~orts/default.as~).

What you can do with it
Together, these records let you measure all kinds of trends. The News used them to figure
out how many patients had died as a result of malnutrition or dehydration, how many had
been hospitalized and how many homes had been cited for violations linked to patients'
- nutrition and hydration. You can also track deaths from pressure ulcers, assault, scalding,
suffocation or other causes that raise red flags. You can find out what kinds of problems
have been found at nursing homes in your area or use the inspections as a starting point to

figure out if your state punishes homes that repeatedly break the rules.
Use them as a launching pad for an investigation - but remember the details that will
really make your story will usually be found in the actual inspection reports, court filings,
disciplinary actions and the memories of patients and their families.
There are limits to the data that can often confound easy conclusions. The fact that a
patient died from dehydration, for example, doesn't necessarily mean the nursing home's
care was inadequate: Some patients refuse artificial hydration as part of an advance care
directive. But you can often find other data from university researchers or others to steer
your reporting over or around these obstacles. Other times you can identify clear
benchmarks, such as reports from regulators warning that conditions such as malnutrition
are a kind of red flag for bad care.
Also remember some of these databases can be pretty big: Four years of Multiple Cause
of Death data; the Nationwide Inpatient Sample has about 7.5 million records per year.
Unless you're very patient (and even that might not be enough) you should consider
using something more powerful than Access to crunch the records. (If Access is all
you've got, download a MySQL database server. There's a bit of a learning curve, but it's
free.)
Best of all, you can turn around and use there records for stories on a variety of other
topics. For example, the News used our Multiple Cause of Death file to follow up on the
killing of four children in Detroit, finding the city's death rate among children was'the
highest among the nation's largest cities and is well above the national average

(htt~://www.detnews.com/2004/metr0/0404/08/a01-116835.htm).

