The Sacramento Bee
P.O. Box 15779 2100 Q S r d Sacramento. CA 95852

Starting from Scratch - Amy Pyle, projects editor, The Sacramento Bee
How do you build a CAR culture to support projects and investigations
when your staff just got their first PCs? That was the question I faced when I
started at The Bee six years ago. Here are a few tips I learned along the
rocky way:
Tip: Choose a couple of smaller projects that rely on relatively quick
crunches to achieve an early success.
The message: CAR is an essential tool instead of an expensive distraction.
Tip: Next take on some bigger databases - we chose a really big one: public
education funding in California - that no one has ever looked at
comprehensively before (in our case, not even the Education Department)
The message: CAR can help you evaluate something so seemingly massive
no one else has bothered to try.
Tip: Then, consider building your own database - we did one for all city and
county campaign contributions, more than 20,000 entries (!), that I hired an
underemployed temp to input.
The message: CAR can get you something no one else could possibly have.
Tip: Finally, advocate for teaming that allows folks with database skills to
work with other reporters, to spread the word.
The message: They're doing CAR and you can too (reporters). Every good
project may have a CAR component (editors).
Some other tips:
- Bring as much training to the paper as you can, with the price of admission
being a database that holds a piece of a promising investigation. (Editors get
a story and reporters have reason to practice what they've learned.)
- Identify and nurture young reporters, even interns, who know database
from college and can be tapped to help out with projects. (If you're one of
them, make sure your projects/investigations editors know.)
- Turn the editorial library into a research arm, primarily for investigations
and projects, and make sure the libraridresearchers get topflight training.
- Push to fill future openings with reporters with CAR skills.

