Cool tools from Mozilla-based browsers
NICAR National Conference March 17-20 2005
Tip sheet prepared by Randy Reddick . Texas Tech University r.reddick@ttu.edu

Who 1 what is Mozilla?
1. Mozilla is / was the mascot of the original development team for the Netscape Navigator browser
in the mid 1990s The Mozilla Museum (http://home.snafu.de/tilman/mozilla/) claims he was /
is frightened of pinstriped suits. Taxonomists tentatively place Mozilla in the phylum Reptilia.
2. Mozilla is the short name of a new-generation browser at the center of the Mozilla Suite, an "allin-one internet application suite" (browser, e-mail client, chat client, HTML editor, address book,
calendar etc.). The browser properly is known as Mozilla Navigator, the e-mail client Mozilla
Mail, the HTML editor Mozilla Composer, and so forth, like its cousin Netscape.
3. Mozilla is the name of a n open-source (http://opensource.org/) software project that can be
found on the Web at http://mozilla.org/. Among the products of the Mozilla Project are t h e e
cross-platform (they run in Windows, Mac and *NIX environments)browsers:
a. Mozilla, currently at version 1.7.5
b. Firefox, currently at version 1.0.1
c. Netscape Navigator, currently at version 7.2, with version 8.0 in beta testing. Version 7.2 is
technically a customized version of the Mozilla suite (version 1.4).

Why should reporters care?
Several features available in the Mozilla-based browsers (Firefox, Mozilla and Netscape 7+) have useful
applications for those "doing news." This sheet is designed as a "how-to" document focusing on three
features described at the NICAR conference in Hollywood Sunday, March 20: 1) "What's Related" in the
sidebar and 3) customizable built-in search forms 2) the "Live Bookmarks" feature of Firefox.

The "What's Related" Sidebar tab

CNN - C a b l e News Network
CBS News
CBC News
ABC News
Yahoo News

World News
Radio Netherlands
Reuters News Online
International News Diaest
~ e w sin Pictures

I

r)9

Traffic Rank: 3
Contact:
Lazarus Engineering Corporation
25 Lakeside Way, Suite 1 0 0
Renfrew, ON K7V 324 Canada
+1-613-432-3343,-Fax :-+1-613-432-5
About Alexa I Privacy Policy
O 2003 Alexa Internet

I Help

f

Fig. 1: The What's Related sidebar
All Mozilla-based browsers come equipped with tabbed
browsing, pop-up blockers, and a sidebar. Especially for
Mozilla itself and to a lesser extent for Netscape and Firefox,
this sidebar is customizable. One easily accomplished
customization is adding the "What's Related" tab to the
sidebar.
Any time you open a Web page, this tab reports useful
information about that Web page. At the top, you are given the
URL of the page currently open, in this case,
http: / /news.google.com.
Immediately below the URL you are given live links to as
many as 10 similar Web pages listed under "Related Links."
This feature can be very useful when you are trying to build a
list of Web resources on a given topic.
At the bottom of the "What's Related" tab, Mozilla reports
"Site Info," which includes the site's traffic rating on the Web
and contact information from the Whois Internet domain
database. This immediately tells you something about who
owns the site, their address and phone numbers - if this
information is available to the public.

Mozilla Tip Sheet Randy Reddick NICAR 2005 Page 1of2

1

Activating What's Related
Fig. 2: Customizing the sidebar
To install the "What's Related" feature in Mozilla or Netscape, you
have to first open the sidebar by selecting View I ~ h o w / ~ i h e
Sidebar. In Windows and Linux boxes the keyboard shortcut is F9.
This shortcut does not work on Macs.
From the "Tabs" drop-down menu (See Fig. 1above) select
"Customize Sidebar." Fig. 2 shows some of the sidebar options that
are available. You want "What's Related," so you will select it and
then click the "Add" button.
You may have to close your browser and re-launch it for the new tab
to be activated in Mozilla or Netscape. This feature does not appear to
be available for Firefox.

i

available Tabs:
What's Related
Search
Bookmarks
History

Address Book
b Favorites

r Sidebar Directory
"Mapquest
/-Google

Customized Reference Tools
All the Mozilla browsers build search dialog forms into the browser
itself. What is unique is that you can designate on the fly what search
engine you want to use. So if you just want to look up the meaning of
a word at dictionary.com, you can select that from the search dropdown menu and then enter the word you want to look up. The default
search is at google.com, but you have several search sites you can
select for any search, and you can add sites
of your own.
1 Find v e tabs.. A
Fig. 3: Changing the search ennine
Inkrefox, the search form is near the top of the browser, to the right of the
address bar. In Mozilla and Netscape, the sidebar has a search tab. The top
results of your search are delivered in the sidebar itself, and stay there so that
you can follow those links without leaving your search results.

"Live bookmarks" through RSS
At this writing, only Firefox supports RSS-driven "live bookmarks." When
you place a live bookmark on a news site that supports them, Firefox actually
creates the bookmark as a folder. Within the folder is a listing of the most
recent headlines in the site. The headlines are linked and constantly refreshed
by means of an RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feed. In this way, you can keep current on top news
items at your favorite news site, news aggregators, and others supporting the kind of RSS feed that
Firefox requires.
Fig. 4: Subscribing to an RSS "live bookmark" in Firefox
When you have reached a Web site that has such a feed, Firefox alerts
you with a special symbol in the lower right-hand comer of your
browser. If you click on the RSS alert symbol, then you are given the
opportunity to "subscribe" to the RSS feed. Firefox will then ask you
where you want to file the bookmark folder which will then be filled
with headlines.
The mozilla.org Web site gives a partial listing of sites supporting such feeds at
http:/ /www.mozilla.org/prod~cts/firefox/live-bookmarks.html.
Two worth investigatingclosely are
http://news.bbc.co.uk/ that simply gives a wide range of news and many ways to slice it and
http://news.yahoo.com/ that has specialized topic-focused feeds that may come close to what is on your
beat.

,,

Mozilla Tip Sheet Randy Reddick NICAR 2005 Page 2 of 2

