Advantages and issues of social network analysis
2005 Hollywood CAR
Jaimi Dowdell, IRE and NICAR
jaimi@ire.org
The power of data analysis isn’t always demonstrated in the final published product. More often
than not the results from hours of running queries never make it in the paper or on air. But, without the
process of sifting through numerous fields and records many important and solid stories would be missed.
We’ve come to learn that by using spreadsheets and database managers we can narrow down the
field of information to pinpoint certain areas of interest to investigate and explore with additional reporting.
Social network analysis software is just another tool that can assist with this filtering process. It allows
reporters to look at relationships, or connections between individuals, organizations, etc., in new ways.
So what is social network analysis?
Social network analysis is a method of research using data to analyze relationships between
individuals, organizations, etc. Driving social network analysis is the idea that social networks are
fundamentally a part of any group or community. The people who know each other, and, in turn, know
others present a web of power and knowledge.
Theoretically, these connections and relationships speak volumes about our society and the
individual players, or actors, themselves. Researchers, mainly in the social sciences, have studied these
types of connections for decades attempting to give meaning to the social networks around us. Quite often
they collect survey data and build databases for their analysis. Journalists have recently begun using social
network analysis software and techniques to produce and investigate stories. While some of the stories may
include fancy graphics of connections, other stories simply used social network analysis methods as a
tipsheet, or guide, to further investigate a story. Social network analysis can help journalists sift through all
of the noise of the extraneous information and attempt to focus on the individuals or organizations that are
potentially pivotal to the story.
Here are some stories that implemented the concept of visualization or social network analysis software
itself. These stories are available from the IRE Resource Center and can be ordered by calling 573-8823364 or e-mailing rescntr@ire.org.
•

No. 21357 The Washington Post
This two day series published in May 2004 looks at the campaign fundraising practices of Pres. George W.
Bush's main contributors. The groups, called the "Bush Pioneers" and "Bush Rangers," have found ways to
bypass contribution limits to come up with a record amount (296.3 million) of campaign funding for the 2000
election. According to the report, the Pioneers "have evolved from an initial group of family, friends, and

1

associates willing to bet on putting another Bush in the White House into an extraordinarily organized and
disciplined machine." In exchange for their generosity, some contributors now hold several positions in the
White House.
•

No. 20463 The Washington Post
The Washington Post used social network analysis in early 2003 to report on a group of language schools in
the Los Angeles area that appeared to be "visa mills" for foreign students. In "INS Moves to Plug Visa
Leaks," Post reporters looked into schools that bore little resemblance to real institutions of higher learning.
Of a dozen schools visited by the reporters, none had more than a handful of students, and one had no
teachers and no staff save for a receptionist.

•

No. 21453 The Kansas City Star
The U.S. government believes that the Columbia, Missouri based Islamic African Relief Agency helped
finance bin Laden and other terrorists. Federal agents seized the charity's office in October 2004. The
Kansas City Star diagrammed the summary the U.S. Treasury created to support its allegations against the
IARA. Some points include: at least eight connections between IARA and Osama bin Laden, his
organizations or the Taliban; two connections to Hamas, the Palestinian terrorist organization whose suicide
bombings ravaged life in Israel; connections to three other groups that long have been designated as terrorist
organizations by federal authorities. The piece also contains a map of IARA funding worldwide in an attempt
to track the money.

What can you do with social network analysis?
You don’t have to work for a large news organization or be a complete CAR nerd to make social
network analysis work for you. The good news is there’s software available that is reasonably priced and
with some effort fairly simple to navigate. The International Network for Social Network Analysis
(http://www.insna.org/) has a link to all available software. My experience has been with UCINET from
Analytic Technologies. You can get a free trial download of this software and pricing information at:
http://www.analytictech.com/ucinet.htm.
There is also a lot of literature available on the uses and practices of social network analysis. While
most of the published work is academic in nature, it can really help shed light on using this stuff. To really
understand the methods and theories behind social network analysis most people recommend Social
Network Analysis: A Handbook, by John Scott; and Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, by
Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust. Scott’s book is a bit simpler and a great place to start, but once
you get going you’ll find the technical explanations from Wasserman and Faust to be a great help. Also, be
sure to check out Introduction to Social Network Methods, a free, online handbook by Robert A. Hanneman
(http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/SOC157/TEXT/TextIndex.html). IRE’s social network analysis page is
also a great source of the latest information on social network analysis and its uses in investigative
journalism.
The real question you might have about social network analysis probably doesn’t involve software.
What you’re probably wondering right now is how you can make all of these nodes and lines work for you

2

and your newsroom. What if you don’t live in a big city and the most powerful board members in your
community belong to the local school district? One of the wonderful things about social network analysis is
that it can be tailored to suit many projects. Here are some ideas for just about any beat in all types of
communities:

•

Local government power—which city council members are connected to others outside of government via
business or organizations? How might these relationships affect important decisions being made in your
community?

•

Campaign contributions—which candidates are getting all of the money and from whom? Are there special
interests that the donors are trying to promote? Are there any political action committees in your community?
How is everyone involved?

•

Crime—criminologists have used social network analysis to track the criminals at the heart of many
problems within inner cities. Police can then take that information to target the sources of the problems.

•

Public health—Researchers have used this method to track the spread of HIV and SARS. Reporters could
look at the spread of West Nile and other diseases throughout the nation.

•

Contracts and bids—Who is getting public money for performing services in your community? Who are the
winners and losers in the contract game? Are there any connections between local businesses and
government officials that might have an influence on which companies are awarded contracts? How is the
public being served through this process?

Another thing to remember about social network analysis is that many of the sources of information
you might use to build network models are already publicly available. Here are some document
sources that might help you build a network:

•

Local Government Web sites—Usually these will list members of city council, board of adjustment,
planning and zoning, etc.

•

Secretary of state corporate filings (state level)—Find out what companies and nonprofit organizations
and individual is a registered agent for. If you already know the names of businesses an individual is involved
with, find out who are the organizers and board of directors.

•

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Filings—Corporate 10-K filings list the board of directors. Find
the filings online at http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml

•

Form 990s—Nonprofits are required to list their board of directors. Many highly-involved individuals in your
community will turn up on these lists. Find filings online at www.guidestar.org

•

Newspaper Archives—Search for an individuals’ name in electronic newspaper archives. Some
researchers have used the “society” sections of newspapers to conduct an analysis on community
involvement.

3

•

Corporate Web sites—Publicly traded companies list board of directors and top-level executives on their
Web sites.

•

Property Records—Help to uncover who a person is doing business with and under what names.

•

Court Records—When researching a business or individual, these records can help you uncover which
business deals have gone sour and who is strongly connected to an individual.

When analyzing networks, remember that your results will only be as good as the data and
information you collect. While there is a lot of public information available that will help you build
network models, in most cases you’ll be the one who has to find it and compile it. Be sure to exhaust
your sources and double check your information.

4

