Making an Index for finding what lurks
(using statistics effectively and safely. 2005 Annual CAR Conference,
Los Angeles, CA)
David Donald
Training Director

Investigative Reporters and Editors Phone: 912-713-2728
138 Neff Annex
Fax: 912-898-8240
Missouri School of Journalism
E-mail: ddonald@ire.org
Columbia, MO 65211

The Problem: I need to find out how different segments of the community
identify themselves as either more pro-environment or pro-development.
Knowing this will add much to my data analysis on a survey gathering community
opinions about water resources. But much that I’ve read says that determining
who is pro-environment is difficult and often not to be trusted. A single measure
or variable is unsatisfactory because it doesn’t pick up all that’s lurking out there
in this complex idea. Can I find a more reliable way to see how people really
think of themselves on environment vs. development continuum?
The Solution: Create my own index (or scale) that allows more reliable
responses, better data analysis and, consequently, deeper understanding of
environmental attitudes. Here’s how.
y On a survey, asking multiple questions about a single concept can lead to more
reliable answers. But we need to know two things. Do the multiple questions
really measure the same concept? And can we collapse them into one measure
that allows comparing the concept to other data, such as demographic
background of the respondents, so that we get deeper understanding of our
community?
y If pro-environmental questions aren’t to be trusted, how about approaching it
from the other end of the spectrum? Let’s find out how pro-development the
respondents are. Write a number of questions that, on the surface, seem to
measure what you’re trying to discover. Here are the ones I wrote (and
borrowed) to get at the concept of “pro-development.”
Now I am going to read you a list of statements. On a scale of 1 to 10, with
1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree, I want to know how
much you agree or disagree with each statement.
1. Material growth makes for happier living.
2. Growth in material consumption helps raise the level of civilization.
3. Economic development can proceed without disrupting the balance of
nature
4. I am reluctant to conserve material goods and services when it affects
my daily life.
5. I have worked hard to get where I am – and am entitled to the “good
things in life.”

6. Humans have a right to modify the natural environment to suit their
needs.
7. In our community, economic development should be pursued more
aggressively.
y Run the survey (with your other questions, including demographic information.
Record the answers and put them into SPSS.
y Now you want to know if the answers tell you whether the questions measure
too much of the same concept, making them redundant. Or do they measure too
little of the same thing, making them unfit for my index. To do this, run a
correlation analysis. In SPSS release 11.5, go to “Analyze” on the menu bar.
Highlight “Correlate” on the drop down menu and click on “Bivariate.” In the
dialogue box, move the seven index variables into the box for analysis. Leave the
defaults checked. Run the statistic.
y One of the defaults is a measure for Pearson Correlation [r]. You’ll have a
matrix with 42 boxes, each question correlated with another question. (Actually,
you’ll have 49, 7 x 7, but each question will correlate with itself.) You want the
Pearson to measure between .2 and .5. If it’s below .2, it’s not correlated enough
to let you know you’re measuring the same concept. If the Pearson is above .5,
then your questions are essentially redundant. On the seven pro-development
questions, all correlated but two, Nos. 3 and 5.
y The final test is to take the remaining 5 questions and run the statistic
Cronbach’s alpha. Again, in SPSS, go to “Analyze” on the menu bar, highlight
“Scale” and click on “Reliability Analysis.” Now in the dialogue box, move your
five remaining variables into the analysis box. Leave the “Model” window on
“alpha” and press the “statistics” button. Under “Descriptives for,” check “Scale”
and “Scale if item deleted.” Click “Continue.” Run the statistic.
y You’ll get two results you’ll want to look at. The more important one is alpha.
You want this number above .7. If it is, then you know your questions are
measuring enough of the underlying concept. If they’re above .8, you can even
use it in what is known as “confirmatory” analysis and that’s great. The results
also show you an alpha score for the questions if you deleted each one. If the
alpha score drops below .7 or .8 when the question is deleted, you know you
want to keep it. For the pro-development index, the five questions scored .81 and
the alpha dropped below .8 if we deleted any of them.
y Obviously, you don’t want to go through this with your readers. At this point,
you’re gaining peace of mind for yourself for the next, and final, step.
y Those five questions can now be made into an Index, allowing us to get one
number that measures our concept. Take the five questions and compute a
mean score (an average for the five responses). That’s our Index score. Give it a

name. Because these questions are about development and a person’s interest
in material goods, I called it the DMG index.
y You can now create categories for those who are pro-development and antidevelopment from the Index and cross tabulate them against your demographics,
confidently giving you a deeper, more reliable understanding of those in you
community.
The Power: When I cross tabulated the pro-development index (the high
category meaning more favorable toward development and material growth, the
low meaning less favorable) by race, we found something we didn’t expect.
Blacks were much more predevelopment than whites. (Deep South Savannah,
where I was working, is a very black/white town.) I then cross tabulated the index
against education level and income level, controlling for race. I found race to be
the bigger explainer, although lower income and education associated with prodevelopment as well. That surprised me and many in our community. While
blacks vote overwhelmingly for Democrats and Democrats supposedly lean more
on the environmentalist side rather than development, it didn’t work out this way.
Why? That’s where traditional reporting takes over. But it’s now based on a fuller
concept of what’s lurking behind the notion of being pro environment or
development.

