Eight Safeguards: A Stats Checklist
(Using statistics effectively and safely)
2005 NICAR Conference, Hollywood, CA
David Donald
Training Director

Investigative Reporters & Editors
Missouri School of Journalism
Columbia, MO 65211

Phone: 912-713-2728
Fax: 912-898-8240
E-mail: ddonald@ire.org

Holly Hacker
Education reporter

The Dallas Morning News

Phone: 214-977-8749
E-mail: hhacker@dallasnews.com

1) Before you begin: Find out what research has already been done. Don’t just
look at other journalists’ work – check out scholarly research. Read the
methodology sections to see how the analysis was done. Ask experts the
best ways to study something.
Questions: What data is available, and on what level (state vs. county, school
vs. student, etc.)? What shortcomings are there in the data (if it’s crime data,
does every police department report)? What have others done with the data
before?
2) Doing the work: Examine your data – is it clean? Can you spot-check it
against other sources (for instance, is there a web site that lists the same
data). Are zeroes really zeroes, or are they nulls? Are there percentages
above 100 (this happens sometimes with school poverty rates because the
figures in the numerator and denominator are collected a few months apart).
An example from Holly: When I had student-level test score data in Missouri, I
wanted to look at students who were poor or in special education. Problem is,
the special ed codes were often bogus, and the free and reduced-price lunch
rates did not match the official school figures submitted to the USDA. That
means the test sheets probably were coded incorrectly, so I couldn’t draw
many conclusions based on those individual scores.
Tip: Keep an audit trail of your work – SPSS logs, Access queries, etc
3) Assumptions: Make sure you explore your data well enough in advance to
know enough about the numbers when you choose your stats. Many of the
statistics that journalists like to use assume that the data fits a normal curve
(the famous “bell curve” that shows how a single variable, such as height or
IQ scores, is distributed). After all, SPSS will compute results for you even if it
doesn’t come close to approximating a normal curve.

1

If you’re doing correlations or regressions, see if the data really form a
straight line – or is it a curve? This will make your results flawed, because
linear regression assumes a line.
Tip: Many stat books have a chart that lists level of measurement,
assumptions, significance tests, etc., for specific stats. Keep the chart handy
for quick reference.
4) Assessing the results: Do the results make sense, or do they go against
conventional wisdom? For instance, if you’re the first to find that test scores
rise along with poverty, either you made a mistake, the data’s flawed or you’re
on to something truly groundbreaking.
What conclusions can – and can’t -- you draw? How much can you
extrapolate from your analysis? For instance, if you ran a regression on crime
rates, try running the same regression on half of your data, randomly
selected. Your model should still work – if not, you may have “over-fitted” the
model – that is, you tried to explain so much that it works only for that set of
data, nothing else.
Have a trusted expert go over your results. If there are any questions or
concerns you want to know that before you print or publish your findings.
5) Significance tests: You can compute many stats in Excel, such as cross-tabs
with the pivot table function. But each stat needs a significance test when
you’re working with a sample, which we often are. Significance tells us
whether the results we observed happened by chance and, therefore,
shouldn’t be trusted. While not impossible, it’s a pain to compute these in
Excel. That’s a plus for SPSS, so know which significance tests to run and
know how to interpret them, especially with accepted practices.
Significance testing becomes more problematical if you’re running cross-tabs
on a relatively small sample. If you’ve got 500 voters, and then look at white
females making more than $150,000, only a few of those 500 fit the profile.
Your significance can go quickly just because of the small sample size. Going
from categorical data to continuous, from cross-tabs to regression can help
with this problem.
6) Lurking variables: Remember that correlation is not causation. One way to
check this is to remember that your independent variable may correlate with
the dependent variable, but that correlation may change when you control for
another independent variable. Those other variables might be lurking out
there, a better explainer than your independent variable. The world is not a

2

simple place. (Example: Kids’ shoe sizes are positively correlated with their
ability to read. But that relationship disappears when you control for age.)
Tip: Making and using indexes is one way to present the complexity of the
world in a single number. Here are some of the reference numbers for finding
tip sheets on creating and using indexes in the IRE Resource Center: #945,
#2024, #1778
7) What is the base: This may not be as obvious as it sounds. We all know the
apples to oranges comparisons can be turned into apples to apples by
making sure the denominator (what we’re dividing by) is the same for both.
That’s what rates help us do.
But sometimes, knowing what the base is isn’t that simple. An example is
reporting on drug tests. A recent test showed that roughly 6 percent of
children on Prozac had suicidal thoughts, about 3 percent of those with the
placebo. So will Prozac make children twice as likely to have suicidal
thoughts? Not necessarily. The base may also mean looking at other studies,
some of which show suicidal thoughts in more than 6 percent of children. So
now what’s the base? And what do you say about Prozac?
8) Getting your results in the paper/on the air: Graphics are your friend. Lots of
numbers will weigh down a story like 70-pound cement shoes. Pick a few to
tell the story, save the rest for charts and graphics.
The nerd box is your friend, too. Explain how you did the analysis so fellow
nerds can find out more if they like – but it doesn’t have to bog down the main
bar.

3

