Julia Franco
Los Angeles Times
Editorial Library
213 237-3352
julia.franco@latimes.com

CAR Conference
March 17-20, 2005

Internet 101

Steps to finding what you need on the Internet
I. Where to start
A. Define what you’re looking for (data/ statistics, definitions, news, background
information, maps).
B. Decide if a search engine is the best tool to use. Maybe you need information that’s
not free, or a specific website that you might not find with a Google-type search.
C. Would it be faster or easier to use a print source, or make a phone call?
II. Using a search engine
A. Know how the various engines work – you’ll get different results from a
crawler, a directory, a hybrid, and a metasearch engine.
Search Engine Watch to read about the major search engines and how they work.
http://searchenginewatch.com/links/
B. Start by looking at Help. It will tell you whether the default for connecting search
terms is “and” or “or.” If it’s “and” you will get back results with all of the words in
them. If it’s “or” you will get results with either/ any of your search terms.
C. Simple searching techniques
Search Engine Watch to read about using search engine math, advanced strategies,
Boolean searching. http://searchenginewatch.com/facts/
Focus your search with search engine math (use plus sign for ‘and’ or
minus sign for ‘not’).
Use quotation marks if you are looking for a phrase.
Be specific. Use more than one term.
Put the most important keyword first.
Type in lower case to retrieve both lower and upper case versions. Using
upper case will usually return only an exact match.
Always look at the Advanced Search page. It will help guide your search
and eliminate some of your need to type.

D. More
Use Boolean logic ( and, or, not ) animal and (rescue OR shelter OR pound)
Use truncation and wildcards (usually an * ) contribut*
Combine phrases and keywords, using double quotes and plus or minus
signs. “campaign finance” + reform
Use field searching if allowed. Confine your search to the title, domain, or
URL. title: “disaster relief”
Bare Bones 101: A Basic Tutorial on Searching the Web one of the best tutorials for
using search engines. Divided into 10 lessons with subsequent chapters on various popular
search engines, this is quick to read and easy to follow. If you need a real quickie tutorial,
go directly to Chapter 7. http://www.sc.edu/beaufort/library/pages/bones/bones.shtml

III. Best and most popular search engines
A. Google – features
Phone directory
type a name, city, and state into search box to get phone number
type a phone number for reverse-lookup of listed numbers
links to map
remove yourself from the Google directory
Calculations and conversions
type 7+54= for addition
type 12*72 for multiplication
type 5 miles = ?km for conversion
type 1932 in roman numerals to convert
type 33% of 39.95 to calculate
Other tools
type define: churl for definitions of that word from various resources
type TRB (company stock symbol) for a link to current stock quotes provided by Yahoo
Finance
type 818 (a U.S. area code) for a map showing the general coverage area
Features
Google toolbar – installs in the browser window of a Windows pc.
Google deskbar – downloads a search box to the bottom of your screen. Search from
within any application – don’t have to have a browser open.
B. Yahoo – features
Called Yahoo Shortcuts (http://help.yahoo.com/help/us/ysearch/tips/tips-01.html )
Area codes, maps, zip codes, local phone listings, stock quotes, news, airport
information, flight tracker, exchange rates, package tracker, synonym finder, definitions,
encyclopedia, calculator, time zones, currency converter, more.

C. Vivisimo -- http://www.vivisimo.com will not only pull back matching responses
from major search engines but also automatically organize the pages into categories.
D. Dogpile -- http://www.dogpile.com Popular metasearch site owned by InfoSpace that
sends a search to a customizable list of search engines, directories and specialty search sites, then
displays results from each search engine individually.
E. HotBot -- http://www.hotbot.com HotBot provides easy access to the web's three
major crawler-based search engines: Yahoo, Google and Teoma. Unlike a meta search engine, it
cannot blend the results from all of these crawlers together. Nevertheless, it's a fast, easy way to
get different web search "opinions" in one place.

