HIGHLIGHTS OF THE N.C. PUBLIC RECORDS LAW
The N.C. Public Records Law applies to state, regional, county and local government records in North
Carolina. It applies to records of all the branches of government.
The thrust of the Public Records Law is that all government records are open to the public and the media
unless there's something in the law that says otherwise. In fact, the law says government records are "the
property of the people."
The Public Records Law defines public records as "all documents, papers, letters, maps, books,
photographs, films, sound recordings, magnetic or other tapes, electronic data-processing material,
regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance in connection
with the transaction of public business by any agency of North Carolina government or its subdivisions."
Reason for request. When requesting a record, a person cannot be required to disclose the purpose or
motive or the request. (However, don't be surprised if you're asked.)
Inspection and fees. A person's right of access to a public record includes the right to inspect the record
for free or to copy the record for a fee equal to the “actual cost” of reproducing the record. The fee may
“not include costs that would have been incurred by the public agency if a request to reproduce a public
record had not been made,” according to the statute. However, if a records search requires extensive use of
technological resources or clerical or supervisory assistance from the public agency, the agency can charge
a service fee. The fee must be reasonable and be based on the actual cost of the service provided.
Computerized records. A person has the right to choose the form in which he or she wants a copy of a
record as long as the public agency is capable of providing the record in that form. For example, a
requestor can ask for a printout of a record that is contained on a computer disk or hard drive, or the
requestor can ask for the record on a disk. However, the government agency is not required to create a
record that doesn't exist or to put records into an electronic database if that hasn't already been done.
The law is clear that agencies that use computerized databases cannot use record-keeping systems that
impede public access to its records. Furthermore, agencies must create indexes of their computer
databases, and those indexes are public records.
The N.C. Public Record Law also forbids government agencies from denying access to public records on
the grounds that confidential information is commingled with the requested nonconfidential information,
and the government bears the cost of separating the information in order to permit access.
Which records are public and which are not. There is no simple answer. The Public Records Law
makes access to records the rule and denial the exception. However, in addition to the exceptions noted in
the Public Records Law itself, there are dozens of state statutes and some federal statutes that declare
specific types of records to be confidential. They supersede the mandate of the Public Records Law that
government records be open to the public. This is some of what those statutes and the Public Records Law
say about access to some specific types of records:
1. A state statute specifically says that the following information about government employees and former
employees is a matter of public record: "name, age, date of original employment or appointment to the
State service, current position, title, current salary, date and amount of most recent increase or decrease in
salary, date of most recent promotion, demotion, transfer, suspension, separation, or other change in
position classification, and the office or station to which the employee is currently assigned." Other
information properly placed in a person's personnel file is confidential.
Applications for government jobs and the names of applicants are not public records.
2. The Public Records Law says that criminal investigation records are not public; however, the following
information is public:

• The time, date, location and nature of a violation or apparent violation of the law reported to a
law enforcement agency
• The name, sex, age, address, employment and alleged violation of law of a person arrested,
charged or indicted
• The circumstances surrounding an arrest, including the time and place of the arrest, whether the
arrest involved resistance, possession or use of weapons, or pursuit, and description of any items
seized in connection with the arrest
• The contents of 911 and any other emergency telephone calls except for contents of the calls
that reveal the name, address, telephone number or other information that identifies the caller,
victim or witness
• The name, sex, age and address of a complaining witness
Since 1993, the Public Records Law has applied to N.C. State Bureau of Investigation records the same
way it applies to other law enforcement records.
3. Minutes of official government meetings are public records, and government bodies must keep minutes
of legally closed meetings and make them available to the public when public inspection would no longer
"frustrate the purpose of a closed session."
4. Preliminary reports and working papers are public record under state law. This is not true under the
federal law (the Freedom of Information Act) that applies to federal government records.
5. Individual student education records are confidential under the federal Family Educational and Privacy
Rights Act of 1974, also known as the Buckley Amendment. Those records can be released to the media
or the public only with the permission of a parent or an adult student. Congress amended the law to make
it clear that records maintained by law enforcement units of educational institutions are not confidential
education records.
April 2005
Cathy Packer

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

919-962-4077 clpacker@email.unc.edu

