(Miller Internet Data Integrity Scale)
MIDIS is a way to determine if a web site has valid information that can be used
in news reports. The standards we apply to non-digital information are -or should be no different fiom the standards we apply to computerized information. The chart below
is a guide to help you determine if the information you get off the Internet can be trusted.
MIDIS sets a Hierarchy of Trust
Government Data is at the top of the list. Federal Government Web Sites all end
in the extension .gov (www.c
s that it is an official
government site. While you might
personally question the data, you are safe
in quoting from it ". ..according to the
National Transportation Safety Board. .."
All
States
and
ties have official web sites.
That data is also safe to use. Many
state web sites still use the
www.state.statecode.us
(www.state.tnus); however, state and
local governments are now eligible
to use the .gov extension. For
example, Maryland is now
www.maryland.gov.
While local government
sites
can be
reached
by
www.ci.cityname.statecode.us,
it's not always easy to get it right.
Chicago
should
www.ci.chicago.il.us, but is, in
fact, www.ci.chi.il.us. It's also
www .city0fchicago.org.
It's
oftentimes easier to look for the
city using one of the search
engines. When you get to an
official local site, it usually says
so on the Home page. When
in doubt, use the telephone and
check.
University studies get
the next spot on the trust
meter. Most studies by
recognized-experts in a field
are still reviewed by peers. Quoting fkom these studies are also a safe bet with
attribution. In addition to professors at universities, doctoral candidates often publish
ongoing research on the Net. Much of this is also peer reviewed.
A surprising number of post-graduate students are publishing their master's theses
on line. While the validity of the data might be in question, it usually contains links or
references to the supporting data. You might not want to quote directly fiom the study,
but it will give you kts of background in the subject if you check the bibliography.
Special Interest Groups publish lots of data on the Net. Even though we know that
these goups have a political agenda, it does not follow that the data are flawed. It's also
safe to use the data since it is attributable. "A study by Amnesty International claims
that.. ."
The fmal category is Other. This is informiGon published on someone's
homepage. Since anyone can put anything on a homepage it's a coin toss as to whether
the datahas any validity. The one saving grace of personalivanity hornepages is that

there is usually some information about the owner and a way to reach them, either by email or by phone.
Often the value of this information is to find sources. The person owning the
homepage may, in fact, be an expert in his field and can safely be used as a source.
Check them out and if they turn out okay, you've now got a source that is not one of the
"usual suspects." We're all looking for new sources of good information and good
quotes.
While we are all caught up in terms like cyberspace and virtual reality; the reality
is that real people not pixels created the information displayed on your computer screen.
Those people are no different fiom the one's we interview in person or over the phone.
There are good people who tell you the truth. There are bad people who tell you lies.
And there are the rest of us somewhere in the middle. Too much faith has been placed in
information generated by computers. Just because it's digital doesn't make it true.
Stephen C. Miller
The New York Times
updated March 2004

