"There is one and only one social responsibility of business - to use its resources and

engage in activities designed to increase its profits so long as it stays within the rules of
the game."
- Milton Friedman, economist

There are rules for how businesses should behave. There are laws they must follow, actions
they must report. By familiarizing yourself with corporate documents, you'll know whether
companies are playing by the rules.

Where to start
Visit the Securities a n d Exchange Commission's web site (www.sec.gov). It has the
same access to corporate filings that regulators and top analysts get.
The site offers a variety of links, but you'll want to familiarize yourself with EDGAR
the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system. This is the powerful search
engine that gives you access to the various reports filed by publicly traded companies. A good

-

tutorial for learning EDGAR is also on the website.
There are several other good sites for financial information. Some of these require a fee
or subscription to get access to some or all of the information. Among the best:

www .bloomber~.com
www.thestreet.com
htt~://finance.vahoo.com

www. 10-Kwizard.com

www.morningstar.com
At some of these you can register to have email sent to you when filings are made for a
particular company or industry.

SEC F i l i n ~ s
You've learned how to use EDGAR, and called up information on a company. Now the

real fun begins. There are dozens of forms publicly traded companies file. Some contain charts
that you can copy into a spreadsheet program such as Excel for analysis. Others contain detailed
statements about the company's financial health.

Some of the filings you are likely to use the most are noted here:
F o r m 10-K a n d 10-Q
The 10-K is the form publicly traded companies are required to file once a year. It
includes information on the last quarter of the year and the entire year. Every three months the

10-Q is submitted. Think of it as the quarterly version of the same report. But it's a slimmed
down version of the 10-K and doesn't contain the same level of detail.
Foreign companies file a form 20-F
Don't confuse the 10-K with the slick,, glossy, picture-filled annual report sent to
shareholders and distributed to the media. The 10-K lacks the pretty pictures, but it includes a
detailed snapshot of a company's finances, along with information about the performance and
other factors that can affect the annual operation.
Among the things to look for:
> Financial statements
> Management's discussion and analysis
> Disclosures of lawsuits, updates on on-going litigation and revelations on investigations
the company has been notified about.
> Ownership statements detailing who owns more than 5 percent of the company's stock
> Footnotes - Just because this information is in tiny print doesn't mean it is not important!

Form 8-K
This is the form companies file whenever "materially important" events occur. When
there is a change in management, an auditor resigns, a major court judgement is rendered or the
company is hit with a big fine by a regulatory agency, it will be disclosed in the 8-K.
Don't be surprised if you check 8-Ks but often find little news there. Some companies
file them every time they send out a news release with the same information. Checking them
regularly will eventually pay off with a story.
Schedule 13-D
When a person or group acquires more than 5 percent of a company's stock, they have 10

days to file a 13-D. If you want to know who is trying to take over a company (or who has taken
it over), the 13-D will provide information.
Form S-1
When a company is making an initial public offering (an IPO), this form is filed. It will
include a history of the company, financial statements, risk factors investors should be aware of
and the names of investors who have already put money into the company.
In short, this is a goldmine, and often the first glimpse inside a private company.

Companies that have been public less than three years also file S-1s. So, if there is a
second round of stock being offered. another S-1 will be filed.
Companies that have been public more than three years file an S-3. These detail the sale
of stock and other tradable securities.

Proxies (form DEP 14-A)
These detail issues that shareholders will vote on. Proxies include information on how
much top executives are paid, including stock options, and how much stock they hold.

You will also find detail about business ties between executives and shareholders, information
about board members, their compensation and terms of service, and information on who the
largest shareholders are.

Form 4
Filed by directors and officers, as well as shareholders who have more than 10 percent of

the company's stock. The Form 4 is filed every time they buy or sell stock. When employees are
exercising stock options or dumping a lot of shares, a Form 4 is often your first heads up.

Other documents
Don't neglect other public records that can show what's happening behind the scenes at a
business. Among those to check regularly:

Court records in both state and federal courts
With PACER, you can get an account to check the dockets of most U.S. District Courts.
Many court filings are also archived here, and are available to print for just 7 cents a page. See
httv:/lvacer.psc.uscourts.gov/ for information about setting up an account.
Pacer also allows you to check bankruptcy filings in different parts of the country. If an
out-of-town company with a local plant files bankruptcy, you want to keep an eye on the filings.
Also, if someone new to town is in the news, it often pays to check bankruptcy records in the
part of the country that person came from.
If you local courts are online, make it part of your weekly beat checks to see what
lawsuits have been filed involving companies you follow. If access to the courts is not online,
plan to stop by the courthouse regularly to make checks in person.

Political Action Committee spending and lobbyist reports
Many companies have their own PACs, they hire lobbyists and join trade organizations

that lobby. Be sure to check sites such as IRE'S Campaign Finance Information Center

(www.campaienfinance.~or www.opensecrets.org so you have an idea of where they are
spending money in Washington and whom they are trying to influence.

Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings
When someone borrows money and the lender wants certain legal protections, they can
file a UCC statement. In most states these are filed with the secretary of state's office. These
forms are often a good way to identify with whom a company has been doing business.

Prepared by:
Mark Skertic
Chicago Tribune
Mskertic @ tribune.co,m
(3 12) 222-4840

