Covering Money in the Statehouse
Eight Ways for the Busy Reporter to Stand Out
Holly A. Heyser, State Editor, The Orange County Register
Better Watchdog Workshop ▪ Sacramento, Calif. ▪ Feb. 19, 2005
Money is one of the most important subjects we cover in state government, and one of the
hardest to make interesting. But there are ways to stand out without spending two months on a
project. Here are some of my favorites from Virginia, Minnesota and California.
BUDGETS
● Hug a budget geek. OK, not quite, but you need to meet with budget staffers (particularly the
impartial analysts, but the partisan staffers too), humble yourself and say, “Please teach me how
this works.” If you stay off the record, they can not only tell you interesting places to look for
stories, but teach you enough that you can find them yourself. And they will be impressed that
you want to learn, because quite a few reporters don’t bother and just write budget stories based
on the latest press conference or spat. Boring!
● Take pity on the reader. We all know it's important to write about the budget, but the honest
truth is that budget stories can be really dry, or totally focused on the insider debate of the day.
Tackle it a piece at a time, use lots of graphics to make it easy to understand and be utterly
willing to turn the traditional story format on its head. Tell readers what the issue is, why it
matters, what leaders are doing about it and what obstacles they’ll face. Illustrate it with pie
charts, bar charts and even maps that show where your state ranks.
One simple explainer like this can help your readers understand an important topic better
than 10 news stories that focus on the latest press conference. (Attached: “State seeks more bang
for its buck,” The Orange County Register, Feb. 17, 2005)
● Be well adjusted. As long as populations increase and prices inflate, it’s meaningless to point
out that we’re spending or taxing more than ever before. Break out your handy spreadsheet and
make the numbers relevant: Adjust figures for population to get a per capita amount, using data
from the Census at www.census.gov (formula: =amount/population). Now go crazy and adjust it
for inflation so everything is expressed in current dollars – all you need is Consumer Price Index
data that’s online at www.bls.gov (formula: =current CPI/old CPI)*old dollar amount). Here’s
how these two simple adjustments change the picture of revenue growth in California between
2000 and 2004:
Year

2000

2004

Change

Population

34,002,467

35,893,799

CPI (1984=100)

172

188

State revenues (in thousands)

71,427,698

77,250,907

8.2%

State revenues per person

2,101

2,152

2.5%

State revenues per person in 2004 dollars

2,289

2,152

-6.0%

● Slice the pie differently. In a Minnesota budget debate, a former governor pointed out that tax
revenues as a percent of income had dropped steadily over the years, suggesting there was room
for a little growth there. Plugging the same numbers into a spreadsheet, adding population
figures and adjusting for population and inflation painted a different picture: Revenues per
person were generally up. (Attached: “Minnesota’s budget,” St. Paul Pioneer Press, Feb. 18,
2003)
CAMPAIGN FINANCE
● Use charts. PLEASE! There is nothing more likely to make a reader turn to the comics than a
long list of numbers. If you find yourself repeating the same sentence structure over and over
again (“Smith raised $100 and spent $20; Rodriguez raised $153 and spent $29), that’s a good
sign you need to put it in a chart. Make it easy for readers to understand, and save your precious
story space for the good stuff that tells readers what the hell this means.
● Don’t obsess on the usual. Totals raised, totals spent, who’s giving and what they’re getting
for it are the obvious stories. But money tells many stories. Example: Look at the broad base of
contributors and whom they’re giving to over time. If you find that traditional Republican
contributors are withholding money from the latest nominee, that can tell you something about
the candidate’s viability. (Attached: “Hager backers reluctant to donate to Earley,” The
(Norfolk, Va.) Virginian-Pilot, Oct. 24, 2001)
● Look at spending. In California, there have been stories recently about lawmakers paying
their spouses and other close family members hefty salaries to work on their campaigns. Must be
nice, eh? And in Virginia, a group of college students decided to analyze campaign spending
data to see what they could find. The results? “Some legislators used their campaign accounts to
hire their own businesses, pay auto-license fees and buy computers and expensive furniture that
they can use when they are out of office,” students wrote. The complete package is online at
http://www.people.vcu.edu/~jcsouth/on-the-lege/.
● P.S. Don’t forget the gifts. You can analyze gift data just like cash donations. Consider this
interesting calculation in a story about gifts doled out to Virginia lawmakers in 2004:
“Sen. Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, R-Fairfax, said the $1.4 billion in tax increases being
considered by the legislature fueled the freebie frenzy. …Supporters of the tax hikes
fared better than opponents. On average, proponents collected $2,418 in gifts,
compared with $1,472 for anti-taxers.”
-- “Freebie Frenzy,” The (Norfolk, Va.) Virginian-Pilot, Feb.4, 2005

