Uncovering Bad Bridges
Mark Greenblatt
Investigative Reporter
KHOU-TV
713-284-1086
mgreenblatt@khou.com

2005 IRE/NICAR CAR Conference
Hollywood, California
March 17-20, 2005

Did you know that more than one out of every ten bridges in America is considered
“structurally deficient” by national standards?

WHAT TO LOOK FOR:
*Structurally Deficient Bridges- significant damage to the structure of the bridge. The
bridge can no longer carry the load it was originally designed to carry. In the National
Bridge Inventory, you’ll find this category in the “STATUS” field.
*Functionally obsolete bridges
*Bridges with a rating of 4 or less on their deck, superstructure, substructure, or other
items. These items have reached a point of serious deterioration.
*Scour Critical Bridges- these bridges are highly susceptible to a washout because of
serious erosion problems that you often CANNOT see from above water.
HOW OLD IS TOO OLD? Most bridges in your area have a lifespan of about 50
years. Most NEW bridges built within the last 10 years have a longer lifespan- because
of newer technological advances. Look for bridges that are more than 50, AND with
structural or scour problems.
DIFFERENT STORIES FOR DIFFERENT TIMES
THE WIDESPREAD STORY- Use the National Bridge Inventory to identify dozens
if not hundreds of problem bridges in your area. Be careful not to fall into the trap of
trying to find “the ten worst bridges” in an area. There is no data in the NBI that can
help you find that accurately. Instead, focus on bridges that have either high traffic
volume or show significant structural or scour damage. Leave the subjective rankings out
of your story, and just present the fact of the damage.
THE SCOUR STORY: Scour is the word engineers use to describe the erosion that
happens at the base of bridges that are over a waterway. Scour is a serious problem that
leads to sudden, catastrophic collapses and deaths. Every state in the union is required
to inspect bridges for scour problems. Many have identified dozens of scour critical
bridges, but do not have the money to fix them. Find out where these bridges are in your
area, and tell your viewers. You’ll be surprised at how many are right around the corner.
THE BREAKING NEWS STORY- In the event of a bridge collapse in your area, use
the data to get deep details about the bridge’s history into your story or on the air

immediately. You don’t have to wait for a PIO to access records that might take a day or
so- or that might reveal neglect on the part of the Dept. of Transportation.
THE IN-DEPTH BREAKING NEWS STORY- If one OLD bridge collapses in your
area, use the data you keep on hand to tell your audience about how many other bridges
are also 50 years old, or how many other well-traveled bridges have structural or scour
problems.
THE INDIVIDUAL BRIDGE STORY - Use the data as a tipsheet to lead you to a
high-profile bridge that might be in danger. Look for bridges on causeways, interstates,
or along major routes. Look for historic bridges that people identify with emotionally in
your community. Sometimes, the data may reveal a number of bad bridges in your area.
However, you DON’T have to focus on them all at once. Sometimes, you can have more
impact and get more attention by doing one very strong in-depth story about a high
profile bridge. THEN, do a follow-up the next day about the other bridges. You can get
your entire community talking about your story if they identify with one bridge. Then,
once you have their attention, hit them with your other findings.

SEVEN STEPS TO A MEMORABLE BRIDGE INVESTIGATION WITH
IMPACT
1) Get the Data, look for problems as identified above.
2) Narrow your story
3) Never rely just on the data (except in breaking news). Go to the hard
documents to find more depth.
4) File public records request to inspect all memos, structural inspections, scour
inspections, pictures, emails, maintenance logs, and maintenance
recommendations for each of your most problematic bridges. This is where
you will find a gold mine of information- often where engineers are writing
back and forth with their concerns. THIS is where you will find proof of
wrongdoing or serious neglect.
5) Tap into your creativity- Approach your graphics department early.
6) Put it on the web. If you have a lot of data, let your audience see for
themselves how it affects their neighborhood.
7) Do Follow-ups, and keep the story alive

