Navigating the Paper Trail
Brent Walth, The Oregonian, 503-294-5072
brentwalth@news.oregonian.com
¶

“THERE'S ALWAYS A RECORD.” You can't possibly know all of the public records that might
be available to you. So at every turn, tell yourself, “There's always a record.” Then ask,
“What might it be? Why would the record be created? Who might have it?”
LEARN HOW THINGS WORK. When you understand how agencies work, you can learn what
kind of a paper trail gets created. Ask about what kind of documents get generated, what
certain forms are called, and how these records are stored.
THE RIPPLE EFFECT. One document begets another: A letter gets answered and then copied
to others; a final report had early drafts; e-mails proliferate. Often records are sent to
other agencies, so follow the trail there.
SEE THE DOCUMENTS DECISION MAKERS SEE. Don't settle for summaries and press
releases. If you're covering a council hearing, ask to see the documents in front of the
people casting votes. If you're covering spending, get the budget itself. And so on.
SEE WHAT OTHER PEOPLE WANT TO SEE. Federal agencies (and some state agencies) keep
a FOIA log that lists other people's FOIA requests and their outcomes. Check it regularly.
THINK ABOUT RECORDS AS PUZZLE PIECES. Rarely does a single document prove to be a
"smoking gun." You often need many documents before the picture starts to emerge.
MAKE IT THEIR IDEA TO SHARE. Look for opportunities to coax records from sources
informally. It can often save time and create less friction, leaving it easier to get more
records the next time you ask.
NEVER LEAVE EMPTY-HANDED. During interviews, ask your subject to back up assertions
with documents. If someone mentioned a report or a letter, ask to see it. The more you
weave requests for records into your interviews, the more natural it will seem, and
sources will grow accustomed to your requests.
FOIA EARLY, FOIA OFTEN. If you run up against the slightest bit of resistance, don't hesitate
to file a public records request. Make it specific. Call ahead to find out who should get it
and to let them know it’s coming. Call back to make sure they’ve got it, ask when you can
expect a response, and then periodically to nudge them along.
BE FIRM. Agency officials may try to bluff you or discourage you or try to bargain with you.
Listen to them, take what they offer, but do not give in over what you really want.
SECRECY IS RELATIVE. If you run into a roadblock, think about who else might have the
record you want and who may have an incentive to share it.
"DO YOU HAVE THIS ON A COMPUTER?" Computer files, databases and spreadsheets can be
valuable. And when asking for documents, always include e-mails as part of your request.

Where to go for help
The U.S. Attorney General’s official web site explaining the federal Freedom of
Information Act (http://www.usdoj.gov/04foia) provides an overview of the law, a list
of FOIA contacts at federal agencies, a FOIA reference guide and other resources.
The Oregon Department of Justice publishes the Attorney General’s Public Records
and Meetings Manual, which contains the state law, lists of exemptions, and a
history of attorney general and trial court rulings regarding disclosure of public
records. You can order the latest edition from the Oregon DOJ, 1162 Court Street
NE Salem, OR 97301-4096, (503) 378-6002.
The Reporter’s Committee for Freedom of the Press (http://www.rcfp.org) provides
advice on making Freedom of Information Act requests, filing appeals, and tracking
the latest case law.
Investigative Reporters and Editors (IRE) is the only organization dedicated to
teaching journalists enterprise techniques. The organization’s web site (www.ire.org)
has a trove of tip sheets and stories showing you how other reporters have solved
their reporting problems. The organization offers books, too. The Reporter’s
Handbook is the key resource.

Examples of records you might want to check out
The law, rules and regulations governing an agency.
Rule-making process.
Audits.
U.S. General Accounting Office
Inspectors General.
Annual reports.
Legislative oversight hearings, reports and investigations.
The courthouse. (Complaints, motions, exhibits, etc.)
Billings for legal fees.
Administrative hearings and appeals.
Advocacy group files.
Agency press releases and clippings files.
Resumes and official biographies.
County recordings. (Property transfers, liens, loans, etc.)
Legislative histories/committee hearings and minutes.
Telephone records and desk calendars.
Public officials’ financial disclosure reports.
Archives.
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings.
Charitable trust filings.
Campaign contributions and expenditures reports.
Agency telephone directories (ask for old ones to see who’s left recently.)
Payroll records.
Agency and union newsletters.
Permits and license files.
Penalties and fines.
Advisory boards.
Industry newsletters.
Property tax records.
Tax appeals boards.
Corporation and business licenses.
Securities and Exchange Commission (public company disclosure reports)
Agency budgets and financial statements.
Expenses accounts and perks.
Travel accounts.
Credit card records.
Expense sheets and receipts.
Contracts, leases and purchasing.
Zoning and land-use decisions.

Sample Oregon Public Records law request
Name of FOIA officer
Agency
Address
Date
Dear XXXXX,
I am a reporter for YOUR NEWS AGENCY NAME HERE. Under the Oregon
Public Records law, O.R.S. 192, I am seeking the following records in the custody of
your agency:
[Here, be specific as you can about what you want.]
I ask to view these records and reserve my right to obtain copies. If for any
reason these records are not released, I ask that your agency cite specific exemptions
under Oregon law that you believe justify the withholding of the records.
I look forward to a prompt response and opportunity to view these records.
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call.
Sincerely,
YOUR NAME

Sample Federal Freedom of Information Act request
Name of FOIA officer
Agency
Address
Date
Dear XXXXX,
I am a reporter for YOUR NEWS AGENCY NAME HERE. Under the federal
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. Section 552 (FOIA), I am seeking the following
records in the custody of your agency:
[Here, be specific as you can about what you want.]
The FOIA at Section (4)(A)(iii) provides that "Documents shall be furnished
without any charge or at a charge reduced below the fees established under clause
(ii) if disclosure of the information is in the public interest because it is likely to
contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the
government and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester."
This request fits the above definition of the public interest. This request is
made for news-gathering purposes. The documents will assist in informing citizens
about actions and decision-making of a federal agency. If a fee waiver is denied in
whole or in part, the processing of this request should move forward without delay. I
ask to be notified if the costs for this request exceed $XXX.
I look forward to your decision to comply with this request within the 20-day
deadline called for in the FOIA. If you have questions about the nature or scope of
this request, please do not hesitate to call.
Sincerely,
YOUR NAME

