Marina Walker Guevara
IRE Conference
Denver 2005
marina@ire.org
Digging up dirt: Investigating American companies’ environmental impacts in Latin America
On June 2, 2000, a Newmont Co. truck spilled liquid mercury on a Peruvian highway and
contaminated three towns. Dozens of residents, who presented symptoms such as headaches,
diminished vision and rash, had to be hospitalized for mercury poisoning. Five years later, 1,100
peasants are heading for a lawsuit in Denver, Co., which could involve millions of dollars in
damages and establish an important precedent: American companies can be held liable in the
United States for environmental contamination committed outside the country.
On March 24, 2005, also in Peru, the release of a lead study performed among children of La
Oroya, where the U.S. firm Doe Run Co. runs a lead smelter, showed stunning results: 99.9
percent of the tested children are intoxicated with lead at levels three times higher than the
standards considered acceptable in the United States. However, the Peruvian government recently
passed a law that would allow Doe Run to delay its environmental commitments in the town four
years passed the contracted deadline of 2007.
Newmont Co., based in Colorado, is the world’s largest gold mining firm.
Doe Run Co., based in Missouri, is North America’s largest producer of lead.
These are just two examples of a much larger, and troubling, trend: American companies that
extract natural resources are increasingly expanding their operations to Latin America, where
foriegn investments are desperately needed and government controls are weak. Stories such as the
ones described above suggest that the watchdog role of journalism shouldn’t stop at the U.S.
borders. It needs to reach the Peruvian Andes and the Bolivian forests, among other places, where
powerful companies are conducting business without having to worry about the controls of the
Environmental Protection Agency. These are places that are pleading for jobs, any jobs. Places
that are seldom covered by American reporters yet the stories to be told there are directly relevant
to American readers.
These are a few tips and resources on investigating American companies that extract natural
resources south of the Rio Grande:
Story ideas: start online. Check the Web sites of the major environmental organizations, such as
the Inter American Association of Environmental Defense http://www.aida-americas.org/aida.php
and Oxfam America http://www.oxfam.org/eng/. These NGOs run programs and, in some cases,
have offices in several Latin American countries. They post important documentation online,
such as environmental audits or health studies on the cases they oversee. The country fact sheets
in Yahoo Finance www.yahoo.com/ifc are also useful resources. A section of them is devoted to
the environment and they provide information broken down by country on key current
environmental issues, major international agreements, major environmental organizations and
regulations. Finally, check the Web sites of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
www.cdc.gov (look for the Office of Global Health and the National Center for Environmental
Health) and the U.S. Agency for International Development www.usaid.gov, which fund
international projects.

Financial disclosures include abroad operations. Publicly traded companies have to file 10-Q
and 10-K forms with the Securities and Exchange Commission www.sec.gov for their abroad
operations. They disclose everything from production levels to environmental lawsuits. Follow
the money: watch out for sales payments and other distributions done to parent companies in the
United States. Companies might be draining cash from their subsidiaries instead of investing
those resources on their environmental obligations abroad.
Interview EPA officials for context and standards. EPA officials and local government
officials can go over the obscure environmental lingo with you and help you compare U.S.
environmental standards with other countries’ standards.
Use local FOI laws. Several Latin American countries such as Mexico, Panama and Peru have
passed their own information-access laws, and others such as Argentina and Brazil are crafting
theirs. Mexico has a Web site from the Adminstración de Sistema de Solicitudes de Información
http://informacionpublica.gob.mx/ that explains how to use the FOI law and allows you to file
online requests. Another useful site is the Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of
Expression at the Organization of American States http://www.cidh.org/relatoria. The Freedom of
Information Center at the University of Missouri http://foi.missouri.edu features a report about
FOI laws in Latin America broken down by country.
International NGOs can be good bridges. NGOs such as Oxfam America or Transparency
International usually have good relationships with Latin American government officials since
they partner with them on projects. These NGOs can help you arrange interviews with
government officials, something that shouldn’t be taken for granted in Latin America.
Look for international audits. Many companies operating in foreign countries are audited by
international firms at the request of local governments. If the company or the government don’t
give you the documents, the auditing firm might. A 2003 audit performed by Golder Associates
alerted the Peruvian government about the deterioration of air quality in La Oroya, where the
Missouri-based Doe Run Co. operates a smelter.
Find a door opener. Beyond documents and numbers, environmental reporting is about people
and communities and how they are affected by damages to the ecosystem. In many cases, the
affected neighbors trust neither the company nor the environmentalists, so it’s wise to find a door
opener, someone who is perceived by locals as a neutral party. Sometimes that person might be a
priest or a nurse. Start developing a relationship with him/her before you travel abroad.
Local officials trust foreign reporters. Once you get them to agree to be interviewed, Latin
American government officials tend to be more open and forthcoming with foreign reporters than
they are with those who cover them every day. Maybe they respect international journalists more
or maybe they don’t perceive them as an immediate threat. Also, look for resigning and retired
government officials; they might be good ‘resentful’ sources.
Avoid the U.S. parent company’s PR officials. They usually know little about the subsidiaries
and will take a long time to get back to you with the excuse that they have to check with their
people in Bolivia or in Mexico. It’s better to contact the subsidiary directly.
Be alert to revolving doors. It’s very common that Latin American government officials end up
being hired by foreign corporations that start businesses in their countries. In their new jobs, they
become prolific lobbyists with the government for their corporate employers. Doe Run’s vice
president of environmental affairs is a former Peruvian director of environmental affairs.

