Watchdog Reporting
Brent Walth, The Oregonian, 503-294-5072
brentwalth@news.oregonian.com

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 2

¶

The Watchdog Reporter’s Job
watchdog, n. A dog kept to guard against trespassers and thieves.
-- Webster's Third New International Dictionary

¶
¶
¶
¶
¶

Know what’s at risk: Fairness, equal access, justice, safety and the
public treasury.
Keep an eye on the important players. The rich, the powerful, the
famous.
Protect your territory. Let sources know you intend to cover your
beat like you own it, and they will respond to you.
Expect trouble. A watchdog reporter must think about what could go
wrong, what has gone wrong in the past, and what – if it did go wrong
– could have the biggest impact.
Challenge the conventional wisdom. Be suspicious when you hear
people repeating the same “truth.” Ask how they know it and what it
would mean if they were wrong.
Pace yourself. You can't do everything all at once. Pacing is key.
Keep a list of what’s important to check. Cover a little bit of ground at
a time, until you've done it all, and then go over it again and again.
Be patient. Don't be discouraged when this all leads to nothing the
first time, or the third, or the tenth. Eventually it will pay off.

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 3

Questions That Lead Watchdog Reporters to Stories
The Mission: What's the organization supposed to be doing, anyway?
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]

What authority does the law give the organization?
What does the organization's charter say?
How does the organization measure its success?
How do people outside the organization measure it?
Who is looking at the organization's performance?
Who are the people most likely to know when things go wrong?

The People: Who's is charge? Who is really in charge? And who
on the inside will talk?

[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]

Who is accountable for the organization's actions?
Who are the most influential people, inside and outside the organization?
What do these influential people want?
What do we really know about their backgrounds?
Do they have conflicts of interest?
Who helped elect -- or install -- people in positions of power?
What do people in the organization say to one another?
What do disgruntled people say about the organization?

The Register of Troubles: How does the organization keep
track of problems?

[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]

How do regulatory agencies keep track of wrongdoers?
What’s at risk if the organization fails in its job?
How does it seek out wrongdoers?
How does it document problems that it finds?
How does it decide which wrongdoers will be punished?
What kind of punishment do wrongdoers receive?

The Money: How does the organization collect and spend money?
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]

Who watches the money?
Have there been changes in spending patterns?
Have there been big cost overruns or unexpected shortfalls?
What are the biggest spending projects of the organization?
Are taxes levied equitably?
Does the organization enrich some people but not others?

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 4

The Mission
What's the organization supposed to be doing, anyway?

THE RULE BOOK: An organization is a group of people following
rules and pursuing shared goals. The “rules” may be laws that an agency is
supposed to enforce or a company is supposed to follow. Often, an organization
has a mission statement that describes the goals.
The law. Find the laws or ordinances (or, in some cases, the state
constitution or local charter) that grants the agency its power and
sets limits on its authority. Ask about recent law changes and what
might have been behind them.
Administrative rules. These tell officials how to carry out the law.
These rules often are written with the input of the interests most affected by
them. Look for proposed changes and how recent changes were made.
Guidance and policies. In addition to laws and rules, organizations
may also have internal policies regarding procedures and conduct.

THE YARD STICK: Every organization needs to know how it's
doing. Some ask the question; others don't. Either way, you need to find a way
to measure the success of an organization. Often, the organization has it own
yardstick.
Audits. Audits are the most commonly used yardstick and come in
all kinds: financial audits, performance audits, investigative audits.
In dealing with public audits, ask for all the appendices, supporting
documents and working papers. Audits go through drafts and are sometimes
watered down. Ask for the early drafts, and all the correspondence and memos
that went back and forth between auditors and the audit’s subjects. Talk to the
auditors who did the work; they may tell you about compelling findings that
never made it into the audit.
For federal agencies, check with the U.S. General Accounting Office, an
arm of Congress, and the agency’s Office of Inspector General.
With all auditing agencies, ask for the work plan. This is the schedule of
planned audits, sometimes as much as a year in advance. Get audit plans for
past years, too. These plans can point to audits that you may not know about,
or audits that were abandoned or buried because they proved embarrassing to
the agency. An agency’s contract with auditing firms can also give you a sense
of what the firms have been hired to examine.
Public reports. Some organizations publish annual reports to keep the
public informed. Others are required to report their work and progress. These
reports often contain benchmarks or goals for the organization, which can tell
you if the organization is living up to its own expectations. (These benchmarks
may be in other documents, so be sure to ask if they exist.)
Legislative oversight. Public agencies may answer to a commission,
legislature or Congress, and provide regular reports about their work. Many
agencies appear before oversight committees, which can be as susceptible to

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 5

political pressure as the agencies themselves. Get the testimony, reports and
even the tapes or transcripts of the hearings.
State and federal oversight. Often, state agencies carry out federal
programs (Medicaid, environmental enforcement, and so on). Or local
governments carry out state and federal programs (county health departments,
for example).
When they do, money is often involved: One agency is paying another to
carry out the work. Ask the oversight agency how the local or state agency is
doing. Ask for audits, correspondence, reports, etc. Conversely, if you run
across problems in the local or state agency, check to see if the oversight
agency is performing the proper watchdog role itself.

THE DOGHOUSE: Organizations often find themselves in trouble.
How can you find out what that trouble is?
The courthouse. The courthouse can provide a roadmap to the
organizations' challenges, troubles and missteps. See if there's a
pattern to the complaints. Check the court house index, read the
complaint and all the files, and look at any exhibits. Talk to the people involved
in the case, including lawyers, to learn the story behind the files.
Legal fees. Is a public agency spending more than usual on lawyers, or
a lot on a particular case? If the lawyer works for the agency or the attorney
general’s office, ask to see time sheets. If the agency is represented by outside
counsel, ask for the contract between the agency and the law firm, and the bills
sent by the firm.
Administrative hearings and appeals. Many public agencies require
the disgruntled to first pursue their case through routes other than the courts.
Learn the process people must follow when airing their complaints.

OTHER WATCHDOGS: Who else is paying close attention?
Maybe it's the industry the organization regulates. Maybe it's an
advocacy group. Maybe it's a group of citizens or neighbors. Sure, they have
agendas, but take that into account as you listen to groups from all sides tell
you what they know about problems with your organization.

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 6

The People
Who's is charge? Who is really in charge?
And who on the inside will talk?
BACKGROUNDING: Pay close attention to the leaders. Who are
they? Who are their friends, families, allies, enemies, business partners? Are
there “shadow” leaders? Does a chief of staff or executive director or city
manager really call the shots? Does the county commission chairman have a
weekly breakfast with his political supporters? Is he hunting buddies with
contractors? Include these "shadow" leaders in your background checks.
Resumes. Just who do these people say they are? Public
officials often have pre-packaged resumes and biographical sketches
for the asking. Elected officials often lay out their history in voter
pamphlet statements. People also like to talk about their background to
reporters. Check for profiles written about your subject in this or other
newspapers; some officials will even have a clip file where they save stories
about themselves. Ask to see it.
Double-check everything that purports to give this person credibility:
resumes, profiles in other publications, press releases, voter pamphlet
statements, and so on. Pay close attention to schools attended, degrees claimed,
military record, awards received and jobs held. Even if the record checks out,
you will have learned a great deal about your subject.
Recordings. Each county has a place where deeds, mortgages, liens
and other valuable documents are put on record. You can trace the history of a
property; see who's buying or selling real estate; find out if someone hasn't paid
her taxes; or discover undisclosed business arrangements.
Court files. In county and federal courthouses, look up every case
involving or affecting your subject and his or her businesses. Ask for all the
exhibits, and call all of the parties, lawyers and witnesses. Ask if depositions
are available. Also check for criminal records with local jails, state corrections
department and the U.S. Bureau of Prisons.
Legislative records. For lawmakers or commissioners, examine bills
or ordinances introduced or co-sponsored, speeches, voting records and
testimony. For state and local politicians, use audio tapes or archives.
Telephone records and schedules. This may make officials anxious,
but you can get these records to trace the activities of public employees.
ETHICS & CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: What do you know
about the key players in your organization or the people who do business with
it? Are there questions about conflicts of interest that have gone unasked? Are
the organization's leaders paying their taxes? Have they been sued? Have some
people won special treatment or contracts from your organization?
Financial disclosure reports. At the state or local ethics
office, obtain the disclosure reports for every key player who falls
under your beat. Using your background checks above, verify the
reports for accuracy.
Campaign money. That is, how much, who gives it, and how it's spent.
See when people gave campaign cash and how the timing might line up with

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 7

the official's actions. See who loans money or donates goods and services. See
who does any of these things in the off-election years. See how the official
spends the campaign money: Is it on campaign operations, or on himself, his
family or his lawyer? Most of all, look for the big names - the people who give a
lot and the companies that donate (find out who's behind them). Ask them why
they gave money and how they were approached for donations.

IN THE TRENCHES: You need people to take you inside and show
you around, help you understand the organization’s culture, figure out the
pecking order and find out how things really work inside. What are people
talking about? What has them concerned? What prevents them from doing the
best job they can? You might check out the "outside" office. It might be a
Starbucks or a local bar: the place where employees tend to hang out and talk
more openly about what's really going on.
Directories. A phone directory, organizational chart, roster
or any document that tells you who works there and the
organization’s pecking order. Compare out-of-date directories to find
out who has recently left.
Payroll records. Sometimes, the highest ranking official is not the
highest paid. Ask for records of actual pay, not just salary, so you don't
overlook overtime and bonuses.
Newsletters. Many organizations have ways of communicating
internally. Find out how the organization communicates with its employees:
Maybe it's with a newsletter, weekly memos or notices posted on bulletin
boards.
WHISTLEBLOWERS & SQUEAKY WHEELS: Every
organization has its grumblers and whiners. These people, however, can often
bring sincere concerns to light.
Grievances and workplace complaints. Many public agencies
receive and investigate workplace complaints, among them the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the U.S. Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, and the state agency that enforces
labor laws.
Unions and employee associations can be helpful. So can advocacy
groups, who often have insiders tipping them off to problems with an
organization
State and federal law prohibit employers from retaliating against
employees who point out problems in the workplace. The Government
Accountability Project is a private non-profit organization based in
Washington, D.C., that represents federal whistleblowers.

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 8

The Register of Troubles
How does the organization keep track of problems?
Many public agencies have a regulatory role. They might be responsible
for public health and safety, or for keeping an eye on business practices, or for
regulating professionals, such as lawyers and doctors. Even general purpose
agencies, such as city and county governments, act as regulators. Or at least
they're supposed to. A watchdog needs to find out how well the regulatory
agencies are doing the job.
Permits and license files. If you’re looking at someone or
something that is regulated, get the permit or license file, which can
be filled with letters, memos, complaints and other leads. If you’re
looking at the regulating agency in general, pull a series of files just to see how
the system works. Ask for a list of permits and licenses -- they’re often on a
computer database and easy for the agency to provide, and for you to search.
Disclosure files. Sometimes an organization is required to make
routine disclosures, such as annual financial reports. The regulating agency is
sometimes required to do something with these disclosures, but they often sit
and collect dust, unless you look at them. Check the Rule Book to find out what
kinds of disclosures are required.
Inspection and investigation records. The Register of Troubles
often begins with a list of enforcement actions or investigations. Ask for the list
of inspections and investigations, and then all documents related to the cases
that catch your attention. Study the actions for patterns. Agencies often look
into problems but don’t always take the enforcement actions they should.
Penalties and fines. Check the Rule Book to see the range of penalties
the agency can levy – citations, fines, court injunctions, etc. – and get a list of
the actions the agency has taken. See if a pattern emerges. Has the agency
pinpointed a real problem out there? Is it picking off just the easy cases? Are
the influential treated differently?
The courthouse. An agency’s diligence may have prompted it to go to
court to enforce the law. Or the target of a regulatory action may decide to go to
court to fight back against the agency. Either way, make the court index a
routine stop.
Advisory boards. Regulatory agencies often work hand in glove with
the industries they are watching. Advisory board and panels are often formed
to “suggest” better ways to oversee an industry. The panels are often filled with
people from that very industry. Check minutes, hearings, reports and
correspondence to see what the industry people are concerned about, and watch
for cases in which they alter the way the regulatory agency operates. Even
better, see if the members of the advisory board (or their companies, partners,
family members, etc.) have ever faced regulatory actions.
Industry newsletters. Any time you have members of an industry
talking to one another, you get a special window into what’s really going on.
Newsletters, trade publications and other journals often focus on the
regulatory actions of government and can reveal weaknesses in the system – or
even regulatory success stories.

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 9

The Money
How does the organization collect and spend money?
THE MONEY COMES IN. . . .
Taxes. Not all tax records are public, but many are. You can use
property tax records to see who might be getting a break. State and
local agencies keep track of the kinds of people who pay taxes: Is the
tax system less progressive than it was before? Have the rules changed to exempt
certain classes of people or business from paying taxes?
Appeals boards. Almost every agency has a way for people who don’t
like their taxes to make a case. It could be Tax Court, an equalization board, or
some other administrative hearing. Find out what it takes to appeal a tax case,
who has been winning (and why) and if the process is a fair one.
Debt collection. People owe agencies money for many reasons: back
taxes, fines and penalties, fees, etc. Take a look at who owes money and how
diligent the agency is in collecting.

. . . . AND THE MONEY GOES OUT
The budget and financial statements. A budget tells you what an
organization plans to spend; a financial statement tells you what was spent.
With budgets, ask for all of the "decision documents" -- the records given to the
people who run the agency. When seek these documents, get as much
information as you can in computer format.
Some things to watch for:
Look at percentage changes in programs and spending from one year
to the next.
Go beyond the overall numbers to look for shifts with departments. A
commissioner’s budget may look stable, for example, but within it salaries
may be up.
Ask how many funded positions are actually filled. If no one is holding
the job, where is the money going?
The accounting office. In theory, every dollar is tracked as it passes
through a public agency. And the agency’s accountants – and their records –
can be a big help to you.
Money is tracked through accounts. Get a list of all the accounts in
your agency, including their titles (“Travel,” for example) and account
numbers, and then ask for printouts (or in data format for your computer) of
the account activity. Look for “special” accounts that are used for things such
as meals, purchasing and other miscellaneous spending.
Ask about overruns and transfers. Big account overruns and
transfers are warning signs. Ask for a record of sizable account transfers or
accounts that are – or have been – in the red.

Watchdog Reporting <> Page 10

Get a list of every credit card or debit card issued within by agency
and ask for a printout of every bill. Some credit card companies now provide
year-end reports with a full accounting of where the card was used and how
much was charged. The agency’s Rule Book should tell you how and why the
credit cards can be used.
Expense sheets and receipts are where officials provide the proof
their spending was justified. Check it out. Again the agency’s rules should
dictate how reimbursements are supposed to work.
Contracts. Contracts are one of the fastest ways an agency can get
work done – or have a public official reward a friend.
Get a list. Contracts are usually kept on a computerized list
somewhere, as are records of payments. Look for patterns – who gets the most
contracts, who gets the most money, who’s giving them out.
Check the Rule Book. See how and when a contract must be sent
out to bid. Look for contracts that are exempt from bidding and see if someone
might be getting multiple contracts to avoid bidding rules.
Get the contract, the bid information and everything in the file.
What are people being hired for? Is it measurable? Is it even necessary? If the
contract was exempt from bidding, someone should have made an official
determination that it was exempt.
Know the players. For key contractors, be sure you find out who
runs the company, who owns it, who benefits, and what connections these
people might have to your agency’s officials.
Talk to the losers. That is, the people who lost bids for contracts to
see what they might say about how the agency’s bidding works. For example,
do they think the bid was written so that a particular contractor would win?
See if the contract changed. Ask for a list of amendments or “change
orders,” which almost always mean more money for the contractor.
Check the contractor’s track record. Is your agency hiring people
with shady reputations or checkered pasts?
Expenses and perks. Travel. An official car. A credit card. An expense
account. What are public officials doing with these perks?
Tax breaks. A public agency that wants to encourage a certain kind of
activity might do so by giving people tax breaks. Find out who’s taken
advantage of the breaks (again, looking for patterns), whether they have met
all the standards, and if the breaks are actually producing the intended result.
Procurement. Agencies need stuff: paper, pencils, furniture, cars, and
so on. They also sign leases and other purchase agreements. The Rule Book
should explain how the agency is supposed to go about buying goods. The
agency should also have a record of expenditures and procurement contracts on
file.
Loans and grants. Many agencies want to help out business and
industry with a little money here and there. See who gets the loans or grants,
how they got them, if they’re well connected, if they are paying the loans back
on time, and what – if any – auditing the organization has done to see if the
money was used as promised.

