CRAFTING THE INVESTIGATIVE NARRATIVE
IRE National Conference, Denver, June 2-5, 2005
James Neff, Investigations Editor, The Seattle Times
jneff@seattletimes.com 206-464-2285

A few rules, tips and suggestions for writing an investigative serial narrative:
You need plot or saturation, preferably both. Saturation means hanging around, watching
things unfold, or having repeated in-depth interviews with a central subject.
Here are some story forms that can work:
*Pursuits (chasing the bad guy), adventures, journeys (a quest for “the truth”), “stranger
comes to town.” With The Terrorist Within, we had two overlapping story lines: a
terrorist on a mission to blow up an airport and his being pursued by a prosecutor wanting
to catch him—a lot of “story” or plot.
*Unfolding mystery is a natural: someone is pursuing the truth or the solution to the
mystery: an epidemiologist, an auditor, a whistleblower, a cop, etc.
You need a character who will take action from beginning to end. Character is usually the
engine in classic serial narratives such as Roy Peter Clark’s Three Little Words. But if
you have as much plot as we did in The Terrorist Within, you can get away with less
access and insight into characters.
All the rules and techniques of investigative reporting still apply, of course. But you may
need to go back and reinterview subjects or visits places when you find a gap in the story
or in character development.
WRITING
*Look for a deadline in the story or a ticking bomb and work toward it.
*Squeeze much of the attribution into a box. You will still need to apply some, sparingly.
*Keep installments short. Terrorist Within chapters were 1,000 words or 25 inches. The
Seattle Times’ investigative narrative of Capt. James Yee, the Muslim chaplain wrongly
accused of espionage, was nine chapters, each about 35 inches long.
*Alternative blocks of narration (the “moving now”) with exposition (background,
summary). Suspense and drama is created by having a character confront a series of
obstacles or try to achieve a goal.

1

*Let events unfold chronologically. Don’t give away the ending.
*Put fact-laden exposition immediately after a scene, just as the reader wants to know
what happens next.
*End scenes or narrative segments with reader wanting to know what happens next.
BENEFITS:
*Great way to provide the “explanatory elements” and make them readable.
*This form provides a place for texture and context that often stays in the notebook with
investigative projects.
*Reader interest. (Our single copy circulation went up about 10 % during the 15 days of
the series). People actually read your work from start to finish.
DRAWBACKS:
*Some readers or colleagues may be uncomfortable with the form and distracted by
wondering how much to trust what is being presented. We don’t have this problem
reading narrative history such as a Robert Caro biography. I think this objection is due
the unconventional nature of this little-used newspaper form.
*Sometimes interesting or new information has to be cut because of space or because it
can’t be carried along by the plot.
BOOKS:
Check out any number of how-to books on novel writing. The Weekend Novelist by
Robert Ray, Writepro (software) by Sol Stein, and The Art of Fiction by John Gardner
have helped me.
NEWSPAPER SERIES:
www.seattletimes.com/terroristwithin
www.seattletimes.com/jamesyee
www.nieman.harvard.edu/narrative/digest/
James Neff, investigations editor at The Seattle Times, was lead writer of the 18-part narrative "The Terrorist Within,"
a 2002 Pulitzer finalist for investigative reporting. He is the author of four nonfiction books, including "The Wrong
Man: The Final Verdict on the Dr. Sam Sheppard Murder Case" (Random House). His biography of Teamsters
president Jackie Presser, "Mobbed Up," won an IRE award and was adapted as the HBO movie “Teamster Boss.” Jim
can be reached at 206-464-2285 or jneff@seattletimes.com.

2

