CAR INVESTIGATIONS INTO POLITICS
Jonathan D. Salant
Bloomberg News
jsalant@bloomberg.net

Six story ideas:
Look at the new committee chairs and see from which
industries they are raising their political action
committee contributions. Compare the makeup of their PAC
donations in previous elections. Note any increase in the
industries that they are now in charge of regulating.
Do a similar study of freshmen lawmakers. Note if PAC
donations from a particular industry have increased now
that the freshman has landed a seat on the congressional
committee that oversees that industry.
Look at lawmakers who narrowly won election. Have they
started raising money early for 2006? Compare their fundraising in 2005 with the amount they raised in 2003 and
2004.
Leadership PACs allow lawmakers to get around campaign
contribution limits. Match contributors to leadership PACs
to contributors to a lawmaker's campaign committee. See
what the lawmaker is spending that money on: Traveling
around the country, perks at the national conventions, or
contributions to candidates.
Don't forget to check expenditures. Look at what the
lawmaker is spending the campaign money on. Look at whether
the lawmaker is aiding his or her colleagues, or donating
``surplus campaign funds'' to a congressional campaign
committee. And note the corporations being reimbursed for
travel. That means the lawmaker is being flown on a
corporate jet, usually with a lobbyist on board.
Check a vote on a major issue. See if there is a
correlation between campaign contributions and a person's
vote on the measure.

Web sites you should know:
www.opensecrets.org. The Center for Responsive Politics.
Searchable database of campaign donations, classified by
industry.
www.fecinfo.com. PoliticalMoneyLine's Web site has some
free data, but you need to pay for most of the best stuff.
They rank political action committee contributions and have
a searchable database of lobbyists and lobby registrations.
www.publicintegrity.org. From the Center for Public
Integrity, a free searchable lobbyist database and a
separate database for 527 contributions.
www.followthemoney.org. The Institute on State Politics has
databases of contributions to state candidates.
www.tpj.org. Texans for Public Justice has a list of
President George W. Bush's biggest fund-raisers, sorted by
name, company or economic interest.

