Tipsheet for using CAR to cover stories
about adverse drug reactions
By David McKie
Who am I? I’m a reporter with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation’s Investigative
Unit.
Contact information: david_mckie@cbc.ca,
1-613-290-7380 (cell) or 1-613-288-6523 (office)
The initial series: Faint Warning (http://www.cbc.ca/news/adr/)
The follow-up series: Prescribed to Death
(http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/seniorsdrugs/)
Place: IRE National Conference, Denver
Date: June 2, 2005
Panel: CAR Investigations into Health Care
An explanation of the initial series: Faint Warning was the result of a five-year battle to
obtain the adverse drug reaction database from Health Canada. Our team at CBC News
had to use the country’s Access-to-Information Law to win our battle. When Health
Canada refused, we complained to the federal Information Commissioner. We argued
that jurisdictions such as the United States make similar databases freely available. And
since Health Canada is always talking about harmonizing some of its policies with the
FDA, it only made sense to follow the lead of the United States. We also argued that
Health Canada had already released a database of adverse medical device reports that we
had requested about four years ago. Logic won the day, and Health Canada was forced to
relinquish the key fields in its database. Although there are still some fields outstanding,
we had enough of them (such as the name of the drug, age of the patient, the type and
severity of the adverse reaction and the date it happened) to determine trends that led us
to broadcast two investigative series: the first one, Faint Warning, examined the plight of
kids; the second one, Prescribed to Death, examined the lot of seniors.
Outcome: The series and the follow-up on seniors touched off a national debate about
the weaknesses of Canada’s adverse drug reaction reporting system. And on May 25,
2005, the federal health minister, Ujall Dosanjh, announced that his department was
posting on its website a searchable version of the department’s adverse drug reaction
database. That database is similar to the one that the CBC posted on February 17, 2004,
as an integral part of our award-winning Faint Warning series.

Our first steps: After cleaning up the database, which we eventually obtained in the
database manager program, Access, we examined the fields to figure the possible story
ideas. The key field for this analysis was the age. Knowing that people tend to pay more
attention to the plight of the young and the old, we figured that any trends we could
uncover involving these two age groups would garner a lot of attention from policy
makers and the general public. We were right.
What we found: The key headline that got us started involved kids. We discovered the
number of serious adverse drug reactions -- death, hospitalization or a side effect that was
totally unexpected – reported to Health Canada involving people under the age of 18 had
tripled since 1997. And since we were dealing with children, it meant that many of these
drugs such as antidepressants, anti-psychotics and acne medicine had never been tested
on them. So not only was the number of reported adverse reactions rising sharply, but in
many cases children were being used as guinea pigs. We had a story. Now the trick was
finding the people to illustrate it, which we did, greatly aided by the use of listservs. The
trend was similar for seniors; and so, too, was the problem of drugs being untested in this
vulnerable population.
Ten tips strategies that helped us get this story
1) Obtain a list: Get list of databases that your health department keeps. To do this,
you may have to go through a freedom of information law, but first insist that you
should be able to obtain the list without jumping through any legal hurdles that
could result in delays.
2) Can we talk? Once you identify the database you want, meet with the bureaucrat
responsible for maintaining it, and find out how her department uses the database.
This should give you some insights that be prove valuable later on. For instance,
departments such as Health Canada and the Food and Drug Administration, use
their adverse drug reaction data as “tipsheets” that can give them an idea of trends
they should be studying, or drugs that may be causing side effects that no one ever
imagined. From your discussion with the bureaucrat, you may discover that her
department only uses the database to look up adverse reactions for specific drugs
that have been identified as dangerous. If this is the case, then any trend you
identify will become newsworthy, as was the case with our series.
3) Be willing to negotiate: Nothing turns off a department more than storming in
and demanding their whole database. Such a demand will just get their backs up
and slow down the whole process. Inevitably, there will be information in the
database that you won’t get because it’s of a personal nature, such as the patient’s
name or address. This is why it’s usually much better to negotiate. Stress that you
don’t want any fields that would identify people. All you want is anonymous data
that will allow you to examine trends and figure out how people are reacting to
specific drugs. Since they have no idea which trends you’re trying to uncover, you
don’t have to worry about giving away your game plan. Negotiating is a give-andtake process over which both parties have some control.

4) Think about stories: Now you have the database, the real work begins. These
databases can be used to tell many stories, but the best ones achieve results
because they go beyond the anecdote of the bad drug. Anecdotes are easier for
institutions to defend. If you are able to identify a trend such as the number of
adverse reactions in the kids and the elderly increasing sharply, then you’ve
already identified a demographic that is likely to engender a lot of public
sympathy, which can mean that your story will have more impact. It’s also best to
try to identify a few trends. That way if you can’t find people to illustrate one of
the trends, you can turn to your plan-B – trend no. two.
5) Double check your numbers: It may be counter intuitive, but you should always
be suspicious of your data. As a colleague of mine cautioned during a panel
discussion at the 2005 annual conference of the Canadian Association of
Journalists: “Don’t fall in love with your data.” Assume that the data only
represent a snapshot of something more significant. And assume that the data
contain mistakes. These assumptions will force you to double and triple check the
numbers with a colleague, then with experts who study the trend you have
identified. For instance, when we identified our trend involving kids, we ran the
numbers by a bio-statistician who used to work for the FDA, and a Canadian
expert who had actually done some work with the database.
6) Explain to your audience what the database can’t tell you: The reporting of
adverse drug reactions is an extremely imprecise way of measuring what’s truly
going on, in large part because only between one and 10 per cent of adverse
reactions are ever reported to the FDA or Health Canada. So what you’re getting
is a hint of a trend, or a faint signal that something could be happening. That’s
fine because you can use this weakness as a springboard into a discussion about
why more doctors refuse to report adverse reactions and whether such reporting
should be mandatory as it is for drug companies. This is exactly what we did. Our
stories precipitated a healthy discussion across the country. We also found out
that Health Canada has done a poor job of maintaining its database, in large part
due to understaffing. For instance, the department spends so much time keying
information into its database that there is little time left for analysis. This startling
admission is contained on page 71 of an internal document that we obtained under
the country’s Access to Information Law.
7) Is the institution studying its own database for maximum effect? Weaknesses
aside, you should make it clear to your audience if the institution in question is
using its database to locate trends. Health Canada didn’t spot the trend we
identified; hence, the title of the series Faint Warning. The department should
have been using the database to warn doctors, kids and their parents about the
dangers of prescribing drugs such as acne medicine and antidepressants, which
have now been slapped with stronger warnings in both countries. Also make it
clear that you’re not only engaging in some academic discussion about trend
analysis. Rather, the failure to identify trends can result in lost lives. One of our
stories featured comments by our bio-statistician who explained that had Health
Canada spotted the trend involving the stomach pill called Prepulsid (Propulsid, in
the United States) earlier, the department could have at the very least forced the
company to put out sterner warnings sooner than it did, and certainly long before

the company was forced to withdraw the product from the Canadian and U.S.
markets. Those warnings were lacking for 15-year-old Vanessa Young who
collapsed in front of her father, Terence, after taking the pill one day. Her heart
gave out. She never regained consciousness. Terence Young, who has now
become an advocate for a more robust adverse drug reaction monitoring system,
says if he had received a more complete warning about the dangers of the drug,
his daughter would be alive today.
8) Find strong characters to tell your story: It almost goes without saying that we
should find people to help bring these stories to light. But it’s tempting that once
you’ve identified a trend (remember, don’t fall in love with your data) to just let
the numbers tell the story. If you can’t find a good example to help illustrate your
trend, then hold on until you succeed.
9) Use your website: The power of our series came, in part, from what we did with
our website. We developed a searchable version of Health Canada’s adverse drug
reaction database and put it online so people could conduct our own searches for
drugs they or their family members were taking. Within the first 48 hours after the
series ran, CBC.ca received 15-thousand “unique visitors” or people, the heaviest
use our online service has ever experienced. After criticizing us for posting its
database online, Health Canada decided to follow suit. On May 25, 2005, federal
Health Minister, Ujjal Dosanjh, announced that this department had posted a
version of the database on its website that was similar to the version we had been
posting.
10) Continue to mine your data: Our temptation as journalists is to move on once
we have done a story. But if you continue to update and maintain your database, it
will become a perpetual resource while you’re negotiating for other databases that
can help you tell other important stories. We were able to use our database in
doing stories about the COX-2 inhibitors such as Vioxx that have turned the
worlds of regulatory authorities such as the FDA and Health Canada upside down.
And, as has already been mentioned, we used the database to tell equally
compelling stories about seniors.

