HOLLAND & KNIGHT LLP
CHARLES D. TOBIN
DIRECT DIAL 202-419-2539
ctobin@hklaw.com

WASHINGTON, D.C.
2099 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Suite 100
Washington, D.C. 20006-6801

TELEPHONE 202-955-3000
FACSIMILE 202-955-5564

From John Peter Zenger to Paul Branzburg:
The Early Development of Journalist's Privilege
Introduction
Journalists' efforts to shield news sources predate the Republic itself.1 As
with the entire United States Constitution, the First Amendment emerged from a
tradition of dissent voiced largely by anonymous authors whose identities their
publishers courageously safeguarded. Indeed, much of the Federalist Papers – the
precursor to the constitutional framework of our government – bore the byline
"Publius," a collaborative cover-name for Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, and James
Madison.2
Revolutionary and Ratification history is replete with discussion and debate
on the role of the anonymous critic in a democratic society. Yet until the U.S.
Supreme Court in 19723 recognized that First Amendment protections from
harassing, tenuous, and other improper efforts to reach sources, the court system
gave little credence to advocacy a journalist's privilege. In fact, the Constitution did
not even surface in early arguments by journalists against compelled testimony.
Instead, while early legislatures seemed receptive to notions that compelled
disclosures of sources were inimical to free expression, American courts were very
slow to catch on to any notion of privilege. The first several generations of
journalists' lawyers did not even tie their clients' arguments to the Constitution.
Instead, early resistance to testimony was based on the honor of the pledge to the
source and the journalists' fears of loss of their livelihood. Later advocates relied
largely on public policy grounds. More formal suggestions of an evidentiary
1 Some scholars assert that the 1735 trial of John Peter Zenger, a New York publisher acquitted of

seditious libel for his newspaper's criticisms of the colonial governor, is the first documented instance
in Colonial American history of a journalist's defiance of a government order to reveal sources.
Zenger refused to identify the anonymous authors of the allegedly libelous commentary. See Gunn
and Peterson, "A Historical Look at Journalism's Struggle for Professional Status", at
http://www.cc.utah.edu/~rdg1/A%20Historical%20Look%20at20%Journalism's%20Struggle%20for%
20Professional%20Status.doc (last visited April 26, 2004) at 13.
2 R. Longley, "The Federalist Papers," at http://usgovinfo.about.com/library/fed/blfedindex.htm (last
visited May 24, 2004).
3 Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972).

1

privilege were added later still. Finally, in a 1958 ruling by the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, the First Amendment basis for the privilege
was argued and considered.
Revolutionary Era Anonymous Journalism
The trial of colonial New York publisher John Peter Zenger is the most
famous example of the pre-Revolution tradition of the anonymous American dissent.
Zenger published the New York Weekly Journal, the opposition newspaper to Crown
Governor William Cosby. After a series of unsigned columns in 1734 favoring a
legislative candidate who, Cosby ordered Zenger indicted and jailed for seditious
libel.4 Famed Philadelphia attorney Andrew Hamilton, who undertook the defense
pro bono, told jurors that Zenger's steadfast protection of the governor's confidential
critics "may in its consequence affect every free man that lives under a British
government on the main of America."
It is the best cause. It is the cause of liberty. And I make
no doubt but your upright conduct this day will not only
entitle you to the love and esteem of your fellow citizens,
but every man who prefers freedom to a life of slavery will
bless and honor you as men who have baffled the attempt
of tyranny, and by an impartial and uncorrupt verdict
have laid a noble foundation for securing to ourselves, our
posterity, and our neighbors, that to which nature and the
laws of our country have given us a right to liberty of both
exposing and opposing arbitrary power (in these parts of
the world at least) by speaking and writing truth.
Jurors acquitted Zenger after brief deliberations.5
Zenger's legacy – and the efforts of those in authority to root out the identity
of anonymous critics – continued through the Revolution on into the early
deliberations of the U.S. government. Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, in
his recent opinion supporting the First Amendment rights of an anonymous election
pamphleteer, noted this rich history of the protection of early American political
pundits. As he recounted, delegates to the Continental Congress in 1779, including
Massachusetts' Elbridge Gerry, were stung by a Pennsylvania newspaper column
blaming the council for inflation and accusing its members of embezzlement.
McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission, 514 U.S. 334, 361 (1995) (Thomas, J.,
4 For a concise and interesting summary of the background of Zenger's prosecution, see D. Linder,

"The Zenger Trial: An Account," at
http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/zenger/zengeraccount.html (last visited May 24,
2004).
5 Id.

2

concurring in judgment). Gerry and others called for proceedings to discover the
identity of the columnist "Leonidas." Several delegates, however, made passionate
arguments that should the proceedings progress, "liberty of the Press shall be
restrained[.]" Id. (citations omitted). "In the end, these arguments persuaded the
assembled delegates, who 'sat mute' in response to Gerry's motion[,]" and the
Congress abandoned attempts to discover the journalist's identity. Id. at 362.6
Anonymity cloaked some of the more vigorous debate a decade later between
the Federalists, who favored ratification of the Constitution, and their political
nemeses the Anti-Federalists. These exchanges included discussion of the very
value that anonymous authorship brought to discussion. The issue came to the fore
when, in 1787, during the Constitutional Convention, the publisher of the
Federalist Massachusetts Centinel announced that his newspaper would refuse to
run critical columns without an author's name. Id. at 363.
This Federalist declaration drew a backlash of criticisms, including that of
Anti-Federalist writer "Philadelphiensis," who saw the insistence on signed
authorship as an implement of "this despotic scheme of government" and a
harbinger of "how things are to be carried on after the adoption of the new
constitution." Id. at 365. Similarly, to one Rhode Island columnist – "Argus" – the
Federalist newspaper policy furthered the goal of "our aristocratical Gentry" to
destroy "[t]he Liberty of the Press, or the liberty which every Person in the United
States at present enjoys[.]" Id. at 366 (emphasis omitted). In the face of this
criticism, and with even some of his fellow Federalist publishers refusing to go
along with the ban, the Massachusetts publisher "retreated from his policy" and
"'readily' reprinted several anonymous Federalist and Anti-Federalist essays to
show that claims that he had suppressed freedom of the press 'had not any
foundation in truth.'" Id. at 367.
To Justice Thomas, looking back over nearly two centuries of history, this
pre-First Amendment exchange of rhetoric furnishes powerful evidence that the
Framers intended the Bill of Rights to protect to anyone wishing "to express his
thoughts on political candidates or issues[.]" Id. at 371.
When Federalist attempts to ban anonymity are followed
by a sharp, widespread Anti-Federalist defense in the
name of the freedom of the press, and then by an open
Federalist retreat on the issue, I must conclude that both
Anti-Federalists and Federalists believed that the
6 As Justice Thomas noted in McIntyre, parallels to the Continental Congress' experience with

anonymous dissent may be found in early state legislatures as well. For example, the New Jersey
State Legislature in 1779, seeking to begin a seditious libel prosecution, ordered a newspaper printer
to identify the columnist "Cincinnatus." However, "[a]pparently the State Assembly agreed that
anonymity was protected by the freedom of the press," as it did not pursue the matter. Id. at 362.

3

freedom of the press included the right to publish without
revealing the author's name.
Id. at 367.
Early Government Leaks Investigations
Despite the historical role anonymous sources played in the establishment of
press freedoms in America — and the apparent protections the Framers sought to
give to critics of government — the common law of the era is silent on this issue. In
fact, the first written decision involving an anonymous source did not arise until
more than a half-century after passage of the Bill of Rights and did not even
mention the First Amendment.
The issue first emerged in the jurisprudence from one of the most hallowed
halls of both government and journalism: the press gallery of the United States
Senate. In 1848, Senate correspondent John Nugent of the New York Herald
published the recently approved, still secret, Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, which
ended the Mexican War. The Senate operated under a standing rule that held
treaty discussions in strict secrecy until senators voted to lift the veil.7
Nonetheless, leaks abounded.8 The Senate called on Nugent to disclose the source
of the leak, but he refused, saying only that the information had not come from a
senator or Senate officer9 and also ruling out then-Secretary of State James
Buchanan.10 The Senate investigating committee confined Nugent inside the
Capitol, during which his supportive publisher doubled Nugent's salary and
published his columns with the dateline, "Custody of the Sergeant-at-Arms."11
Nugent petitioned the federal court in Washington, D.C. for a writ of habeas
corpus, challenging the authority of the Senate to confine him. The reported
opinion in the case, by Chief Judge Cranch of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for
the District of Columbia Circuit, almost exclusively consists of a review of AngloAmerican jurisprudence of parliamentary bodies' authority in matters of contempt.

7 Donald A. Ritchie, PRESS GALLERY: CONGRESS AND THE WASHINGTON

CORRESPONDENTS (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991) at 28-29; Ex Parte Nugent, 18 F.
Cas. 471, 483 (D.C. Cir. 1848).
8 Nugent "taunted that 'those Senators who most strenuously advocate the system of closed doors,
are always the least economical of the Senate secrets.'" Ritchie, supra note 2, at 29.
9 Ritchie, supra note 2, at 29.
10 U.S. Senate web site, "The Senate Arrests a Reporter," at
http://www.senate.gove/artandhistory/minute/The_Senate_Arrests_A_Reporter.htm (last visited
April 26, 2004). According to former Senator Bob Dole, however, history suggests the future
President Buchanan, anxious to have the treaty published for political advantage, was indeed
Nugent's source. Robert J. Dole, HISTORICAL ALMANAC OF THE U.S. SENATE (Washington
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office 1989) at 94.
11 Ritchie, supra note 2, at 29.

4

Ex Parte Nugent, 18 F. Cas. 471 (D.C. Cir. 1848).12 The decision contains no
reference to Nugent's status as a journalist, treating the matter as a simple
question of Senate authority to enforce the rules of secrecy. A month into his
confinement, failing to coerce the journalist into revealing his source, the Senate
released Nugent, citing "the face-saving grounds of protecting his health."13
A half-century after Ex Parte Nugent14 – in an almost exact replay of the
Continental Congress's brief flirtation with proceedings against an anonymous
critic – the California Supreme Court concluded that the state senate's investigation
of potential wrongdoing prevailed over journalists' and sources' confidences. In Ex
Parte A.M. Lawrence and L.L. Levings, 116 Cal. 298, 48 P. 124 (1897), the
California Senate subpoenaed a news editor and a reporter following publication of
charges that the senate's members had exchanged votes for bribes. The journalists,
objecting partly on the grounds that "the information sought to be elicited was
irrelevant and hearsay[,]" refused to disclose the sources to senate investigators. Ex
Parte A.M. Lawrence, 116 Cal. at 299, 48 P. 125. The California court, however,
viewed the questioning of the journalists as "a natural and logical method for the
senate to follow in its endeavor to arrive at the truth." Id. The court also
foreshadowed the distinction later courts would draw between subpoenas issued to
journalists in government investigations and prosecutions on the one hand, and
civil lawsuits on the other.
The case differs from those presented in courts where the
interest lies between conflicting parties, and where
improper evidence sought to be introduced in the interests
of one must be to the injury of the other. Here, the
inquiry was inquisitorial, to arrive at the truth concerning
a public charge of corruption, silent as to names,
indefinite as to facts, but specific in its assertion of
bribery.

12 The court held that the Senate had unchecked power to punish contempts of its authority. Judge
Cranch wrote that "every court, including the senate and the house of representatives, is the sole
judge of its own contempts; and that in case of the commitment for contempt in such a case, no other
court has the right to . . . discharge the prisoner on habeas corpus[.]" Ex Parte Nugent, 18 F. Cas. at
481.
13 U.S. Senate Web site, supra note 5.
14 In the interim period, in the 1880s Baltimore Sun reporter John T. Morris refused to reveal to a
grand jury sources for stories about the bribery of elected officials. Morris was jailed for two days.
Gunn and Peterson, supra note 1, at 15. A decade later, in 1896, the state's General Assembly
enacted the nation's first shield law, protecting journalists under certain circumstances from having
to reveal their sources' identities. The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, "The
Reporter's Privilege Compendium: An Introduction," at http://
www.rcfp,org/privilege/item.cgi?i=intro (last visited April 26, 2004).

5

Id. In the context before it, the court held, "[i]t cannot be successfully contended,
and has not been seriously argued, that the witnesses were justified in refusing to
give the names on the ground that the communications were privileged." Id. at 300,
48 P. at 125.
The Georgia Supreme Court in 1911, in another leaks investigation,
marginalized a journalist's assertion that revealing a source would "cause him the
forfeiture of an estate, to wit, it would cause him to lose his means of earning a
livelihood." Plunkett v. Hamilton, 136 Ga. 72, 81, 70 S.E. 781 (1911). An Augusta
Herald reporter had refused to disclose to a police-review board the name of an
officer who had leaked information about a murder. Id. The commission held the
reporter in contempt and ordered him confined, but a lower court granted habeas
relief, finding that commissioners could not punish a witness for declining to answer
questions. Id. at 73, 70 S.E. at 782. The Georgia high court reversed, holding the
board had authority to punish direct contempts, and that the journalist's claim of
forfeiture "is of course unfounded in law." Id. at 81, 70 S.E. at 785. To the court,
what the reporter "really meant, no doubt, was that he apprehended that his
employer would discharge him if he stated the source of his information." Id. at 82,
70 S.E. at 785. If this reasoning were adopted, the court said, "[a] murderer, a
burglar, or a thief might pledge his friends or their employers to secrecy" and those
witnesses "might claim exemption from testifying" on grounds that they "had
pledged their sacred words to the criminal not to do so" or "that they feared a loss of
their employment if they testified to the truth." Id. at 84, 70 S.E. at 785.
Another grand jury leak led to sharp criticism of a journalist by the Missouri
Supreme Court in 1917. In Ex Parte Holliway, 272 Mo. 108, 199 S.W. 412, 414
(1917), the St. Louis Republic had reported that grand jurors returned seven yetunannounced indictments in an investigation of the coal industry. The court upheld
a contempt citation and directed that the reporter be incarcerated until he revealed
his source. In doing so, the court harshly rejected the argument that the disclosures
furthered the public interest.
Nor does it change the rule or mitigate the offense, that
he who violates any of the above statutes, was under the
guise of friendship induced to do so by someone desiring
to "scoop" his competitor in the business and printing socalled news. The cold commercial desire to print facts in
advance of the crime when public policy, or the public
welfare permits the same to be made public, may be good
business, but it is poor patriotism, and worse citizenship.
It is at best a vicious sort of harmful intermeddling with
the enforcement of the law, or the conservation of the
public welfare.

6

Id. at 115, 199 S.W. at 415.15
Reporters continued decades later to bring challenges under the common law
to subpoenas in leaks investigations. In Clein v. State, 52 So. 2d 117 (Fla. 1950), a
Miami Life editor resisted disclosure to the source of a leak about a grand jury
probe of a city councilman. The trial court held the editor in contempt and
sentenced him to 30 days in jail. Id. at 119. Citing grand jury secrecy laws and the
broad investigatory powers vested in grand juries under the state constitution, the
Florida Supreme Court upheld the conviction and sentence, finding the editor had
no privilege against revealing the source.
Members of the journalistic profession do not enjoy the
privilege of confidential communication, as between
themselves and their informants, and are under the same
duty to testify, when properly called upon, as any other
person.
Id. at 120.
Prosecutions of Criminal Libels
In episodes reminiscent of the pre-Revolution trial of John Peter Zenger,
several state appellate courts at common law approved the government's efforts to
compel a journalists' testimony in seditious and other criminal libel prosecutions.
For example, in In re Grunow, 84 N.J.L. 235, 85 A. 1011 (1913), a journalist had
learned second-hand that a village trustee claimed a surveyor double-billed the
village. Id. at 235-36, 85 A. at 1011. Although the charge was leveled at a public
meeting, a grand jury subpoenaed the journalist to learn his source. When the
reporter challenged the relevancy of the testimony sought of him, the New Jersey
Supreme Court responded:
The article upon its face is libelous. All those who were in
any way concerned in its publication were offenders
against the law. It is both material and relevant to the
investigation had before that body to ascertain who were
concerned in the publication of the article.

15 The Missouri Supreme Court decision, in an interesting passage that presaged later

newsgathering decisions in the U.S. Supreme Court, rejected the journalist's assertion that under
the Fifth Amendment he was not required to testify. The court held that while the source may have
violated grand jury secrecy laws, the reporter "as the mere recipient of the disclosure would be guilty
of no offense, either for that he listened to the disclosure, or that he repeated it, or wrote it down and
caused it to be published after he heard it." Id. at 117, 199 S.W. at 416.

7

Id. at 237, 85 A. at 1012. The justices held that a decision to excuse the journalist
from testifying "would be far reaching in its effect and detrimental to the due
administration of law," as it would "shield the real transgressor and permit him to
go unwhipped of justice." Id. at 236, 85 A. at 1012.
Similarly, an intermediate appellate court in New York in 1875 upheld the
authority of a trial judge to indefinitely detain a journalist called before a grand
jury in a criminal libel action. The details of the article at issue in People ex rel.
Phelps v. Fancher, 22 Hun 226 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1875), are not contained in the court's
decision. Rather, the court merely described the New York Tribune's story,
"Brooklyn Ring's Method," as an "alleged libellous article." Id. at 227. The
newspaper's editor refused to disclose to grand jurors the identity of the article's
author, explaining to the court:
I decline to answer the question, because I am instructed,
as one of the editors of the paper, not to give the name of
writers of articles published in it. It is one of the office
regulations, and on the principle that the paper, and not
the editor, is responsible.
Id. (italics original). The New York tribunal noted that, as the law "has for ages
existed, no court could possibly hold that a witness could legally refuse to give the
name of the author of an alleged libel, for the reason that the rules of a public
journal forbade it." Id. at 230. The newspaper's position that it alone was
responsible for its content did not bind the court, as, in its view, "He who writes a
libellous article for publication in a newspaper, is certainly guilty of a crime," and
"[t]here is no exchange or substitution of punishment in the administration of
justice." Id.
A trial court's order compelling testimony featured prominently in the
Georgia's Supreme Court 1887 decision upholding a criminal contempt conviction of
a journalist, who wrote that a real estate agent was an "old 'skunk'" who should be
left to "stink himself to death." Pledger v. State, 77 Ga. 242, 3 S.E. 320 (1887). The
court overruled the journalist's assertion that the trial judge had improperly coerced
the newspaper's owner from revealing the journalist's name. The owner, also
indicted on the libel charge, had been sentenced to jail for 10 days and fined $50
after he initially refused to reveal the author's name. He relented and testified. Id.
at 244, 3 S.E. at 321. The state supreme court held the owner could "be punished
for contempt of the court, as any other witness refusing to testify" and had "surely
merited the punishment he had received." Id.
Another state supreme court, while searching for the identity of an author
who questioned the political motivations of a grand jury, expressly disclaimed that
it sought to punish the critic's speech. In Joslyn v. People, 67 Colo. 297, 184 P. 375

8

(1919), the Colorado Supreme Court approved a subpoena to a newspaper owner in
a lower court's investigation of the grand jury. The investigation began after
publication of an unsigned editorial charging that a Republican sheriff had packed
the grand jury with party members in probing a Democrat officeholder's activities.
Id. at 299, 184 P. at 375-76. The supreme court, in upholding the questioning of the
newspaper owner as to the editorial writer's identity, noted reassuringly that "[t]his
was not a proceeding to punish the author or publisher . . . nor to adjudge them
guilty of libeling the sheriff." Id. at 307, 184 P. at 378-79. However, according to
the court, the inquiry was necessary to determine "whether the grand jury was an
aggregation of political tricksters, brazenly sitting in the halls of justice in the garb
of public functionaries and juggling with the liberties and reputations of men." Id.
The decision contains no discussion of privilege, making it doubtful that this ground
was raised.
Question of Common Law Privilege
The issue of evidentiary privilege, framed precisely as such, appears to have
been raised for the first time at common law in a 1936 decision in New York. In
People ex rel. Mooney v. The Sheriff of New York County, 269 N.Y. 291, 199 N.E. 415
(1936), the New York Court of Appeals upheld the contempt citation of a newspaper
reporter in a grand jury setting. The reporter had written that the grand jury's
investigations into gambling and lottery were ineffective. Id. at 293, 199 N.E. at
415. He refused when grand jurors asked him to furnish the names and addresses
of his sources. The only question on appeal was:
whether a newspaper reporter may lawfully refuse to
answer pertinent questions relating to communications
made to him as a reporter on the ground that such
communications were privileged.
Id.
New York's highest court in People ex rel. Mooney observed that "no court has
ever so decided" that a journalist enjoyed a testimonial privilege against compelled
disclosure of a source. In its view, the reporter "urges that the development of the
law and changes in social relations require that the courts now extend the privilege
to a reporter." Id. at 294, 199 N.E. at 415. The court observed that English courts
had overruled the privilege that had been extended to journalists there, and it cited
the decisions in American courts requiring that reporters testify under subpoena.
Id. The court also noted that the leading treatise disapproved of extending privilege
to a number of specific occupations, including journalists. Id. (citing 5 John H.
Wigmore, EVIDENCE IN TRIALS AT COMMON LAW § 2286.16 The court
16 The court quoted from Wigmore's treatise:

9

additionally observed that, while three states by that time had enacted shield
laws,17 the New York Legislature failed to pass legislation the previous year. Id.
The court commented that a privilege "works a hardship" on the administration of
justice, and the "policy of the law is to require the disclosure of all information by
witnesses in order that justice may prevail." Id. Whether to enact a privilege must
be left to the legislature, the court held, declining to "depart from the general rule in
force in many of the States and in England and create a privilege in favor of an
additional class." Id.
In a rare common law decision excusing a journalist from testifying, a federal
district court in New York, citing People ex rel. Mooney, also rejected assertions of
an evidentiary privilege but nonetheless ruled in the reporter's favor. The reporter
was subpoenaed during proceedings involving Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, accused
communist spies who later were executed. Rosenberg v. Carroll, 99 F. Supp. 629
(S.D.N.Y. 1951). The court noted "the prevailing rule is that a newspaper
correspondent must answer pertinent questions and disclose the sources of
information that he has published or caused to be published if the questions be
relevant to the proceeding[.]" Id. The court reasoned, however, that the statement
at issue in the journalist's syndicated column – that the trial court has authority to
alter Ethel Rosenberg's death sentence within 60 days of an appellate ruling, and
that therefore "if she talks she can still save herself" – is "merely a restatement" of
the applicable rule of criminal procedure. Id. The court therefore held that "[t]he
information itself and the source of that information are not relevant here." Id. It
ruled that the journalist need not answer the questions. Id.
Enter the First Amendment: Garland v. Torre and its progeny
Actress Judy Garland in the late 1950s became the first litigant to face a
formal First Amendment challenge to her demand for a journalist's sources.
Garland sued CBS for defamation,18 alleging that she was defamed by quotes from
an unnamed "network executive" arising out of a New York Herald Tribune

In general, then, the mere fact that a communication was made in express
confidence, or in the implied confidence of a confidential relation, does not
create a privilege. This rule is not questioned today. No pledge of privacy,
nor oath of secrecy, can avail against demand for truth in a court of justice:
Accordingly, a confidential communication to a clerk, to a trustee, to a
commercial agency, to a banker, to a journalist, or to any other person, not
holding one of the specific relations hereafter considered, is not privileged
from disclosure.
People ex rel. Mooney v. Sheriff, 269 N.Y. at 294, 199 N.E. at 415.

17 These states were Alabama, Maryland, and New Jersey.

18 Garland also brought a breach of contract action count the network.

10

column.19 Garland v. Torre, 259 F.2d 545, 547 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 358 U.S. 910
(1958). Garland took the depositions of the three executive she believed to be the
most likely suspects. All denied having made the statements and said they did not
know the source's identity. Id., 259 F.2d at 547 & n.1.
The column's author, Marie Torre, testified at deposition that "the
statements appearing in the column were 'in exact words'" what her source said in a
telephone interview, but she refused to disclose his identity. Id. Garland filed a
motion to compel, and Torre filed a motion for protective order. The trial judge, at a
hearing where Torre again would not divulge her source, held the journalist in
criminal contempt, sentenced her to 10 days in jail, but allowed her to remain free
pending appeal.20 Id. at 547 & n.2.
On appeal, Torre raised three grounds. As characterized by the Second
Circuit, they were:
•

Compelled disclosure of confidential sources of news would "encroach upon
the freedom of the press guaranteed by the First Amendment" because it
would "impose an important practical restraint on the flow of news from news
sources to the news media and would thus diminish pro tanto the flow of
news to the public."

•

"[Q]uite apart from any Constitutional question, the societal interest in
assuring a free and unrestricted flow of news to the public" necessitates "at
least a qualified privilege."

•

Finally, Torre argued that under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the
district court should have held, "in the particular circumstances of this
case[,]" that Garland could not inquire about the source's identity.

Id. at 547-58.
The Second Circuit decision was written by Judge Potter Stewart, who soon
would be elevated the Supreme Court, where he later would write the leading
dissent endorsing privilege in Branzburg v. Hayes. Stewart began the analysis in
Garband v. Torre by acknowledging that journalists have a First Amendment
interest in protecting their sources, accepting "the hypothesis that compulsory
disclosure" of confidential sources would "entail an abridgement of press freedom by
19 Torre's column quoted a network "spokesman" as saying that Garland had not been working

because "something is bothering her" and speculating, "I wouldn't be surprised if it's because she
thinks she's terribly fat." Richard Kluger, THE PAPER (New York: Alfred A. Knopf 1986) at 536.
20 The Second Circuit observed that the district court "expressly noted on the record that [Torre] was
entirely respectful to the court and intended no personal affront to its dignity." Id., 259 F.2d at 547 &
n.2.

11

imposing some limitation upon the availability of news." Id. at 548. He noted that
"within the historic meaning of the First Amendment" freedom of the press
primarily meant freedom from censorship. The court appreciated, however, that
"varied forms of government action" may constitute an "[a]bridgement of such
rights[.]" Id.
But court held, that while "precious and vital . . . to a free society," a free
press "is not an absolute." Id. Competing with the values of individual liberty
embodied in a free press is the role of "courts of justice, armed with the power to
discover truth." Id. The Second Circuit observed that the duty of witnesses to give
testimony in court "has roots fully as deep in our history as does the guarantee of a
free press." Id. at 549. Suggesting that litigants' rights to compel a witness may
"be considered an element of Fifth Amendment due process," Stewart noted that
"sometimes, if not always," forcing any witness to testify in "impinges . . . upon the
First Amendment freedoms of the witness." The court found this impingement of
little moment, however, as it squarely decided:
If an additional First Amendment liberty – the freedom of
the press – is here involved, we do not hesitate to
conclude that it too must give place under the
Constitution to a paramount public interest in the fair
administration of justice.
Id.
Finding that the question asked of Torre "went to the heart of plaintiff's
claim," the Second Circuit rejected her First Amendment claim, holding that "the
Constitution conferred no right to refuse an answer." 21
Turning to Torre's assertion of a public necessity, the court noted that a
privilege "constitutes an extraordinary exception to the general duty to testify"
about relevant evidence. It observed that other courts had yet to recognize a
privilege for journalists. Id. at 550 (citations omitted). Doing so in this instance,
the court held, "would poorly serve the cause of justice." Id.
The court then disposed of Torre's argument under the Federal Rules. These
arguments, the court said, were based on the journalist's assertions of "injury to her
position . . . that could result from her compulsion to testify," the possibility that
Garland could obtain the information elsewhere, and the trial court's failure to first
explore the merits of the defamation claim before compelling Torre. Id. Stewart
found the trial judge had not abused his discretion. Id. He noted the judge's
21 In an important passage, however, often cited in subsequent litigation as the silver lining in

Garland v. Torre, Stewart noted that Garland's subpoena did not confront the court with a situation
where a litigant sought "to force a wholesale disclosure of a newspaper's confidential sources of news,
nor with a case where the identity of a news source is of doubtful relevance or materiality." Id. at
549-50 (citation omitted).

12

finding that the testimony was sought " ' in good faith and not in such manner as to
unreasonably annoy, embarrass or oppress the witness[.]' " He also held Garland's
efforts to discover the source's identity by other means "had met with singular lack
of success." Finally, the Second Circuit held that Garland's claim was not "patently
frivolous" and that the testimony from Torre "was of obvious relevance and
materiality." Id. at 551.22
The U.S. Supreme Court denied certiorari. Torre v. Garland, 358 U.S. 910
(1958). Torre appeared before the trial court and again declined to reveal her
source. The trial judge reluctantly remanded her to serve 10 days in federal prison,
referring to Torre as "the Joan of Arc of her profession.23
Garland v. Torre was cited in a number of court decisions prior to the
Supreme Court's 1972 decision in Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S 665, in both
criminal24 and civil25 cases. In almost every instance, the court rejected a
journalist's constitutional challenge to a subpoena.26 The most noteworthy opinions
in these cases, however, came not from the judges ordering the testimony, but from
dissents.
In In re Appeal of Alan L. Goodfader, 45 Haw. 317, 367 P.2d 472 (1961),
plaintiff, who sued state officials after she was fired from her civil service position,
sought the identity of news sources. The sources had told a journalist that
plaintiff's termination was planned in advance of a public meeting. The majority of
the Hawaii Supreme Court, in a lengthy decision surveying First Amendment law,
relied on Garland v. Torre and affirmed the order compelling the testimony. Id. at
344, 367 P.2d at 487. Justice Mizuha's lone dissent, however, read Garland as
calling for more of a balancing test than the majority's opinion in Goodfader
suggested. He also saw a grave threat to the First Amendment from journalist's
subpoenas.

22 A year earlier, a federal district court in Massachusetts, in another civil libel action, similarly held

that the identity of the author of an editorial was relevant and discoverable under the federal rules.
See Brewster v. Boston Herald-Traveler Corp., 20 F.R.D. 416 (D. Mass. 1957).
23 Kluger, supra note 14, at 537, 562.
24 In re Cepeda, 233 F. Supp. 465 (S.D.N.Y. 1964) (grand jury subpoena); Martin v. State, 194 So. 2d
8 (Fla. 1967) (grand jury subpoena); Oregon v. Buchanan, 250 Or. 244, 436 P.2d 729 (1968) (grand
jury subpoena); Taylor & Selby Appeals, 412 Pa. 32, 193 A.2d 181 (1963) (grand jury subpoena);
State v. Knops, 49 Wis. 2d 647, 183 N.W.2d 93 (1971) (grand jury subpoena).
25 Adams v. Associated Press, 46 F.R.D. 439 (S.D. Tex. 1969) (subpoena for nonparty witness
deposition in defamation action); In re Appeal of Alan L. Goodfader, 45 Haw. 317, 367 P.2d 472
(subpoena for nonparty witness deposition in civil servant's wrongful termination action).
26 Notably, in Caldwell v. U.S., 434 F.2d 1081 (1970), rev'd, Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972),
the Ninth Circuit read Garland v. Torre as supportive of its decision relieving the reporter from
appearing before the grand jury. The Ninth Circuit suggested that its decision and Garland both
applied the same sort of analyisis, but in Garland, "an over-riding need for the specific testimony
was shown." Caldwell, 434 F.zd at 1087 n.6.

13

Refusal of the condition [of anonymity to the source]
means refusal of the information. To the extent that
judicial compulsion under a procedural rule which
sanctions a "fishing expedition" renders such assurances
to information unavailable or precarious, the flow of news
to the public is pinched off at its source and, pro tanto, the
public's right to know is diminished.
Alan L. Goodfader, 45 Haw. at 359, 367 P.2d at 495 (Mizuha, J., dissenting).
Justice Mizuha distinguished Garland v. Torre, where the court found the
information sought "went to the heart of plaintiff's claim" as the alleged defamatory
statement was made by an employee of the defendant. Id. at 359, 367 P. at 497
(citing Garland, 259 F.2d at 545). In Goodfader, by contrast, other discovery had
made "apparent that the confidential information sought by the plaintiff did not
originate from the three defendants." Id. The dissent characterized plaintiff's
demand for the journalist's testimony as a "fishing expedition" by a private litigant.
He concluded that "the remote possibility that the disclosure of the news source
may lead to admissible evidence, must give place under the Constitution in the
public interest to a free press[.]" Id. at 364, 367 P.2d at 497, 498-99.
Another state's supreme court justice, in a partial dissent, sounded similar
notes of caution and called for greater deference to the First Amendment interest.
In State v. Knops, 49 Wis. 2d 647, 183 N.W.2d 93 (1971), the Wisconsin Supreme
Court affirmed the contempt cite of a journalist who would not tell grand jurors the
identity of sources who had confessed to a bombing. Dissenting Justice Heffernan,
however, wrote that while the majority's decision rested on a finding of "a
compelling and overriding interest that cannot be served by any alternative
means[,]" the court overlooked "official records" of the state and federal government
that suggested officials already knew the bombers' identities. Id. at 660, 183
N.W.2d at 99, 100 (Heffernan, J., dissenting). The state therefore "no longer has a
compelling interest in having [the journalist] testify to what is already known." Id.
at 661, 183 N.W2d at 100.
The Branzburg Case
To a differing degree, each of the U.S. Supreme Court justices' four decisions
in Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665, places limits on the subpoena powers of the
government in light of the First Amendment protections of the press. This is
noteworthy given that the strong Colonial and Revolutionary tradition of the
anonymous critic had been largely overtaken by a common law emphasis on the
judiciary's perceptions of the need for everyone's evidence and the authority of the
state to punish wrongdoing. It is especially remarkable given the interest that
competed with the First Amendment in the Branzburg case: the power of the grand
jury to investigate crimes.

14

15

Branzburg arose out of four grand jury investigations. Two of the grand
juries were convened to investigate reports in the Courier-Journal of Louisville on
the manufacture and sale of drugs in two Kentucky counties. See Branzburg v.
Pound, 461 S.W.2d 345 (Ky. Ct. App. 1970); Branzburg v. Meigs, 503 S.W.2d 748
(Ky. Ct. App. 1971). The third involved a Massachusetts grand jury's investigation
of a television journalist's coverage of the internal planning of protests by the Black
Panther movement. See In Re Pappas, 358 Mass. 604, 266 N.E.2d 297 (1971). The
fourth grand jury also probed reporting on the Black Panther movement, by a New
York Times journalist in California who quoted a member of the organization
advocating the violent overthrow of the federal government. See Caldwell v. U.S.,
434 F.2d 1081 (9th Cir. 1970).
Reporter Earl Caldwell of The Times met with much success in arguments to
the trial court and the Ninth Circuit. While the Northern District of California
court denied his motion to quash, it issued a protective order limiting his testimony
to published information and expressly permitting him to withhold "confidential
associations, sources or information received, developed or maintained by him as a
professional journalist." In re Caldwell, 311 F. Supp. 358, 362 (N.D. Cal. 1970).
The government could only mandate that testimony, the court held, upon a showing
"of a compelling and overriding national interest in requiring Mr. Caldwell's
testimony which cannot be served by alternative means." Id.
Notwithstanding these limitations, the reporter refused to appear before the
grand jury and was ordered jailed for contempt. The Ninth Circuit, however,
reversed. Caldwell v. U.S., 434 F.2d 1081 (1970). In a thoughtful opinion, Judge
Merrill noted reporter Caldwell's warning, in affidavit testimony, that compelling
his testimony would "'suppress vital First Amendment freedoms'" by "'driving a
wedge of distrust and silence between the news media and the militants[.]'" Id. at
1084 (quoting appellant's brief.) The court agreed that the appearance before the
grand jury constituted a real and imminent threat to the reporter's "very tenuous
and unstable" bond with the Black Panthers.27
Militant groups might understandably fear that, under
the pressure of examination before a Grand Jury, the
witness may fail to protect their confidences with quite
the same sure judgment he invokes in the normal course
of his professional work.
Id. at 1088. Requiring Caldwell to appear before the grand jury at all – even with
the shield the district court's protective order afforded him from having to reveal
sources – "necessarily introduces uncertainty in the minds of those who fear
27 The Ninth Circuit noted that the reporter-source relationship "depends on a trust and confidence

that is constantly subject to reexamination and that depends on . . . continuing reassurance that the
handling [of information the source imparted] has been discreet." Id. at 1088.

16

betrayal of their confidences." Id. In light of this threat, the Ninth Circuit that
placed the burden on the government.
we hold that where it has been shown that the public's
First Amendment right to be informed would be
jeopardized by requiring a journalist to submit to secret
Grand Jury interrogation, the Government must respond
by demonstrating a compelling need for the witness's
presence before judicial process properly can issue to
require attendance.
Id. at 1089.28 The appeals court vacated the order requiring Caldwell to appear,
reversed the finding of contempt, and remanded. Id. at 1090.
By contrast, the Kentucky state courts rejected the Courier-Journal
reporter's contentions that the state's shield law and the First Amendment afforded
him protections from appearing before the grand juries. The state court of appeals
distinguished the Ninth Circuit's ruling just two months earlier in Caldwell. It
noted that because Kentucky reporter Paul Branzburg had not filed an affidavit, the
court had no evidence before it to support the reporter's assertion "that the general
public, or the drug-using portion of it, would be so chilled by the mere appearance
before the grand jury that it would cease speaking to him or furnishing information
to him." Branzburg v. Meigs, 503 S.W.2d 748, 751. Moreover, calling the grand jury
"a bulwark of freedom specifically recognized" by the Constitution, the Kentucky
Court of Appeals expressed grave
misgivings about the rule announced in Caldwell. It
represents a drastic departure from the generally
recognized rule that the sources of information of a
newspaper reporter are not privileged under the
Amendment.
Id. at 751. While the court allowed that "[s]ome day a situation may arise" in which
a grand jury subpoena would "so seriously jeopardize constitutional rights," it held
that Branzburg's case did not present that situation. Id. The court upheld the trial
court's decision refusing to quash the subpoenas. Id.

28 The panel relied on Supreme Court precedent concering legislative investigations, noting there, the

Court "has required the sacrifice of First Amendment freedoms only where a compelling need for the
particular testimony in question is demonstrated." Id. at 1085-86 & n.4 (citing DeGregory v. Attorney
General of New Hampshire, 383 U.S. 825 (1966); Gibson v. Florida Legislative Investigation
Committee, 372 U.S. 539 (1963); NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449, 460-467 (1958); Sweezy v. New
Hampshire, 354 U.S. 234 (1957); Watkins v. United States, 354 U.S. 178 (1957); United States v.
Rumely, 345 U.S. 41 (1953).

17

Massachusetts television correspondent Paul Pappas fared no better after the
state trial court denied his motion to quash. The state Supreme Judicial Court took
judicial notice that the reporting at issue arose during "civil disorders," including
gunfire, during the summer of 1970. It assumed "the grand jury investigation was
an appropriate effort to discover and indict those responsible for criminal acts." In
re Pappas, 358 Mass. 604, 606, 266 N.E.2d 297, 299. The court then flatly criticized
the Caldwell decision for "largely disregard[ing] important interests of the Federal
government and the several States in enforcement of the criminal law[.]" In the
Massachusetts court's view, the Ninth Circuit had announced "newly discovered
constitutional absolutes" that were nothing short of "judicial amendment of the
Constitution or judicial legislation." Id. at 612, 266 N.E.2d at 302.
Requiring a newsman to testify about facts of his
knowledge does not prevent their publication or the
circulation of information. Any effect on the free
dissemination of news is indirect, theoretical, and
uncertain, and relates at most to the future gathering of
news.
Id. The Massachusetts high court held "that there exists no constitutional
newsman's privilege, either qualified or absolute, to refuse to appear and testify
before a court or grand jury." Id. at 612, 267 N.E.2d at 297.
The Supreme Court granted the Kentucky and Massachusetts reporters'
petitions for writs of certiorari and the government's petition in the California
case.29 The court then consolidated the cases for review.
Justice White's Opinion for the Supreme Court
Writing for himself and three others, Justice White began with a measure of
reassurance, acknowledging that news gathering, as with the publication of news, is
a protected right under the Constitution.
We do not question the significance of free speech, press,
or assembly to the country's welfare. Nor is it suggested
that news gathering does not qualify for some First
Amendment protection; without some protection for
seeking out the news, freedom of the press would
eviscerated.
Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. at 681. However, in his view and those of the others
who joined his opinion, these privilege claims presented a far different issue than
the other First Amendment cases that had confronted the Court. Justice White
29 402 U.S. 942 (1971).

18

noted the dispute did not involved "intrusions upon speech or assembly," nor a
"prior restraint or restriction on what the press may publish, and no express or
implied command that the press publish what it prefers to withhold." Id. at 681.
Instead, the Court framed the issue in the context of the general public's duty
to respond to grand jury subpoenas. Citing its prior decisions applying labor,30
antitrust,31 and tax32 laws to the press, the Court noted that "the First Amendment
does not invalidate every incidental burdening" of journalists "from the enforcement
of civil or criminal statutes of general applicability." Id. at 682. Justice White also
cited to other Supreme Court and courts of appeals decisions involving challenges to
restrictions on the methods and places in which journalists have sought to gather
the news.33 He concluded that under those decisions, "the First Amendment does
not guarantee the press a constitutional right of special access to information not
available to the public generally." Id. at 684. On that basis, the Court pronounced
that the First Amendment furnished no safe harbor for journalists from that duty.
Citizens generally are not constitutionally immune from
grand jury subpoenas; and neither the First Amendment
nor any other constitutional provision protects the
average citizen from disclosing to a grand jury
information that he receives in confidence.
Id. at 682 (footnote omitted.) He also wrote that the court in Garland v. Torre and
other cases analyzing the First Amendment "almost uniformly rejected" the
journalists' arguments, noting, however, the "occasional dicta that, in circumstances
not presented here, a newsman might be excused." Id. at 685-86 (citations omitted).
Moreover, it was "not surprising" to Justice White that the courts at common law
did not excuse journalists from disclosing their sources to a grand jury.
The Supreme Court measured the journalists' arguments against the
historical and constitutional roles of grand juries. To Justice White and the others
who joined his opinion, the "longstanding principle that 'the public has a right to
every man's evidence' . . . is particularly applicable to grand jury proceedings." Id.
at 688 (citations omitted.) The Court found no support in the record for the
argument "that a large number or a percentage of all confidential news sources . . .

30 Associated Press v. NLRB, 301 U.S. 103, 132-33 (1937).
31 Citizen Publ'g Co. v. United States, 394 U.S. 131, 139 (1969); Lorain Journal Co. v. United States,
342 U.S. 143, 155-56 (1951); Ind. Farmer's Guide Publ'g Co. v. Prairie Farmer Publ'g Co., 293 U.S.
268, 276 (1934).
32 Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 112 (1943;) Grosjean v. Am. Press Co., 297 U.S. 233, 250
(1936).
33 New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. 713, 728-30 (1971) (Stewart, J., concurring); Zemel
v. Rusk, 381 U.S. 1, 16-17 (1965); Tribune Review Publ'g Co. v. Thomas, 254 F.2d 883, 885 (3d Cir.
1958); In re United Press Assns. v. Valente, 308 N.Y. 71, 77, 123 N.E2d 777, 778 (1954).

19

would in any way be deterred by" requiring journalists to testify.34 Id. at 691. In
any event, Justice White wrote, the grand jury's contribution to "[f]air and effective
law enforcement aimed at providing security to the person and property of the
individual" overrides the journalists' concerns in that regard.
On the records now before us, we perceive no basis for
holding that the public interest in law enforcement and in
ensuring effective grand jury proceedings is insufficient to
override the consequential, but uncertain, burden on news
gathering that is said to result from insisting that
reporters, like other citizens, respond to relevant
questions put to them in the course of a valid grand jury
investigation or criminal trial.
Id. at 690-91.35
The Court also saw little justification for a First Amendment shield from the
sources' points of view. If the source is a wrongdoer, "their desire to escape
prosecution . . . while understandable, is hardly deserving of constitutional
protection." Id. at 691. Where the source is not a criminal but has information
about the crimes of others and fears retribution — for example, threats to their "job
security, personal safety, or peace of mind" — the Court saw no evidence that they
"should in fact be in a worse position, or would think they would be, if they risked
placing their trust in public officials as well as reporters." Id. at 692, 695.
The Court also was troubled by the "practical and conceptual difficulties of a
high order" that a First Amendment privilege could present. The first concern was
how "to define those categories of newsmen who qualified for the privilege,"
especially considering that press freedoms traditionally apply equally to "the lonely
pamphleteer who uses carbon paper or a mimeograph just as much as the large
metropolitan publisher who utilizes the latest photocomposition methods." Id. at
704. Also troubling to the Court was the prospect of claims of privilege "by groups
that set up newspapers in order to engage in criminal activity and to therefore be
insulated from grand jury inquiry[.]" Id. at 704 n.40.
The Court noted that the Attorney General's Office had recently fashioned
internal operating guidelines that contained prerequisites to subpoenas to
journalists in criminal cases. 36 To the Court, the guidelines obviated the need for
34 The Court nonetheless acknowledged that journalists' fears "that the flow of news will be

diminished by compelling reporters to aid the grand jury in criminal investigations is not
irrational[.]" To Justice White, however, "the evidence fails to demonstrate that there would be a
significant [ob]struction in the flow of news to the public[.]" Id. at 693 (footnote omitted).
35Justice White also observed that several states had, by that time, provided some sort of statutory
protection for compelled testimony of journalists. He noted, however, that "the majority have not
done so" and that Congress repeatedly had failed to enact several shield bills. Id. at 689 & nn.27, 28.
36 The Attorney General's guidelines are now codified at 28 CFR § 50.10.

20

additional protection under the First Amendment, as they "may prove wholly
sufficient to resolve the bulk of disagreements" with prosecutors over subpoenas. Id.
at 707-08.
Justice White concluded the Court's opinion with the reiteration that "news
gathering is not without its First Amendment protections[.]" He sent the court
system a strong signal that, despite the Court's decision not to announce a privilege,
its opinion should not be read as furnishing a carte blanche to prosecutors.
[G]rand jury investigations if instituted or conducted
other than in good faith, would pose wholly different
issues for resolution under the First Amendment. Official
harassment of the press undertaken not for purposes of
law enforcement but to disrupt a reporter's relationship
with his news sources would have no justification. Grand
juries are subject to judicial control and subpoenas to
motions to quash. We do not expect courts will forget that
grand juries must operate within the limits of the First
Amendment as well as the Fifth.
Id. at 707-08.
Justice Powell's Concurrence
Just three paragraphs long, Justice Powell's concurrence in Branzburg has
given legal ammunition and solace to generations of journalists and press
advocates. He wrote to clarify his understanding that Justice White's decision "does
not hold that newsmen, subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury, are without
constitutional rights with respect to the gathering of news or in safeguarding their
sources." Id., 408 U.S. 665 at 709 (Powell, J., concurring). He reinforced the Court's
statements that "no harassment of newsmen will be tolerated" and that a journalist
"who believes that the grand jury investigation is not being conducted in good faith .
. . is not without remedy." Id. at 710.
Indeed, if the newsman is called upon to give information
bearing only a remote and tenuous relationship to the
subject of the investigation, or if he has some other reason
to believe that his testimony implicates confidential
source relationship without a legitimate need of law
enforcement, he will have access to the court on a motion
to quash and an appropriate protective order may be
entered. The asserted claim to privilege should be judged
on its facts by the striking of a proper balance between

21

freedom of the press and the obligation of all citizens to
give relevant testimony with respect to criminal conduct.
Id.
Rather than Justice White's seemingly blanket rejection of any weighing of
interests, Justice Powell called on the courts to "balance of these vital
constitutional and societal interests on a case-by-case basis accords with the tried
and traditional way of adjudicating such questions." He thus reassured journalists,
and signaled the judiciary, that "the courts will be available to newsmen under
circumstances where legitimate First Amendment interests require protection." Id.
at 710.
Justice Stewart's Dissent
Joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall, Justice Stewart in dissent
chastised the Court for its "crabbed view of the First Amendment" and its
"disturbing insensitivity to the critical role of an independent press in a free
society." Id., 408 U. S. at 725 (Stewart, J., dissenting). He accused the Court of
inviting the government "to undermine the historic independence of the press by
attempting to annex the journalistic profession as an investigative arm of
government." Id.
To this group of dissenters, "the broad societal interest in free and full flow of
information to the public" is the "basic concern that underlies the Constitution's
protections of a free press." Id. at 725-26 (citations omitted). That interest is not
adequately served solely by safeguarding the right to publish, but also includes the
"corollary" right to gather news. Id. at 727.
No less important to the news dissemination process is
the gathering of information. News must not be
unnecessarily cut off at its source, for without freedom to
acquire information the right to publish would be
impermissibly compromised. Accordingly, a right to
gather news, of some dimensions, must exist.
Id. at 728 (citing Zemel v. Rusk, 381 U.S. 1, Note, "The Right of the Press to Gather
Information," 71 Colum. L. Rev. 838 (1971)).
Justice Stewart set forth a compelling syllogism to encapsulate his reasoning
of why the law must protect the reporter-source relationship.
(1) newsmen require informants to gather news; (2)
confidentiality – the promise or understanding that
22

names or certain aspects of communications will be kept
off the record – is essential to the creation and
maintenance of a news-gathering relationship with
informants; and (3) an unbridled subpoena power – the
absence of a constitutional right protecting, in any way, a
confidential relationship from compulsory process – will
either deter sources from divulging information or deter
reporters from gathering and publishing information.
Id. 37 Promises of confidentiality, he observed, may be necessary to "a productive
relationship" between journalist and source. Many sources – particularly those in
government – "may be willing to relate [ ] information only in confidence to a
reporter whom he trusts because of excessive caution or because of a reasonable fear
of reprisals or censure for unorthodox views." Id. at 729-30. Justice Stewart wrote
that sources, under the Court's decision, now must "choose between risking
exposure by giving information or avoiding the risk by remaining silent." Id. at 731.
Noting, as did the Court, society's interest in the grand jury's function,
Justice Stewart observed that "the longstanding rule making every person's
evidence available to the grand jury is not absolute." Id. at 737. He cited the
protections against compelled disclosures under the Fourth and Fifth Amendments
and the common law privileges, all of which shield information in which there exists
"'a very real interest to be protected.'" Id. (quoting United States v. Bryan, 339 U.S.
323, 332 ). He observed that a journalist's privilege would not only serve "the First
Amendment interests of either partner in the news-gathering relationship" but also
"serves nothing less than democratic decision making through the free flow of
information to the public[.]" Id.
To balance the interests between the grand jury's function and the First
Amendment interest in the free flow of news, Justice Stewart advocated a threepart test that has, with some variations, now become a familiar standard in most
courts.
I would hold that the government must (1) show that
there is probable cause to believe that the newsman has
information that is clearly relevant to a specific probable
violation of law; (2) demonstrate that the information
sought cannot be obtained by alternative means less
37 Justice White's view that the journalists in Branzburg had established, at best, an uncertain

burden on news gathering, id. at 710, drew a sharp rebuke from Justice Stewart. "We have never
before demanded that First Amendment rights rest on elaborate empirical studies demonstrating
beyond any conceivable doubt that deterrent effects exit." Id. at 733 (Stewart, J., dissenting). He
also noted that the record included uncontradicted affidavits of at least 19 journalists, including
Walter Cronkite, Eric Sevareid, Mike Wallace, and Dan Rather, attesting that "deterrence will occur
with regularity in important types of news-gathering relationships." Id. at 736 & n.20.

23

destructive of First Amendment rights; and (3)
demonstrate a compelling and overriding interest in the
information.
Id. at 743 (footnotes omitted).38 The "probable cause" and "alternative means"
portions of the dissent's test would "serve the vital function of mediating between"
the competing public interests in the administration of justice and the free flow of
news. Id. at 745.
Justice Stewart recognized that the courts would need "to make some delicate
judgments in working out this accommodation." But in his view, "that, after all, is
the function of courts of law." Id. at 745-46.
Better such judgments, however difficult, than the
simplistic and stultifying absolutism adopted by the Court
in denying any force to the First Amendment in these
cases.
Id. at 746.
Justice Douglas's Dissent
terms.

Writing for himself, Justice Douglas expressed his dissent in absolutist
It is my view that there is no 'compelling need' that can be
shown which qualifies the reporter's immunity from
appearing and testifying before a grand jury, unless the
reporter himself is implicated in a crime.

U.S. v. Caldwell, 408 U.S. 711, 712 (Douglas, J., dissenting). In fact, according to
Justice Douglas, a journalist need never even appear at all, for if he is not an
alleged criminal "the First Amendment protects him against an appearance before
the grand jury, and, if he is involved in a crime, the Fifth Amendment stands as a
barrier." Id.
Two First Amendment principles underlie Justice Douglas's reasoning. First
"an individual must . . . have absolute privacy over whatever information he may
generate in the course of testing his opinions and beliefs." Id. at 714. Second, saw
subpoenas for journalists' testimony as a threat to "a steady, robust, unimpeded,
and uncensored flow of opinion and reporting which are continuously subject to
38 Interestingly, Justice Stewart wrote that in his view, the Second Circuit decision in Garland v.

Torre – which he authored while a member of that court – "recognized a newsman's First
Amendment right to a confidential relationship with his source[.]" Id. at 742 n.33.

24

critique, rebuttal, and reexamination" essential to "effective self-government." Id.
at 715.
To Justice Douglas, "all of the 'balancing' was done by those who wrote the
Bill of Rights." Id. at 713. He criticized the position of the government – and that
of the New York Times, which advocated a balancing of interests – as suggesting a
"timid, watered-down, emasculated version of First Amendment[.]" Id.

Conclusion
The protection of critics of the government is at least one element of what the
Framers had in mind when they established freedom of the press as a cornerstone
to the Bill of Rights. Through subsequent history, however, notions of strong
government authority — especially the powers of the judiciary and the grand jury
— overtook this aspect of the original intent of the First Amendment. As a result,
for much of our history, reporter's privilege gained little foothold in American
jurisprudence.
The decisions in Branzburg, however, made clear that journalists are not
without rights when subpoenaed to reveal their sources. The case signaled a deeply
divided Supreme Court's efforts to grapple with an undeniable reality. Disclosure of
sources, if too easily compelled, will undermine one of the central the principles on
which the Revolutionary War was waged and that has allowed the press to flourish
in our society.

# 2947636_v1

25

