SMALL MARKET OR SMALL STAFF?
HOW TO STILL DO INVESTIGATIONS
Easy and Intermediate Story Ideas
2005 IRE National Conference in Denver
Tisha Thompson, Investigative Reporter
WMAR-TV
Baltimore, MD
thompson@wmar.com 410-372-2536

EASY INVESTIGATIONS
Big Time Over Time
Which public officials are cashing in on their overtime? Don’t just look at City Hall –
but check out the Sheriff’s Department, the public schools, Dept. of Transportation,
Public Works Department, etc.
Crumbling Bridges
This is my favorite first-time investigation…unless you live in Missouri (it’s been done
there way too many times by J-schoolers). Get a copy of the Bridges database from
NICAR and look up the worst bridges in your area. You’re guaranteed to get
something good from this fairly user-friendly database…and you’ll really learn the
layout of your viewing area after you try to scramble under some of these suckers.
Fake Fingernails for City Council
How are your candidates spending their campaign money? Jessica Lowell of the
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle found one candidate using her money to buy fake fingernails
in a bid for image improvement. Another candidate used his money to buy new
shoes because he “had to go door-to-door.” Don’t forget to check who is giving this
money as well.
But Does He Even Live There?
You wouldn’t believe the number of candidates that don’t actually live in the district
where they are running when they file. John McCarthy at Florida Today says, “It’s
amazing how often people move into a district to run for office.” Check out your
long-serving politicos as well…especially after they get divorced. I found the wife
kicks them out of the house and the district, they then rent an empty shack in the
district, then they shack up with their new girlfriend no where near their district.
If They Can’t Bother to Show Up, Why Should You
Mark Ranzenberger at the Morning Sun in Mount Pleasant, Michigan suggests looking
at how often these candidates have shown up to the polls and actually voted. As he
says, “It’s amazing how often they have a really spotty voting history.”
Taxes? We Don’t Pay No Stinkin’ Taxes
Russell Martin at WRCB in Chattanooga loves this story. Are your local officials
paying their taxes? Any liens on their property? Great small market story…and it
works in the big cities as well. Mark Ranzenberger says, “don’t forget the water and
sewer bills” either. Paul Parker at the Providence Journal adds you should also see if
any of these guys are getting tax abatements.

But We Do Pay for the Bouncers
John Kelly at the Pioneer Press in Illinois suggests finding out how much public
money goes into police security at political fundraisers – especially when the
President or the First Lady comes to town.
And Not for the Textbooks
Mark Tapscott at the Center for Media and Public Policy says you’ve just got to check
out the U.S. Census Bureau’s Public Elementary-Secondary School Finance database
at www.census.gov/govs/www/school03.html where you will find all kinds of story
tips on how much the government is paying on instruction, salaries, textbooks, etc.
for every school district in the country.
Knives, Guns and Backpacks
Kid get expelled for bringing a weapon to school? Bet it happens a lot more than you
think. Get your state’s disciplinary database. It will tell you how often the kids are
expelled and suspended at local schools – but it will also tell you why…and how often
a weapon is involved.
Yes, You Just May Fall Out of that Rollercoaster
Perfect May/July Sweeps story.
Someone typically dies every summer in a
rollercoaster accident. FOIA rollercoaster and/or amusement park ride inspection
reports for your state. The state inspectors love to show off how well they do their
jobs – and there are lots of Internet sites that will give you some tips on how your
state compares to others. You’ll be stunned at some of the stuff that goes wrong on
your favorite rollercoaster.
Big League Spending
Get a copy of the Major League Database, or similar databases from the NFL and the
NBA. Find out whose making what – and what cost to your local team. Before she
left USA Today, Mary Jo Sylwester found the American League outspent the National
League…by a lot. This is a sports story (remember your demographics).
If You’re Surrounded by Water
Then you definitely need a copy of NICAR’s boat_acc database. Mike Mather of
NewsChannel 3 in Norfolk says he uses it all the time in his water-saturated city. He
particularly likes it for breaking news stories because he can find things like the
region’s deadliest waterways, life-preserver use, personal watercraft statistics…it
goes on and on.
The Top Dog
It may sound silly, but people lap this stuff up…literally. Get a copy of your pet
license database. Find out who is the top pooch in your area…or zip code. That’s
what Susan Saulny did at…the New York Times. If it’s good enough for them, it’s
good enough for you. You could also find out who and where the rarest breeds
reside. And the NICAR gurus say you should always have a copy of this database
anyway…just in case.
My name is George Bush and Her Name is ky…seriously
Get a copy of the voter registration database. This is a good thing to have in general
during the election cycle – so you can find out how many Republicans v. Democrats
there are…as well as Communists…registered in your state. But you can also use
this database to find people who share a famous name – like “George Bush.” Or if
the election is already over – look up the weird ones. Sandra Fish at the Daily
Camera in Boulder, CO found a guy named “ky.” Not Kay, not K, just ky. Seriously.

And Maybe ky Got More Votes than W
Ronald Campbell at the Orange County Register went and found who had the most
write-in votes. In California, Jesus Christ beat out Mickey Mouse in the last
presidential election. Of course, you may want to focus on some of the more local
folk who ended up with their names in the pot.
Starbucks and Pizza Plus Interest
Marcus Hibdon suggests getting the government-issued credit card bills for your
favorite city or county. He says, “there’s bound to be hard-to-defend charges like
coffee from Starbucks.”
Even better, “find out how much interest they
accrue…taxpayers will love (or hate) to read about city employees ordering pizza on
their dime.”
But Don’t Forget the Top Tens
WSMV-TV’s Nancy Amon’s Favorite Easy Investigations
Top 10 most expensive homes
Top 10 most-often stolen cars
Most unpaid parking tickets
Department with the biggest budget increase
Person/Department with the highest expense report
District attorney with the highest win ratio
Highest Salary of CEO’s
Highest salary of CEO for a non-profit

INTERMEDIATE INVESTIGATIONS
The Top Tens Take Two
WSMV-TV’s Nancy Amon’s Favorite Intermediate Investigations
Top 10 most like spots to have your car stolen
City/state official cell phone bills
Most speeding tickets
Highest per diem for lawmakers
Biggest OSHA fine in the state
Biggest OSHA fine never paid
Highest legal bill paid by the taxpayers
Lowest percent of fundraising proceeds going to charity
There’s a Cockroach Crawling on my School Computer
This could be really easy…or a big pain to do…but it will produce results. FOIA the
last two years of health inspection reports for your public schools, your private
schools, local restaurants, whatever floats your boat. Public schools are great
because they affect the most people (remember your demographics). Create a
database in Excel for each violation category. Look at their overall health…or if you
are really ambitious…compare counties. This is super easy to do if the records are
computerized...but don’t get your hopes up. Paul Parker at the Providence Journal
offered this variation on the theme as well – make sure your schools and restaurants
are even getting inspected.

It completely slipped my mind, I swear
Find out if your public officials are telling the truth on their publicly filed ethics forms.
Jessica Lowell of the Wyoming Tribune-Eagle found a gubernatorial candidate
neglected to disclose his interest in a company when he was Speaker of the House.
Will require a good understanding on how to background businesses and how to use
the SEC’s website.
Charter School Competition
Holly Hacker at the Dallas Morning News got a copy of the school enrollment
database and used it to show how charter schools were sucking kids out of the public
school system. Who are the winners…and who are the losers in your area? To do
this story well, you may need some mapping help.
Venus Lives Alone While Mars Can’t Survive Without His Buddies
Paula Lavigne at the Dallas Morning News found guys tend to live with roommates,
while the ladies live alone. It was even more so locally in Dallas. How did she do it?
By going to the US Census Bureau’s website. Lots of good stories to be found in the
census website – especially if your competition doesn’t have a NICAR guru.
A 40-1 Ratio But At Least He Gets Healthcare
Check into the health benefits for school board members. Marcus Hibdon says many
districts are offering big-time incentive packages in an effort to attract “a higher
caliber candidate.” But some of these guys get things like health-care for life. Will
people with health problems seek an office they would otherwise have no interest in?
Are board members killing off vital programs but reaping in the benefits?
I Know Where to Buy the Winning Lottery Ticket
Get a copy of your state’s lottery ticket sales and cashings databases to find out
where all the tickets are sold (in the city or in the suburbs) and which stores sell the
most winning tickets. You will probably need to pick your favorite game (we used
the Megamillions) and negotiate hard to get the data. Be prepared for LOTS of data
– we received two million lines for one week’s worth of sales. You can make this
story as serious (do the poor people really get taxed) or as light-hearted (does luck
have anything to do with it) as you want.
I’m Going to the Mall to Get Mugged
Get a copy of your police incident database – which will give you TOO MANY story
ideas…but chances are good that the largest number of robberies, muggings,
assaults, car theft, burglaries…you name it…take place at the local mall.
But You’ve Already Robbed This Bank…Twice
That same police incident dataset will hopefully tell you how often banks are being
robbed. We were even able to read what was on the notes they passed – and how
the bank robbers screwed up. We noticed some banks had been robbed four to five
times within a year.
Even If He Gets Away with the Money, He’ll Probably Get Stuck in Traffic
I think this story is tired, but it always seems to get good ratings. Go to the Census
website and calculate drive times in your viewing area. Chances are good they’re
out of control. Look at how much gas you waste sitting in traffic, how long rush-hour
has become, which counties have the worst jams, and when is the worst time to
drive. For some reason, people love to be told how miserable they are when they go
to work.

