IRE Annual Conference, Denver
June 4, 2005
Eric Eyre
Charleston Gazette
(304) 348-4869
ericeyre@wvgazette.com

Andy Hall
Wisconsin State Journal
(608) 252-6136
ahall@madison.com

Nigel Jaquiss
Willamette Week
(503) 417-9337
njaquiss@wweek.com

Investigating public officials:
How smaller news organizations do it
10 tips for getting started
1)Seek another warm body: No one should labor alone. Support colleagues with mentoring, training and
networking through organizations such as IRE.
2)Listen before leaping: Beat reporters, lawsuits, neighbors, fellow church members, party guests, coffee
shop patrons, school parents and newsroom callers offer great tips, particularly in small communities.
3)Rules rule: It’s essential to learn how things are supposed to work before you can understand what’s
going wrong. Learn the law. Often the best stories are about what’s legal.
4)Be shrewd, dude: The stories that will have the greatest impact may not be obvious at first. They may
involve prosecutors in faraway counties (if the statewide justice system is flawed) or former public
officials (if the transgressions are severe enough). Show readers and viewers why this matters.
5)Jack be nimble, Jack be quick: Small news organizations can quickly adapt to fast-moving events.
Fewer editors need to sign off. Turf battles are rarer than in large newsrooms.
6)Learn to punt: Drop a story that’s failing to gel. Balance the quality of story against your limited
resources and other tips that are being neglected.
7)No I-team? No problem: Build a team when it’s needed, matching journalists’ skills and availability to
the story.
8)Appetizers first: A quick story puts your stamp on the issue and buys editors’ support for a more
expansive investigation.
9)Patience: Recognize that with small staffs, delays are part of the landscape.
10)Rock ‘em by rolling: A rolling investigation raises the profile of the issue over an extended period of
time, often leading to useful tips while providing the news organization with high-impact coverage.

10 places to look for stories and sources
1)The motivated: Enemies, victims and competitors.
2)The money trail: Direct such as contribution and expenditure reports and indirect, such as
public/private partnerships, which usually require financial reporting to the public entity.
3)The perks: Personal service contracts allow public entities to reward friends and supporters.
4)The schedule: Public officials’ time is valuable. Their calendars show how they spend it. So do credit
card receipts, landline phone bills, cell phone bills and the sign-in logs at public offices.
5)The stationery (paper and electronic): Public officials’ letters, memos and emails.
6)The state bar or legal regulatory agency: Usually a treasure trove of documents including
investigators’ notes, depositions and motivated sources.
7)The courthouse: Divorce files are great but other legal documents – such as suits filed by former
employees -- often provide sources and windows into officials’ lives.
8)Public employee unions: Union members are the backbone of government, know where everything is
and how it works, make big political contributions and are adversarial to public officials in contract
negotiations.
9)Custodians, secretaries and assistants: They see everything and often feel unappreciated.
10)Laid-off, fired or temporary workers: Find the victims of budget cuts, those with an axe to grind
and those temps who work long enough to see the inside but not long enough to become loyal.

10 free sources of information
1)The library: Many big libraries subscribe to vast numbers of electronic databases, newspaper archives,
trade journals and other expensive publications. A library card gets you free access.
2)Lawyers: Courthouses and court reporters charge lots of money for documents such as transcripts and
depositions that motivated lawyers will often give you for free.
3)Opposition research: In every meaningful election, somebody is out there digging. Their findings
usually don’t get discarded after an election, so anybody who has ever run for office is in a file
somewhere.
4)Web people finders: You can pay a lot even on reasonably priced sites such as Accurint
(www.accurint.com) but you can also get lots of free stuff from sites such as www.bigbook.com,
www.switchboard.com (phone numbers, addresses,) www.anywho.com/rl.html (matching phone numbers
with people) and www.ussearch.com (ages). A terrific launching pad is at www.reporter.org/desktop.
5)Reverse directories: At every public library; they’re great for finding current and old neighbors of
people you are backgrounding.
6)School and college yearbooks: Paid for with public dollars, usually, and an excellent source of friends
and acquaintances.
7)Basic public records: Many jurisdictions now post Uniform Commercial Code filings, corporation
division filings and property information on city, county or state websites. Contracts – especially no-bid
deals – are key to understanding who’s getting what. See www.searchsystems.net to get started.
8)Experts: University professors and researchers, local accountants and attorneys, and non-profit
associations help assess potential wrongdoing, whether you’re examining ethics, finances or something
else.
9)Google: It’s obvious but crucial on any investigative story to type names and numbers into
www.google.com and other search engines. Use the Google Images and Groups sections, too.
10)Officials’ own words: News releases, news stories and campaign literature show what has been said.
Have promises been kept?

