Flesh on the bones
Tip Sheet: Using Narrative Techniques in Investigative Stories
IRE National Conference, Denver, June 2-5, 2005
mmoffeit@denverpost.com 303 820-1415
By Miles Moffeit/The Denver Post
The skeleton of the investigative story is built with damning facts. But the
story doesn’t come alive without good, classic storytelling. That means
fleshing out characters. That means using suspense. That means describing
the emotional landscapes and the culture surrounding your subjects.
These elements are often ignored during the planning stages of a project. To
pull it off, start early.
Identifying a Good Narrative. Great candidates for strong narrative
projects are failing institutions and corporations. You already have your
Shakespearean element: tragedy. Apply that to a corporate meltdown such as
Enron. Sketch its demise chronologically, through the highs and lows.
Build Your Cast of Characters. Who was responsible for the ruin? Who
were the doubters and dissenters? On the first day you launch, build a file
listing the characters at the center of the issues you raise and update it as you
go along. Jot down their career experiences, their motives, their political
camps, their physical descriptions. Later as you write the story, the words
will flow easier. In writing about accounting scandals at telecom giant
Qwest, I had heard early on that the former CEO, Joe Nacchio, was obsessed
with numbers. When it came time to write the story, the words spilled out
because I had written many of them down earlier.
He studied them, he memorized them, spouted them, finessed them.
The number fixation was his brilliance and his weakness, his
colleagues and critics say, the reason his company hit or bested
the targets of Wall Street’s predictions 15 straight quarters. In
speech after speech, he talked about the streak.
But it was also the reason colleagues often felt uneasy with him, as
if the numbers kept his foot smashed to the pedal.

Every investigative piece should have a narrative thread. That can be a
character, like Nacchio, whose actions are tracked in various chapters.

What’s the Emotional Landscape? Study the cultural landscape of the
company or institution. What is the ideology of the leadership? What are the
philosophical influences behind the villains and heroes in your story? What
are the fears, apprehensions, pressures, hopes and dreams of the people who
work at these places?
Write it authoritatively.
In Qwest, we described the Nacchio’s arrival at the company like this:
The yellow-pages division was the pride of US West’s corporate family, a
reason to light up cigars every year.
They championed diversity and community-outreach projects. And they
practically obsessed over measuring customer and employee satisfaction,
workers say.
So when Nacchio’s team burst in, they shuddered. Immediately, it seemed to
them, Nacchio was feeding years of success into the shredder.

The Writing. Good narratives contain suspense, dialogue and lots of
anecdotes. If these elements are in the story, the action helps hold readers’
through a double truck of newsprint real estate.
Using suspense, means not giving away everything at the beginning.
Consider holding what could be considered a major finding toward the
middle or end to keep the drama unfolding. We did this in Qwest by not
foreshadowing a memo written by management instructing employees to
keep an accounting maneuver secret. This was candy given to the reader 50
inches into the piece.
Using dialogue means not being content to just quote people talking, but
describing how they’re interacting. In a piece describing Enron’s demise,
``The Collapse of the Culture of Cool,’’ I used this simple exchange to
highlight the fever for the deal.

Enron could drown in a flood of deals, many believed.
"This is an operating company," a troubled Oxer told Mark, the Azurix
CEO, one day. "To be in the water business, you have to be an operating
company."
"No, we're a deal company," Mark shot back.

Using anecdotes means describing situations that relate to the bigger picture.
Consider beginning all or some of your individual chapters with revealing
anecdotes about your main characters to reacquaint them with your
points/themes.

Think Narrative While Your Reporting. To succeed at this kind of
storytelling, whether it’s a full-blown narrative or an investigation with
narrative elements, make mental notes during your interviews and reporting.
Use one trusting source you can return to repeatedly during your reporting
who has a grasp of the culture and characters.

