GROWING PAINS: DIGGING UP THE DIRT

Darcy Spears
Investigative Reporter
KVBC-TV
dspears@kvbc.com
702-657-3177
www.kvbc.com

2005 IRE National Conference
Denver
“The Rockies and Beyond:
Investigating land, development and
sprawl”

Any city dealing with fast-paced growth has a number of attendant issues. All are questions
journalists can ask as the idea kernels for investigative stories.
- What’s the impact on the environment?
- In what ways are taxpayers paying for unchecked development?
- What price are we paying in health as fallout from environmental impact? I found
constant dust pollution due to construction activity going on unchecked, little to no dust
control on the sites, no laws requiring smog checks of diesel construction vehicles. My
reporting became almost a beat for awhile, under the umbrella title, “Deadly Dust.”
POLLUTION POLICE
Every city has a government agency in charge of policing the polluters. When I arrived in Las
Vegas, the Clark County Air Pollution Control Board was doing little in terms of citing and
fining polluters. Stake out any construction site and it’s simple to catch the culprits in the act. If
you know some of the big polluters, check their local records of citations and fines. The EPA
has federal jurisdiction over all major polluters and may have taken action over and above your
local agency. That federal action could point to a failure to act locally. Our coverage forced new
penalty amounts, increased crackdowns, institution of dust classes to educate the industry on
what’s required of them, and new dust control signs at each site listing contact persons and
numbers to call to report pollution. We even succeeded in forcing the County to add more staff
inspectors. This kind of coverage also helped me develop whistleblowers within the Air
Pollution Control Division who were sick of watching upper management do favors for highpowered friends.
HIGHWAY HAZARDS
Big rigs run through every city, and where there’s construction and urban sprawl, there are
trucks. Most cities have a law on the books requiring trucks to tarp their loads, but here in Las
Vegas, no one enforced it until our coverage of the damage to motorists and lack of
responsibility taken by construction/trucking companies forced County Commissioners to renew
enforcement efforts. Now nearly every truck in town is tarped. It’s easy to find motorists to talk
about this one. Check complaint records with your local government agency to find construction
debris complaints and get in touch with victims that way.

FIELD OF STREAMS
Especially in the West, water and drought conditions are major concerns. Growth and urban
sprawl takes water, and that precious resource is not being renewed to keep pace with rapid
growth. Water is the latest big issue for many Western states. What is your city doing to combat
drought conditions? The answer to this question may open your eyes to some serious taxpayerfunded boondoggles. I found one, and you can see the story online here:
http://www.kvbc.com/Global/story.asp?s=668995
DUST DEVILS
Consider a franchise. I did one called “Dust Devils,” which was sort of a “shame on you” series
where we kept tabs on who the polluters were and how much they were being fined, then showed
up on construction sites, with the camera rolling, to ask them why they couldn't comply with the
law. This almost always resulted in good TV.
INSPECTING THE INSPECTORS
From California to Florida, building booms are popping up coast to coast. For every home built,
a local government inspector has to sign off on it. I think you know where I’m going here…
Inspection records can be a goldmine for what DOESN’T get done. Homeowners rely on
inspectors to make sure builders are doing their job, but who’s inspecting the inspectors? It’s
amazing how much shoddy work inspectors sign off on, and how many homes get passed
without required inspections. Class action lawsuits are good places to start looking for defects
that may indicate this underlying issue. You can also just compare what your city requires, with
what inspection records show was actually done on any given structure. Pick a controversial
development or builder and follow the paper trail. Here’s a link to my reports on this subject.
http://www.kvbc.com/Global/story.asp?S=2581671
http://www.kvbc.com/Global/story.asp?s=2584130

