The Abuse and Exploitation of Children: Overcoming the
Confidentiality Barrier
Gerry Lanosga, Investigative Producer
WTHR-Indianapolis
glanosga@wthr.com
317-655-5809

2005 IRE National Conference
Denver
June 4, 2005

Investigations into child abuse and the agencies that monitor it will always be a challenge because
of the confidentiality of many of the specific case records involved. That shouldn’t deter us from doing our
jobs in this important area, however. There are ways to get around the confidentiality rules.
For starters, make sure you know the law – you may be living in a state that already allows some
access to the records. Right now, at least 20 states permit public disclosure of abuse and neglect records in
some or all fatality and/or near-fatality cases: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia,
Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nevada, New Jersey,
North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Wisconsin (National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
Information, http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/general/legal/statutes/confide.pdf, current as of July 2003). If you
live in these states, you should regularly ask for those records and do stories based on them – they don’t
always have to be long-term projects.
But what if you live in a state where that kind of access is not permitted? That was the case when
we began our investigation into Indiana’s child protection system nearly 20 months ago. The documents
we wanted were mostly confidential by statute. Despite the curtain of confidentiality, though, we found
there were still plenty of tools at our disposal.
• First, make contact with people in the system who might be willing to provide documents
you can’t get through a records request. For our first series of stories, we relied on parents and
agency insiders to provide records on a piecemeal basis. Sometimes these are the calls and emails you’re tempted to ignore because, as we probably all have said at one time or another, “Here
comes another CPS complaint.” But often, these are the people who can get you in the door of an
otherwise closed system. Because of that – and despite the lack of systematic documentation – we
were able to air a forceful series about children who were removed from abusive or neglectful
homes only to be re-victimized in foster care
(www.wthr.com/Global/story.asp?S=1512585&nav=DqSHIx5o).
• Second, don’t limit your research to state agencies, which are notorious for finding ways to
delay or block access to information. Remember that a lot of funding for children’s services
comes from the federal government, and that means a potential bounty of oversight records –
many of which are available online. The Administration for Children and Families, an agency of
the Department of Health and Human Services, is stop one: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/. We also
found the department’s National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect Information to be
useful: http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/. You won’t get specific case information from these offices,
but you will get documents that can point you in the direction of problems in your home state. In
our case, we found data to back up the things we were finding anecdotally.
• As a last resort, consider getting access to child abuse case files by seeking status as a
researcher. At last count, 26 states (along with the District of Columbia) allowed researchers to
view files cleansed of identifying information: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado,
Connecticut, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Montana,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah and Wisconsin. As a researcher, you can compile the data and
then try to put names and faces to individual cases using other means, such as police reports. If
you can’t identify the cases, be sure to tell your readers or viewers or listeners why. And that
brings me to the next point…
• Don’t forget to wield the power of the pen. That is to say, if you can’t show the full picture of
child abuse or neglect because of restricted access to records, say so. In fact, put it in your lead. If
there’s an opportunity to mention blocked access to public records, don’t ever let it slip by.
Journalists let it happen far too often on this and other topics, and our silence allows the

•

•

perpetuation of the secret-keeping. By using the pages of our newspapers and the minutes in our
newscasts as a bully pulpit on the issue of access, we can change that. In fact, that is what
happened in Indiana. As we continued to air stories mentioning the confidentiality barrier,
lawmakers took notice and, in the next legislative session,enacted a law to open the records on
child abuse and neglect fatalities.
Exercise your right to records. If you have the right to records under your state’s laws, act like a
prosecutor and enforce it. That may mean getting your organization to spring for some legal costs,
as ours did. When the new disclosure law took effect in Indiana last year, we promptly put it to
the test, asking for two years worth of records. One of the things we found was that the state was
failing to comply fully with the new law, so we went to court and won a judge’s ruling that took
the agency to task for withholding certain records and ordering the production of those documents.
The result was a second series (www.wthr.com/Global/story.asp?S=2549022&nav=DqSHT3ZF)
that documented the lack of compliance, among other things, and again got the notice of
lawmakers. Just this past month, the legislature approved significant improvements to the
disclosure law.
Finally, keep beating the drum. None of the legislative or other changes that arose from our
reporting resulted from a single series of stories. From beginning to end, it’s been more than 20
months and nearly 60 stories, including two distinct series. If the issue is important and the stories
continue to break new ground, policymakers and the public will continue to follow it.

