Investigating Racial Profiling Problems
Holly Whisenhunt Stephen, Investigative Producer
News 4 WOAI TV
hollywhisenhunt@woai.com (210) 226-4444 x 426

2005 IRE Conference
Denver

How can a motorist be considered black, white and Hispanic by the same police officer? It
happened in San Antonio and our two month investigation uncovered a police database full of
errors and duplications and drivers listed as more than one race. Ironically, this same data was
used in a study showing SAPD officers did not racially profile drivers. We started looking at the
issue of racial profiling after analyzing thousands of tickets for a story about speeding tickets.
What you need to know before you start:
Watch for dirty data. Remember it is data entry —you can’t get around the fact that mistakes will
be made. When you’re looking for specifics inspect the hard copy records for accuracy and
clarification.
The data:
We filed an open records request (Texas Public Information Act) to obtain the racial profiling
data collected by the San Antonio Police Department. This information (required by state law in
Texas) did not have names or birthdates. In Access we were able to link more than 150,000
records with ticket numbers in municipal court data we already had in house.
Our Findings:
We found several discrepancies: tickets counted more than once, multiple tickets on the same
stop, but with different races; and overall recording differences between the actual ticket race and
the racial profiling data. After analyzing the data we took it to the police department. We wanted
to know how this information could be a reliable source for a racial profiling study that was
released a year earlier and cost over $50,000.
Know the law for your state:
Texas Senate Bill 1074 (S.B. 1074), passed in 2001, requiring law enforcement agencies to
annually report detailed statistics onconcerning the race of drivers who are stopped and searched.
What is the law in your state? Is there one? If not, why?
Things to know when looking at racial profiling data and studies:
The likelihood of finding a “smoking gun” showing a department blatantly discriminates is highly
unlikely. Why? Variables and what experts call “perception”. It is extremely hard to know what
each officer is thinking during a traffic stop. You also need to factor in the racial makeup of the
force. Before opening up this possible “Pandora’s Box”, get in touch with someone who is
knowledgeable about racial profiling studies.
Where to go:
Check with local universities. See what type of social science, economic and statistical research is
going on. We found a professor who did an analysis of the search rates of minority and nonminority Texas motorists a few years ago. Having another set of eyes looking at our data helped
confirm inaccuracies we thought we had uncovered.
Understanding the Methodology:
Understanding how data is collected and analyzed is essential to the story. Don’t try to reinvent
the wheel! Finding an expert early on will help save time. A social scientist or
statistics/economics professor can help you understand the terminology and methodology of
complex studies.

Helpful links:
The Institute on Race and Justice is an interdisciplinary research institute at Northeastern
University in Boston. This site is awesome! Through a federal grant the university has created a
web-based Racial Profiling Data Collection Resource Center. You can use a new interactive
report generator that contains comprehensive information on traffic stop reports from most states.
http://www.racialprofilinganalysis.neu.edu/
The Texas Criminal Justice Coalition (TCJC) just completed a 2005 racial profiling report.
According to the agency this is the largest set of racial profiling data and it is the first interdepartmental review of contraband data collected by Texas law enforcement agencies.
http://www.criminaljusticecoalition.org
Dr. Dwight Steward of Austin, Texas, provides economic and statistical research on employment
and discrimination issues to the legal, business, and governmental communities.
http://www.steward-research.com/
The Justice Research and Statistics Association (JRSA) is a national organization of state
Statistical Analysis Center (SAC) directors and researchers throughout government, academia
and criminal justice organizations. http://www.jrsa.org
The Council on Crime and Justice is a non-profit agency that studies criminal and social justice.
http://www.crimeandjustice.org
Civilrights.org is a collaboration of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights and the
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights Education Fund. It offers civil rights news and
information. http://www.civilrights.org
The Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice looks at criminal justice policies that reduce
incarceration and promote long-term public safety. http://www.cjcj.org/index.php
The Vera Institute of Justice works closely with leaders in government and civil society to
improve the services people rely on for safety and justice. I found this to be a good website for
research concerning all types of law enforcement issues. http://www.vera.org
The following links may be some of the more “obvious” places to look when researching racial
profiling.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
It has links to local contacts as well. http://www.naacp.org
League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) http://www.lulac.org
Check for your local representative.
The Alliance of South Asians Taking Action (ASATA), located in California, has several helpful
links to organizations across the country. http://www.asata.org/resources/hatecrimes/
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) http://www.aclu.org/ The ACLU also has a special
section called “Racial Justice” and “Police Practices.”
http://www.aclu.org/RacialEquality/RacialEqualityMain.cfm
The Institute on Race and Poverty (IRP) at the University of Minnesota Law School. While IRP
focuses on racialized poverty, it has plenty of info about other issues.
http://www.irpumn.org/website/

