DEMO ROOM: MAPPING FOR BROADCAST
2005 IRE National Conference in Denver
Tisha Thompson, Investigative Reporter
WMAR-TV
Baltimore, MD
thompson@wmar.com 410-372-2536

Let’s face it – most broadcast reporters will never touch fancy mapping software like
ArcView or ArcMap, which cost thousands of dollars. And to be brutally honest – we
rarely need to use software that complicated for 30 seconds worth of video.
But mapping can really add power to an investigation – and broadcast reporters
ought to use maps whenever they can. So here are a few options for reporters on a
very tight budget…

THE SUPER-CHEAP OPTION: GOOGLE MAPS
http://maps.google.com/

You can’t plot locations on these maps – but they’re great for other things…

1. Where are all the high schools?
Quickly search for groups of things in a certain location (restaurants, golf
courses, gas stations, etc.) Say you want to find all the high schools in
Paducah, KY (the home of the first high-school shooting). Type in
“Paducah high schools.”
WARNING: Doesn’t always work. Say you want to find all the high
schools in Montgomery County, Maryland.
You type in “Maryland
Montgomery County High Schools” – you will get a random assortment of
things in Montgomery, Alabama. But if you type in a more specific name
like “Churchill High School Potomac Maryland,” you will suddenly get a list
of the high schools in Montgomery County.
2. Where do they live?
Type in as much of the address you know and you will probably get an
exact location…you may have to zoom in a bit. Click on the satellite
button at the top right corner and you can see what their yard looks like.
WARNING #1: If you type in a rental property – you may only get the
property management’s address…which can be in another city. If it’s a
rural location, you may only be able to zoom in a limited amount.
WARNING #2: If you need the satellite picture, be prepared to have half
of it in the summertime, half in the wintertime. For a good example, type
in “Big Eau Pleine Wisconsin” and zoom in a bit.
WARNING #3: The Directions option is terrible. It sends you the
slowest way possible – for example, through the city rather than the
interstate.
3. Why can’t I see it?
Because it’s either really rural or blocked-out on purpose. Interesting
examples include “1600 Pennsylvania Avenue Washington DC” and its
neighbor the Capitol Building. Surprisingly, you can get a very good
picture of the Pentagon and LAX. If you want to see one of the very few

uranium enrichment plants in the world, try typing in “Paducah Uranium.”
But you won’t see anything. It may be restricted…but since the rest of the
county is also missing when you zoom in…more likely it’s too rural.
4. How do I make it into a graphic?
Try Snag It software. It allows you to save anything you select on your
screen in any format you choose (jpg, gif, etc.). You can download the
software by going to the website at http://www.techsmith.com/. It costs
$39.95. Or just shoot video of your computer screen.
WARNING: Check the copyright law before you broadcast

THE $50 OPTION: Microsoft MapPoint

http://www.microsoft.com/PRODUCTS/info/list.aspx?type=srch&view=22&qu=mappoint

Not as great as ArcView…but it costs roughly $2,000 less. I taught myself the
software in about an hour. You can either plot in your locations by hand – or with an
Excel/Access spreadsheet using the Mapping Wizard located under the Data Menu.
A FEW TIPS:
1. Make sure your data is as clean as possible with separate fields for street
address, city, state and zip code. If they are not exact, you will have to
manually go through them.
2. Know what kind of map you want to create – pushpins, shaded area or
shaded circle. I suggest playing around with a small amount of data before
you go to the trouble of manually fixing addresses. If you don’t like the kind
of map you get, you may have to start all over.
3. Check to make sure your locations are accurate. I found some of the
schools MapPoint listed in the Baltimore Area have either closed or have been
renamed.
4. You can find out how many schools, restaurants, gas stations, etc. are
within a set distance of a location by first clicking on your location, and then
clicking on the “Find Nearby Places” button. It will give locations within a one
mile radius by default…but you can adjust that to whatever you want.
5. You can get directions to and from places by clicking on the “route
planner” button. I find the maps are much better than MapQuest…but I tend
use MapQuest for the actual directions.
6. Say you have a severe storm moving through a particular area and need
to get a phoner. Zoom in on the area and see what gas stations, state parks,
golf courses, etc. are in that small area…then call them.
7. You can only open these maps if you have MapPoint on your computer. If
you want anyone else to see these maps, including your graphics department,
you will need to do one of two things:
A. Buy additional copies of MapPoint
B. Buy the Snag It software
…or you could just have your photographer shoot video of your
computer screen as you zoom in and out of your lovely maps.

