Tom Farrey
Senior Writer, ESPN The Magazine
Correspondent, ESPN television
860.766.4893

2005 IRE National Conference
Denver
Panel: Sports Investigations

Sports Investigations: The basics
Sports investigations come in two basic flavors. Those that speak to the
interests of:
• Fans
• Society
Stories in the former category usually involve evidence and allegations of
cheating the competition -- NCAA recruiting violations, souped-up
baseballs, tampering with coaches and so on. They generate considerable
buzz among fans because an unfair advantage can prevent their team from
winning, and often include a celebrity target or victim.
Stories in the latter category -- race, gender, sex, violence, academic fraud,
etc. -- speak a more to a broad audience, the kind of crowd that also reads
the A section of the paper. These stories are less related to wins and losses,
and more complex, but ultimately more important because they recognize
sports as an extension of the larger culture.
The best sports investigations often engage both of the above news
consumer groups. They connect the “sports world” to the “real world,”
artificial as that distinction may be. It’s a beautiful thing when that happens - the fan impulse (will Player X be suspended?) helping drive the discussion
of an issue that counts (teenage steroid use, etc.).
So, with that in mind, here are some principles that have worked for me:
• On stories that matter to the larger culture, find the angle that
speaks to fans
Don’t just report on the new tax burden of a new basketball arena;
find that document or source that says the team expects ticket prices to

double in price and that longtime fans will lose the best seats in the
house to corporations.
• On stories that matter to fans, find the angle that speaks to the
larger culture
A prominent player involved possible NCAA violations for getting
phony grades might be an opportunity to examine issues of academic
integrity and corporate influence at universities.
• FOIA, FOIA, FOIA …
Pro clubs are private entities, but most college programs are part of
public institutions. While some have created separate organizations to
run their athletic departments – in part to avoid public scrutiny – most
have not. And often there is a wealth of material that can be acquired,
everything from coaches contracts to Title IX audits to phone logs.
• Treat fans as correspondents
Readers and viewers of sports news content know their stuff. Sure,
some of them ranting knuckleheads – sports talk radio exists to
babysit that crowd – but plenty of others are repositories of good
information. They’re classmates, neighbors and garden-variety
gawkers of athletes, and they’re often eager to share what they know.
Tap into this resource through mailforms and other targeted forms of
internet feedback.
And finally …
• Think globally, act locally
The pro leagues now have global reach, selling product in markets
like China and recruiting talent from all over the world. The trend
opens up all kinds of story lines. If your local baseball team has a
Dominican shortstop who can’t speak any English, switches agents
every year and seems to be struggling off the field, ask yourself: Is the
guy literate? What education, if any, did he get in his team’s
Dominican-based academy?

