SMALL MARKET OR SMALL STAFF?
HOW TO STILL DO INVESTIGATIONS
2005 IRE National Conference in Denver
Tisha Thompson, Investigative Reporter
WMAR-TV
Baltimore, MD
thompson@wmar.com 410-372-2536
You want to be an investigative reporter – but you work at a station that has no intention of ever investing in
the time and effort investigative reporters tend to suck up. So what do you do? I’ve put all of the advice I’ve
ever received into this little packet. It includes a bit of sacrifice, a lot of common sense and a few ideas you
may not have thought of before.
First, you have to prove to them you are worth the time and effort. Start with a single story and...

MANAGE UP
1.

When do sweeps hit? If you want a story to air in November, you better start working on it in
September to give yourself enough time for FOIAs, data negotiation and interviews.

2.

Pick a killer story that will give you great video but doesn’t cost very much. Avoid expensive ideas
involving lab testing and comparison shopping.

3.

Do a realistic assessment of what kind of news director/supervisor you have.
Is he the “I have no money, no resources and I just want you to fill the slot” type? If so, try to get as
much of the story done as possible BEFORE you go to your news director.
If he’s the “I have no money, no resources but I want you to tell a good story” type, you may have
more flexibility to ask for more money and time if you get your news director involved earlier.

4.

Find a motivated photographer/editor and recruit them to your cause.
SUPER CREATIVE GUY will come up with neat editing techniques, fun lighting ideas and excellent
standup suggestions.
I’VE GOT SOMETHING TO PROVE KID will be willing to work late and will bust a gut to prove to the
more veteran guys he’s up to snuff. But the Kid needs to know how to use lights (for all your
documents).
AVOID LAZY LIGHTLESS MAN at all costs!
Now you have to

SUCK IT UP
THIS WILL BE THE SINGLE MOST IMPORTANT THING YOU CAN DO. This is what will separate and
transform you into an “investigative” reporter – even if you don’t have the title. This is also the most painful
part of the process…
1.

Learn to be a Computer-Assisted Reporter and go to bootcamp.

2.

Come in early and stay late. Go get your documents before your GA shift starts. Stay late to work on
your database skills. Do your Internet and backgrounding searches on the weekends. Read your
state’s sunshine and campaign finance laws at home.

3.

Buy your own datasets from IRE.

4.

Offer to shoot your interviews before or after your regular shift.

5.

Write your script on the weekend – DON’T CHARGE THE COMPANY FOR OT.

6.

“I can’t afford this!” This is true – when you work at a small market, you tend to be eligible for food
assistance. But the $500 you are sacrificing may be tax deductible – and will be returned many times
over at your next job.
Your story rocked and now you boss wants more of where that came from…

REV IT UP
1.

Join IRE and NICAR list-servs. While you’re at it – join other list-servs like the Education Writer’s
Association, the State Auditor, the Attorney General, the GAO, the Consumer Product Safety
Commission, etc.

2.

Ask for documents during your GA shift. You may not get them that day, but it will be a great
“investigative” follow-up story.

3.

Come in early or stay late to file FOIAs on topics that really excite you – but also matter to a large
variety of people.

4.

Pick better stories that still don’t cost a lot. Make your own dataset from paper documents – it’s a
lot of work, but it will always raise eyebrows.

5.

Become your station’s “computer guru.” I have no idea how to defrag a computer or what the
technical difference is between RAMs and ROMs…but I am the computer dork of the newsroom.
Figure out how to search on Google, mapping skills, find people and pictures on the Internet,
background businesses and where to find the good government datasets. Comparison shop “For
Pay Search Sites.” Some cost thousands of dollars, some as little as 25 cents a search – you can
afford that.

People are now calling you “the Investigative Reporter” and you’re getting more time and money…

DON’T SCREW IT UP
Now that you have established yourself, don’t become a vanishing act. You need to remain on your boss’
radar – and you must continually prove to them that you really are worth the time and effort.
1. Avoid being sucked into the swirling vortex that is the GA black hole
Never tell them “I can’t do that – I’m the Investigative Reporter.” That will only hurt you and your
reputation in the newsroom.
Instead…manage up. Always have a “Story Plan” available. It’s a list of things that you have to
do to finish your story – including b-roll, interviews and documents. You can point to it and say,
“Ok, I can do that. But here’s what I have to do to finish that story you asked me to do. If you
really want the VOSOT on the abandoned kitten, I will do it…but you will either need to move my
deadline or pay me overtime.”
2.

Become a NEWSROOM TROOPER. Always offer to give the “investigative angle” in breaking news
situations. A plane crashes. You go to the FAA datasets before anyone asks you – and announce
to the newsroom “the company that owns that plane has had four other crashes.” Oh, you will be
such a genius.
Good datasets I’ve used in the last year in just this kind of scenario include FAA, Suspensions,
FARS, Health Inspections, Train Crashes, Haz Mat, Bridge Inspections, Boat Accidents, Mall Crime
and Police Incident data.

This entire process took me about a year. In the end, the key is to always ask for documents, perpetually
plan ahead, constantly educate yourself about new techniques and accept the fact that you must come in
early, stay late and work on the weekends.

