OLDIES BUT GOODIES: PROBES INTO DAMS & BRIDGES
Lee Davidson, special projects reporter
(Salt Lake City) Deseret Morning News
infrastructure:
lee@desnews.com, (801-333-7434)

2005 IRE National Conference, Denver
“CAR investigations into
Roads, Bridges and Dams”

Probing the safety of local dams and bridges has long been a staple for many
news media. It is an oldie, but still a goodie. Plenty of public documents and
databases are available to help. They may offer perfect initial investigations for
people learning CAR. They offer great photos and video (from concrete falling on
freeways, to water seeping through sagging dams). They are a public service. As a
CAR rookie, I assure you they are do-able and easy. If I can do it, so can you.

DAMS
Possible issues to investigate: Safety ratings of dams; how old are local dams; how often are highhazard dams inspected; do local dams have Emergency Action Plans in place; how many high-hazard dams
are above key cities; were modifications ever made after federal “Phase I” or “SEED” studies of major
dams in the 1970s and ‘80s; how much would it cost to modify and fix unsafe dams.
Suggestions on how to proceed:
1. Look at what other media have done through tip sheets and stories at the IRE Resource Center.
2. Obtain data from the National Inventory of Dams. You have several options. A. Its web site is
“crunch.tec.army.mil/nid/webpages/nid.cfm,” but personally (as a CAR rookie) I found it difficult to
maneuver there. B. You may buy formatted, ready-to-slice data from the NICAR library. It’s cheap. 3.
Check with your local state engineer or public works department (including their web sites) to see if they
have databases available. I found my state had it free at “waterrights.utah.gov/daminfo/default.asp.” I used
info there to partially download, and partially build my own database for dams in Utah.
3. You will probably want to look at “high-hazard dams,” defined as those dams where someone would
likely die if they break. The words “high-hazard” do not mean they are now unsafe or in poor condition.
4. Using an Excel or similar spreadsheet, you can sort for such things as: the oldest dams in a state; the
number of high-hazard dams above key cities; which dams lack Emergency Action Plans; and which dams
have not been investigated recently. You can easily count how many high-hazard dams are in your area.
5. Once I had such data, I called the chief state dam inspector (in the Utah Division of Water Rights). I
requested an interview to see what dams he thought were the worst in the state – and I wanted to compare
that with a similar list his predecessor gave me 17 years ago. He told me the state had in recent years
developed its own safety rating system, with scores from zero to 775. If a dam received even a “1,” it was
considered unsafe. He said the state maintained a database on that. He emailed me a copy. An easy sort
showed the worst-rated dams in the state (as well as what bad dams had been recently fixed or replaced,
and how much it cost to do that). See if your state has similar data.
6. You may want to look at the inspection files of the most problematic dams. Luckily, my state has
most of that online – but I suspect most states will have it in paper files. They will often show scary stories,
and how the same problems are described year after year with no corrective action. You may use them also
to see if officials made repairs suggested by studies the federal government funded for key dams in the
1970s and ‘80s after the failure of the Teton Dam in Idaho. The studies into locally owned dams were
called “Phase I” reports (the planned Phase 2 and Phase 3 reports generally were never funded). The studies
into federally owned dams were called SEED reports. Inspectors likely have old copies of those reports.
7. I found that inspectors like to talk about their work and are willing to take photographers and reporters
to see first-hand some of the problems they see. It makes for great art and anecdotes. Art from their files
may also be good. We used one from the state showing a dam being overtopped with water.
8. I started building a database of dam failures in Utah by looking in my newspaper library’s files. I
mentioned that to the state engineer, who said his office already had such a database. So I requested it, and
ran that list in the newspaper, too. Ask your officials if they have similarly tracked failures – or emergency
actions, such as ordered dam breaches and draining because of unsafe conditions.

BRIDGES
Some issues to investigate: Safety ratings of local bridges; age of local bridges; estimated costs to repair
or replace deficient bridges; how local bridges compare to other states; causes of local decay; where the
worst bridges are; and are conditions improving or getting worse over time.
Suggestions on how to proceed:
1.Visit the National Bridge Inventory website at “www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/nbi.htm.” Peruse and
download the many charts and databases available there under “Tables of Frequently Requested NBI
Information.” They will give summary information about how many “deficient” bridges are in your state,
how that compares to other states, how that rate has changed over time, the age of bridges in your state, etc.
2. Once I had that data, I asked the Utah Department of Transportation for its bridge-specific database
about what the federal data said should be 506 “deficient” bridges in the state. I asked for and obtained
electronically the “deficiency” rating of each bridge (from 0 to 100), whether it was “structurally deficient”
or “functionally obsolete,” its location, the owner (state, county or city), any scheduled repair or
replacement, and how their individual bridge components were rated.
3. Federal guidelines say any bridge with a “sufficiency rating” less than 50 should be replaced, and
those with ratings between 50 and 80 should be repaired. The state database allowed me to do an easy sort
on the spreadsheet to find the worst-rated bridges in the state. We also made a map showing the worst
bridges in the state’s urban areas. It only requires basic knowledge of how to sort on a spreadsheet.
4. I interviewed the chief state bridge engineer, who was happy to take me and a photographer to some of
the worst bridges – which made for good art and horror stories. He produced inspection files on some of
those worst bridges, which described problems more in detail with photos.
5. Ask for details about what bridges may have been closed or had weight restrictions placed on them
because of safety issues. Ask about collapses, too – Utah had three “deficient” bridges collapse during
flooding this year.
6. I interviewed the state bridge engineer and some local-level public works officials about the challenges
of funding needed repairs, and how long it may require.
7. I also asked about the cause of bridge decay in Utah (almost all of it comes from salting roads during
winter to reduce ice). I also asked about steps being taken to improve bridge design and construction.
8. Compare bridge conditions over time in your data. I found that despite hundreds of millions of dollars
in repair and replacement in recent years (largely to help prepare for the 2002 Olympics), Utah still has a
higher percentage of deficient bridges now than it did 17 years ago (the last time I looked at Utah bridges).
A key reason for that is most Utah bridges were built about the same time in the 1960s for the Interstate
freeway system. They are as a group now reaching the age where they need major work – like a bubble of
baby boomers needing extra care. Is the same happening in your area?

