WHERE to DIG for GREAT STORIES
on HOSPITALS, DOCTORS and PATIENTS
Jim Steele, Time magazine, jim_steele@timeinc.com
William Heisel, The Orange County Register, wheisel@ocregister.com
IRE Conference, June 4, 2005
Hospital inspection records. Hospitals are inspected regularly by state and federal agencies. The states
often do these inspections on behalf of the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Those reports, or
statements of deficiencies, are public. By law, the hospital must make these inspection reports
available, but it is often easier to get them from the agency. The form is divided in half. On the left are
the things the inspectors found wrong, such as incorrectly administered drugs, patient abuse and insect
infestations. On the right of the page is the hospital’s response. Many of the problems appear minor,
but looking back over months or years you might find a pattern of problems. Take note of what the
hospital said they would do and then follow up.
Patient discharge data. California compiles all of this in ready-to-use files. www.oshpd.cahwnet.gov.
You also can request them from CMS. www.cms.hhs.gov/data/download/default.asp. The discharge
data includes most major procedures, listed by a hospital code. It includes what they came in for, how
they were treated and where they went after they left (i.e. to another hospital, home or to a funeral
parlor.) It does not include patient names or doctor names. The only patient identifiers are ages and the
month and year the patients were admitted. It also includes the “Expected Source of Payment:” public
assistance, private insurance, workers’ compensation, etc. You can look compare mortality and
morbidity data. You can find out where hospitals are making their money (or losing it.) If a hospital
boasts of having a “breast cancer center” or a “diabetes center,” you can see how frequently the
hospital has cared for those types of patients. Creating these “centers” is often just a way to bring in
more revenue not evidence of excellence.
Hospital report cards. Every three years, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations inspects hospitals. The commission is an independent, nonprofit, peer-review
organization. If a hospital is accredited by JCAHO, it automatically is eligible for Medicare funding.
The commission has been criticized for being too soft on its member hospitals. www.jcaho.org
CMS also compares hospitals in three different areas based on a few dozen criteria, such as whether
heart patients were given aspirin upon admission. Not all hospitals provide data, and sometimes small
patient loads make the data meaningless. www.hospitalcompare.hhs.gov/hospital/home2.asp
There are lots of others out there with varying degrees of success at getting buy-in from hospitals.
Disciplinary records. Even if you’re talking to a doctor for a story about free flu shots, you should
check with your medical board to make sure of two things. 1.) Is he or she, indeed, licensed? 2.) Does
this doctor have a disciplinary record? Many of the records are posted online. But it’s always good to
request the full file. The charges or accusations filed against doctors will give you details not only about
that specific case but about how medicine is practiced at the hospital, who is ordering whom to do
what and patterns of problems. They will not give you names of patients, but you can deduce the
names with a little gumshoe. They often use initials that match plaintiffs who have sued. Don’t assume
that because the discipline is light the offense must have been inconsequential. These doctors often
have good lawyers and plea bargain so their records remain unblemished. Remember, too, that doctors
make mistakes. Being accused of botching one surgery doesn’t mean a doctor is incompetent. (One of
the most common charges is just that, “incompetence,” and it typically requires more than one mistake
for a conviction.) Look for patterns, though. If this doctor has been in and out of drug rehab and has

injured five patients in the process, you might not only have a story about the doctor but about the
hospitals that failed to stop him. This site rounds up most state boards: www.fsmb.org
Do the same with the nursing staff. even though it’s tougher to find the names of individual nurses. A
good starting point: www.ncsbn.org/regulation/boardsofnursing_boards_of_nursing_board.asp
Death records. At the clerk and recorders office in your county, you can often look up who died on
what day. This can help you track down patients who are referred to anonymously in court and
medical board records. Also, contact the coroner’s office regularly to see if they are investigating any
hospital deaths. They are often loathe to part with their notes, but make it clear to them that their work
is public record. Their reports can differ greatly from the hospital spin. Don’t forget to follow-up with
the coroner to ask about the toxicology report. Medication errors abound.
Civil court records. Nexis search the hospital, the doctors in question and doctors groups, but don’t
assume that Nexis gave you everything. Go to the courthouse and check on that computer system, too.
When you get the files, look for patient names, addresses and phone numbers. Look for other doctors
who can provide more information. They are often included as expert witnesses or co-defendants. Look
for patterns of behavior. Is this doctor being repeatedly accused of misreading X-rays? Does this doctor
seem to have an unusual number of patients claiming he seduced them and then stole all their money?
Lawsuits, like Medical Board disciplinary actions, are not reason alone to write off a doctor. Check with
the different medical societies to find out the average number of suits. For example, ob/gyns are sued
about three times in their career. Even if a case has been dismissed by the court or settled, check with
the attorneys for both sides. They likely are holding on to records that could be valuable.
Bankruptcy court records. These can be a gold mine of info about topics well beyond the scope of the
bankruptcy. Look for hospital suppliers that went bankrupt. Doctors groups. Affiliated nursing homes.
Often the same players who sent one entity down the tubes are involved in a new venture. Look first
for the statement of claims. Talk to some of the people who are owed the biggest amounts of money. In
the case of doctors groups, mountains of medical records often are filed. Much of it is old by the time it
makes its way into the court, but it’s another good way to establish a pattern of bad behavior. Some of
the records are online. You have to register and pay just to look at the records but it still beats flying to
the city. (pacer.casb.uscourts.gov) As with the civil cases, ask the attorneys for the records they’re
keeping, too. Where’s your nearest bankruptcy court? Check here:
www.uscourts.gov/courtlinks/index.cfm
Medical specialty boards. If a doctor says he is a specialist or if a hospital is hyping its expert staff,
check with that group. Not all of them make their records public. A good first stop is Nexis. Also, the
American Board of Medical Specialties (www.abms.org) At the American Medical Association
(www.ama-assn.org/aps/amahg.htm), will tell you what the doctor claims as his specialty. Then you
can go to that board and check. A doctor doesn’t always have to be board-certified to diagnose and
treat patients in a particular area. If a doctors can persuade a hospital to give them privileges, they can
do the work. But if you find a hospital has an inordinate number of doctors working outside their
specialties, it could be a cause for concern.
Medical research journals. Hospitals anddoctors may claim to be experts, but what do their colleagues
think about their work? Anyone can speak at a conference. Getting published in a journal that is
reviewed by that doctor’s peers, however, is a higher hurdle. The gold standard is the New England
Journal of Medicine. The Journal of the American Medical Association wins the silver. There are
myriad highly specialized journals, too. You can find some journal articles reprinted on various Web
sites with a simple Google search or with Nexis. Universities, for example, often tout their physicians’
research. The best ones are found at the National Library of Medicine’s Web site, also known as

PubMed. (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi) Usually the NLM site offers just a summary of
the work. For more, go to the authors themselves or the journals to get a copy. Remember, every study
seems to have a study to counter it. Check the references cited in the doctor’s study and contact those
doctors. See what they think about the work. The best studies are double-blind, placebo-controlled and
randomized with a large number of participants in regions throughout the country or world. Be wary
of studies of a few dozen left-handers in one shopping mall in eastern Montana.
Research foundations: There are numerous think tanks and foundations that devote an enormous
amount of effort to charting trends and assessing the state of health care in America. There are too
many to list, but two are worthy of special mention:
The Center for Studying Health System Change http://www.hschange.org/
The Kaiser Family Foundation http://www.kff.org/

