Steroids in sports: A primer to covering the never-ending saga
(And, how to penetrate a federal grand jury in 3 easy steps ...)

Mark Fainaru-Wada, reporter
San Francisco Chronicle
mfainaru-wada@sfchronicle.com, 415-777-7753
http://www.sfgate.com/balco

2005 IRE National Conference
Denver
“Doing the Big Sports Investigation”

For better or worse, this is a story that is not going away anytime soon. No less than five
Congressional bodies have taken up the issue – and at the pace Washington often works, who
knows how long, if ever, it will takebefore a bill becomes something remotely resembling a law.
Baseball is not escaping the matter in the remote future, not with the BALCO investigation
ongoing, not with Congress continuing to exert pressure and certainly not with the specter of
Barry Bonds breaking Hank Aaron’s storied career home run record still looming.
It also is a story with seemingly endless tentacles, creating an array of options for reporters to
choose from if they want to dive in. To that end, this represents a quick offering both of ways to
get up to speed on the issue, as well as produce some stories that add something to the discussion.
6 Juicy (get it!) Web Sites:
1) www.usantidoping.org: The United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA), the
governing body for testing of Olympic-level athletes.
2) www.wada-ama.org: The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), the world governing body for testing of
Olympic-level athletes.
3) www.steroid.com: A haven for endless steroid data, this site includes info about specific drugs, how to
cycle and side effects, as well as a message board.
4) www.snac.com: Site of the man at the heart of the BALCO investigation, including pictures of a bulging
Barry Bonds and an Ask Victor message board.
5) www.trackandfieldnews.com/tfn/discussion/viewForum.jsp?forum=6:
Message board related to doping, hosted by Track & Field News.
6) www.getbig.com: A premier source for bodybuilding information, this site includes several different
message boards – one of which focuses on hardcore steroid info.
6 experts worth needling (sorry):
1) Dr. Gary Wadler, widely quoted, testified before Congress: 516-365-9600
2) Dr. Charles Yesalis, widely quoted, Penn State professor: 814-863-7333
3) Howard Jacobs, attorney represents athletes charged with doping: 213- 426-2000
4) Dr. Christianne Ayotte, runs WADA-accredited lab in Montreal: 514-630-8806
5) Dr. Don Catlin, U.S. steroid wizard, credited with discovering THG: 310-825-2635
6) Rick Collins, attorney, very knowledgeable about steroids law: 212-643-3120
6 possible story ideas to shoot (pathetic) for:
1) The culture of the local gym. We live in a world of people striving endlessly to make themselves look
and feel better. There’s plenty of anecdotal evidence that the local gym can be a good spot to score some
steroids. So, a look inside the life of a gym.
2) Steroids and kids. Yes, everybody is trying to do this, but it can/should be done everywhere. The goal
should be to get beyond the question of whether the drugs are used where you are – studies show anywhere
between 4%-11% of teens are using -- but rather why the hell they’re doing it for? More and more girls are
using, a story in itself.
3) Where can I score? Still haven’t seen this story done very well anywhere. This stuff can be had all over
the Web – although some of it is fraudulent (makes the story better). Also, a trip to Mexico remains a
popular and easy way to get steroids. To do it right: Take a trip across the border, surf the Web endlessly,
explore the gym scene.

4) Steroids, but of course. My dad mentioned this two years ago, and we still haven’t done the story – that
is, maybe fans don’t seem that up in arms about steroid use in sports because we live in a world
increasingly driven by drugs-to-enhance: Better sex, more hair, deeper sleep, etc. It’s an era of forever
seeking the wonder drug.
5) The anti-aging phenomenon. This an offshoot of #4. Put “anti-aging” into a google search, and it will
return more than 2 million hits. The notion of anti-aging therapy can be found everywhere, and the use of
human growth hormone and/or steroids is prescribed as part of the regimen by doctors trying to pitch
clients on the Fountain of Youth.
6) The supplement industry: This is a $19 billion industry with an incredibly strong lobby in
Washingtonand not a whole lot of government oversight. Some experts (and parents) will tell you
supplements are the gateway to taking steroids, and kids are downing anything they can get their hands on
at GNC in the interest of bulking up. But what are they really taking?
3 simple steps to penetrating a federal grand jury:
1) Beg
2) Plead
3) Weep heavily
Alas, no one will be surprised to hear there is no untold secret here in the reporting. Humbly, in the matter
of probing and poking around a grand jury, I suggest a few basic concepts (forgive me if this all rings as
Reporting 101, but I have no sage tales):
•
•
•

•

You can’t make enough phone calls. Everybody is a potential source, and if they don’t know
anything right now, they might know something tomorrow. Dig back into your source file, and
sometimes up will pop somebody you hadn’t even thought to call.
Give your sources reason to help. Everybody is bringing something different to the table, so get to
know your sources to the point that you can essentially provide a motivation for them to help.
Everybody likes to deal information, particularly the parties involved. In the BALCO case, we’re
often asked by people involved what we know or what we’ve heard. The more you learn, the more
you can use to your advantage. Also, the more you can position yourself as educated and/or
theleader on the story, the more likely a source is to help.
Have off-the-record conversations. This should not be construed as an advocacy for the use of
anonymous sources or anything of the like. Rather, it’s merely a suggestion geared toward
establishing rapport with a source, finding additional ways to educate oneself about a story and,
thus, laying the groundwork for a payoff in the end.

