IRE TIPSHEET

Denver 2005

Natural disaster investigations: From forest fires to hurricanes

Sally Kestin (954) 356-4510
Megan O’Matz (954) 356-4518
Investigative Reporters
South Florida Sun-Sentinel
skestin@sun-sentinel.com
momatz@sun-sentinel.com
The Story: Cashing in on Disaster
Last year's four hurricanes devastated much of Florida but spared MiamiDade County. Yet the Federal Emergency Management Agency handed out
more than $31 million to residents there for Hurricane Frances, a storm that
struck 100 miles away, the newspaper found. The government paid for new
wardrobes, rooms full of furniture, cars and thousands of televisions in MiamiDade. The Sun-Sentinel investigation spread to other states, finding that
FEMA awarded millions in disaster aid to communities minimally affected by
disasters. The reports prompted three federal investigations that have
confirmed widespread waste and mismanagement in the aid program and led
to the indictments of 14 Miami-Dade residents on federal fraud charges. Bills
have been introduced in Congress to reform FEMA.
The complete coverage is available online at www.sun-sentinel.com/fema

When a disaster strikes close to home the natural response is to look at how
much relief is getting to victims and how fast. But what if money is going to
people who weren’t affected? Florida is cursed by hurricanes, but many tips
listed here can apply to any region of the country that is declared a federal
disaster area because of flooding, storms, earthquakes, tornadoes, etc.

THE PROGRAM
FEMA has two primary types of disaster assistance. One type, Public Assistance,
reimburses local governments for preparation, cleanup and rebuilding after a
storm. Something as simple as tree stump removal can run hundreds of
thousands of dollars. The second type, the Individuals & Households Program

(IHP), provides money to people in disaster areas for losses that are not covered
by insurance – furniture, clothing, home repair and cars, as well as disasterrelated medical, dental and funeral expenses.
We concentrated on the IHP program.
PINPOINT THE DAMAGE
Check FEMA’s web site, www.FEMA.gov, or the Federal Register for the
Presidential declaration and amendments. This will tell you what counties or what
areas of your state were declared a disaster and eligible for assistance.
Start by asking FEMA for a county-by-county breakdown in your state of how
much money the agency is giving to people through its Individuals and
Households Program. The information may be on the agency’s web site, or may
be available only by calling the main disaster assistance office and asking for it. It
will tell you by county, the number of aid applications, the number ruled eligible,
and amounts paid out.
Look for oddities. Compare totals by county. Did anywhere outside of the
affected area obtain a windfall?
For hurricanes, check web sites for the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration, www.noaa.gov, and its Hurricane Research Division,
www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/, to download pdf maps and Arcview shapefiles showing
wind speeds and rainfall amounts. Where did the storm hit? Where did the
money go?
FEMA’s Mapping & Analysis Center (http://www.gismaps.fema.gov) is a goody
basket for CAR reporters and graphics artists. Maps show estimated wind
speeds and rainfall, flooded neighborhoods, number of people in shelters, power
outages, damage estimates, etc.
Look to local landmarks for the extent of destruction -- golf courses, zoos, malls,
etc. Were they affected? Local power companies can pinpoint power outages
and tell you how long service was interrupted.
County and city governments may track the number of damaged homes. Check
with disaster coordinators, building officials, and planning departments for
another measure of damage.
FEMA’s web site has historical disaster facts and contacts. Most states have
their own emergency management web site with similar information. In Florida it
is www.FloridaDisaster.org.

VALUABLE RECORDS
Obtain copies from FEMA of the preliminary damage assessments. This will state
how much damage local, state and federal officials estimated occurred. Compare
that to how much FEMA actually awarded and how many applicants ultimately
applied and received aid. Did officials actually do a preliminary damage
assessment? FEMA has procedures in place to do preliminary damage
assessments but bypasses the step for severe catastrophes. FEMA did not do a
preliminary damage assessment in Miami-Dade before declaring it a disaster
area and was widely criticized for it. Congress is considering requiring the
assessments.
File a Freedom of Information request with FEMA for individual claims records by
disaster for your counties by Zip Code. The agency will not release the names or
other identifying information about the recipients, however, citing the Privacy Act.
The Sun-Sentinel and three Gannett newspapers are suing FEMA to force the
agency to disclose the information. Simply having the Zip Codes, however, will
help you better define where the money went. The records also show verified
losses. How many television sets, air conditions, computers, washers and dryers,
etc., did FEMA pay for? How many cars?

COUNT BODIES
FEMA pays for disaster-related funeral expenses. Using FEMA’s claims data,
look for how many funerals and burials the agency covered. Compare that with
the number of deaths the local Medical Examiners attributed to the disaster. Do
they match or are they far off? Why? The Sun-Sentinel found that FEMA paid for
315 funerals when the Medical Examiners attributed 123 deaths to the
hurricanes. FEMA paid for people who died of cancer, AIDS, strokes and selfinflicted gunshot wounds.

CHECK BACKGROUNDS OF INSPECTORS
The newspaper found that two private companies under contract with FEMA to
provide and train inspectors hired thousands of new people quickly after the
hurricanes and dispatched them with little training. The Inspector General of the
Department of Homeland Security cited the inspectors’ lack of training as a factor
in the high number of errors made in Miami-Dade County.

The newspaper also found that FEMA inspectors entrusted to enter disaster
victims' homes and verify damage claims included criminals with records for

embezzlement, drug dealing, robbery and other crimes. This story was laborintensive, time-consuming, and a pricey endeavor.
Neither the companies nor FEMA would provide the names of the inspectors.
The newspaper gleaned the names of over 100 from confidential sources, web
sites, aid applicants, and news stories. Using Accurint, Nexis, and AutoTrack we
obtained addresses, phone numbers, names of relatives etc., and kept track of it
all in an Excel spreadsheet.
Run the names through local court records and PACER to find convictions. We
checked court records in multiple counties and states for each person based on
prior addresses. Most courts require you to mail a letter and include a check or
money order (even for small sums like $2). The costs can add up. We used
FedEx at times to speed the process.
Don’t forget to get mug shots from police, jails, etc.

For information on computer-assisted reporting aspects of disaster coverage, see
IRE tipsheet No. 2284 from the Sun-Sentinel's presentation at the 2005 CAR
Conference in Hollywood, Calif.

-30-

