Watching the Watchers:
Investigations of the Data Revolution

2 6

This is not only a great business story. It's also a story about
changing times, the tradeoffs between old values and new
conveniences, and about the tension between personal autonomy
and national security.
Enterprising reporters will find a wealth of information to help
them examine and explain an industry that has become a driver of
our economy and a key player in the war on terror.
Resources include:
- Company press releases. Executives often exaggerate. But
their press releases, pulled together over time, can reveal
much about what they're doing, their business alliances and
what they plan going forward. A close examination of press
releases will reveal inconsistencies in the statements they
make during interviews.
- Trade show material. Companies often reveal choice details
when they're trying to sell to one another. Look for brochures,
CDs and booklets. Go to marketing industry and law
enforcement trade shows and you will find material that
otherwise will be unavailable to the public.
- Financial filings with state and federal securities agencies.
Annual reports, 10-Qs, 8-Ks and other filings provide a wealth
of leads about publicly traded companies. 10-Ks often include
details about direct competitors, profit trends and new
company initiatives. 8-K's sometimes document local, state
and federal investigations. Companies are obligated to
describe risks they face - risks that sometimes make for easy
and compelling stories.
- Proxy statements. These documents also contain a wealthy of
details, strings that sometimes leads to very good stories. Look
at company directors. Find out where they came'from, what
other companies they have ties to, former government or
industry jobs.

- Responses to government requests for proposals or requests

for information. These documents sometimes reveal a
company's "sources and methods." Sometimes they're
available on request.
- Lawsuits. As on any other beat, lawsuits often contain a
wealth of leads. Look for court papers filed by disgruntled
employees or bitter competitors.
It's important to recognize that the information industry
(including data brokers, data mining operations and infomation
analysis companies) have become an important part of every day
life.
Companies such as Acxiom, Choicepoint, LexisNexis, InfoUSA
and many others determine whether regular people can get jobs,
receive insurance, get on airplanes or will become the targets of
police or intelligence investigations.
The industry has accumulated personal details - including
estimated income, reading habits, spending patterns and much
more - about nearly every adult American. They are playing an
important and growing role in homeland security and intelligence
activities.
To begin thinking about these Information Age stories, it helps to
ask some old fashioned questions:
- What do these companies say they are doing? What do they
actually do?
- Do your readers understand how much information about
them is being collected or how it is used?
- Do the companies operate in a legal way? If you find the
answer is yes (as you generally will) you must ask whether the
laws and regulations have kept pace with what some people
call the "data revolution."
- Are these companies enabling government authorities to
legally sidestep limits on official data collection and data
surveillance?

