IRE Annual Conference — “Investigating property scams” — Saturday, June 4
Peter Panepento, Erie Times-News
(814) 870-1707
peter.panepento@timesnews.com
Property scams come in many forms — from greedy investors looking to “flip” a
property for profit to speculators using inside information to make a quick buck.
Here are some of the documents and tactics we used in 2004 to uncover a landspeculation scheme involving Erie’s mayor:
Property sales and tax filings: Property sales are easy to track. Municipalities across the
country are required to keep public records that detail a parcel’s history. The municipality
should list each parcel’s transaction history, its assessment and whether the property’s
owner has been paying the appropriate taxes. In Erie County, Pa., the records also include
information about zoning, the size of buildings and photos of the property. In many towns
and cities, these records are available online — Erie’s records, for example, are
accessible through the county’s Web site.
Mortgage records and deeds: These are often a gold mine of information. In
Pennsylvania, mortgage documents and deeds are available publicly at the county
courthouse. Mortgage documents are particularly useful because they include information
about the terms of the mortgage, such as its value, its interest rate, and its length. Pay
special attention to who signed the mortgage. In cases where a property is purchased by a
corporate entity, it can give you insight into who has invested in that company.
Financial disclosure forms: If you’re looking to find out if public officials have realestate interests, check out their statements of financial interest. In Pennsylvania, elected
officials and key members of their cabinets are required annually to list all of their
income sources, investments and loans.
Liens, permits and inspections: These documents typically require a visit to your local
city hall or courthouse — and they can provide key details about the physical condition
of the property and the financial condition of its owners. These documents can show if a
property owner has failed to pay the bills, if the owner has made a substantial renovation
to a property and if a property is up to code. If a property sees a tremendous spike in
value during a short time period — but there have been no permits for renovations — it
should raise a red flag. These records are typically available through individual towns and
cities.
Corporate records: Real-estate investors who have something to hide sometimes will
form a limited liability company or other concern as the front for their real-estate
transactions. LLCs can disguise the identities of those who are the true investors in the
property. But those LLCs also have to register themselves as businesses. To find out who
is involved in an LLC, you can check its corporate records. In Pennsylvania, those

records are available for free online through the Department of State. The corporate
records include the names of owners and officers — along with a mailing address and
information on when the company was formed.
Unusual sources: While paper trails are necessary, the best investigations typically
include a wild-card source who can offer you information you can’t find in the public
record. When investigating property scams, those wild cards are often easy to track down.
Find out if there were any contractors doing improvements. Talk to the former owners of
a property, neighbors and, in some cases, fair-housing advocates. All of these folks can
offer you leads, useful documents and anecdotes. In our investigation of the Erie land
deals, a contractor who had done renovations to one of the properties proved an
invaluable source — offering us information about who was paying the bills and even
providing canceled checks to back up his claims.
What to look for
Here are some things to look for when you’re mining this data:
* Look for familiar names — Are public officials, their supporters or advisers buying
property in a specific area of town? If so, do they have inside information about a major
development?
* Look for big price swings — Did someone buy a rundown duplex for $70,000 in
April, then turn around and sell it for $140,000 four months later? Did that person double
his money without taking out any permits for renovations? If so, he might be flipping
properties.
* Look at who is granting the mortgages — Is the same seller lining up multiple buyers
with an obscure mortgage company? If so, she might be steering customers to a particular
lender — or pushing them into predatory loans.
Sample Web sites
Here are some sites I’ve used to research real-estate scams:
Erie County property tax records
www.eriecountygov.org/Assessment/Property/Selector.aspx
This local site offers access to information on real-estate sales and assessment records.
Pennsylvania Department of State — www.dos.state.pa.us/DOS/site/default.asp
Offers searchable database of companies licensed to conduct business in Pennsylvania.
Other state offer similar information online.
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data — www.ffiec.gov/hmda_rpt/dis_welcome.htm
Offers federal statistics on mortgage companies and their customers.

