Authenticity: When things go wrong — Lessons learned from the
journalistic disasters
Russ Baker, independent journalist
Web: www.russbaker.com E-Mail: russ@russbaker.com

7 THINGS TO REMEMBER WHEN CHASING A LIVE ONE
Small mistakes can ruin a good big thing. Nail everything down….everything.
It’s better to go with lots of small details linked together than a juicy centerpiece that
can’t be entirely verified.
Wishful thinking killed the cat. No matter how much you believe something to be true
or want it to be true, if it isn’t 100 percent, forget about it.
Be careful how you phrase things. Frame your findings as generally as possible when
you have not personally verified every specific.
Give your best source the hardest time. Someone who tells you what you want to hear
may turn out to be your worst enemy.
Make sure there’s a devil’s advocate in your organization, and, much as you dislike
the person, be thankful he/she is there.
Don’t wait until you’re in trouble to make friends and build alliances. Being collegial
is a good—and smart—way to live.
7 THINGS TO DO WHEN YOUR REPORTING IS UNDER FIRE
In a time of institutional journalistic timidity and tremendous official pressure, you
owe it to yourself and to others to fight for what’s right. Don’t let yourself become a
victim.
Get out front and talk. Make yourself available for interviews. And don’t be defensive.
Don’t let others define your reporting or your sources. Be explicit about why you
believed what you did and acted in the way you did. Demystify the process. Make what
you do as transparent as possible. Admit mistakes.
Quickly contextualize the situation. If your piece contained errors or missteps but was
essentially correct in its thrust and conclusions, that’s important for people to know. If
someone is out to destroy you, you need to find a way to communicate that to the public.
The corporate brass has other things to worry about than your welfare or the
journalistic principles involved. You’ve got to look out for yourself. Get your own team,
and, especially, your own lawyer.
Reach out to other media organizations, and to professional groups like IRE. Just
because you’re part of the evil “gotcha media” doesn’t mean you’re not entitled to an
aggressive defense and a fair public hearing.
Use the controversy as a teaching opportunity. Offer to participate in discussions of
what went wrong and of how to get it right next time.
##

