PANEL: FRESH AND NEW ANGLES FOR TV PROJECTS
(Sustained substantive investigations set you apart.)
Stuart Watson, Investigative Reporter
WCN C-TVCharlotte, NC
swatson@wcnc.com
(704) 329-3619

IRE Annual Conference
June 4, 2005
Denver, Colorado

“ROLLING” INVESTIGATIONS AND MULTIPART SERIES OF REPORTS MAKE GOOD
JOURNALISM AND GOOD BUSINESS. Producing a substantive investigationtakes time. It’s like
tooling up a production line. And it doesn’t make sense to spend the time and effort and money to
tool up a production line only to punch out only one widget, does it? Then you’d have to break
down the line to retool for the next widget. Didn’t Henry Ford teach us anything? Pitch your boss
on the economies of scale achieved by the magical sidebar, the super-duper follow up, the proofof-performance results piece. If there’s not support from one producer for the piece in their show,
pitch it to another producer, another newscast, a cable newscast, a podcast – find more time in
alternative venues.
DOES THIS INVESTIGATION HAVE LEGS?Audiences will tell you. Try it on for size. Run one
part and check your tip line or e-mail like a lobsterman checking his traps. Rolling investigations
often generate tips by keeping the subject top-of-mind with your audience. Are you getting calls
and e-mails? Deafening silence?Is this topic a one-hit wonder? Is it worth spending much time? Is
this report/anecdote a symptom of a larger societal ill? Or an isolated incident? Is the newest
anecdote moving the story forward by touching on a new issue or just more of the same? Is this a
rich vein which bears more digging or has it been tapped out?
SELL IT TO THE NEWSROOM FIRST. Face it. Audiences are blown down every day by a fire
hose of information - no audience more than your own bosses who are scanning the feeds,
reading the paper, clicking the computer and punching the blackberry while looking over your
shoulder. No wonder we suffer from compassion fatigue. Convert allies in the newsroom on the
merits of your investigation BEFORE you invest a lot of your own time. For some reason I expect
that after I fight for the trust of sources, fight for access to public documents, fight to clean up
data, that the fighting is done. Sometimes the steepest hurdle is selling the boss. Evangelize up
the chain of command. To wit:
•
•
•
•

This story is both important and riveting.
This story is maddening, heartbreaking and outrageous.
This story demands to be told.
This story will set us apart and people will watch it.

(OVER =>)
GET TO THE POINT QUICK. Set it up and sum it up quick. Plan your pitch. Plan the timing of
your pitch. Does the boss prefer an e-mail? Have you asked? When is the boss receptive to a
face-to-face pitch? When can (s)he focus on you for 3 minutes? How much information? What’s
the bottom line? The 3-word challenge: can you sum it up in a simple subject-verb-object
sentence? Who is the subject? Who’s zooming whom? Tell me a story – a short one. Practice on
friends. Make sure you can answer their challenges. Is this clear? Is it interesting? Is it relevant?
HUMAN = INTERESTING. Empathy = understanding. Make a human connection – not just
graphics/music/whiz-bang. Focus on one interesting character or story per report. Micro tells the
macro. An audience will find it easier to become invested in one story fleshed out vs. twelve
skeletons. Start with the person. Give us a sense of them. Don’t just fill in blanks. Then “snap
zoom” with your info to reveal the person’s connection to the broader issue/landscape/context.

Remember good writing and videography. Make use of Poynter/NPPA/National Writers Workshop
storytelling tips: humor, pacing, pauses, silence, structure, surprises, natural sound, allowing the
piece to breathe and connect.
YOU HAVE TWO MINUTES MAX AND WE NEED IT IN A NOON LIVE SHOT – TODAY. I feel
your pain. Here’s my little speech. Twenty second readers. (Pacing! Story count! Wait for the
meter click!) It’s a blur. This isn’t news, it’s haiku. Actually it’s not as memorable or important as
haiku. Real investigations with substantive, important information take time. Time to research and
time to present. Ultimately audiences get this. But the relentless demands of daily news and quick
hits are like the wicked stepmother. Load up Cinderella with enough chores and she’ll never get
to the ball.It’s called “opportunity costs.” In a finite universe turning the noon live shot means I’m
NOT digging through records/knocking on doors/analyzing data. Let’s not eat the seed corn, shall
we? It is easy to get buried in the “thick of thin things,” to spend so much time on daily turns that
you never get to dig deeper. You must find time. You must make time. Get out of the newsroom.
Out of sight and out of mind. Dig deep.
BUT (and I have a big “but”…) do yourself a favor - help the team. Feed the beast. You’re going
to need the team. You’re going to need a favor, some video shot at the last minute, some phone
calls made, a little support in a morning meeting. Pitch in. Even if it’s not a plane crash or a
school shooting, investigative reporters should be relevant to daily newsgathering. You have back
grounding and people finding skills. Use your magic powers for your colleagues. Elite
investigative units feed newsroom resentment and often face the chopping block because they’re
judged an expendable luxury, aloof and self-indulgent.Your mission, should you choose to accept
it: stave off the beast with a steady diet of choice morsels while buying time for the big dig. How
do you do this? Maybe you could let me know. It’s a constant balancing act and a perennial
dilemma that pits the business of broadcasting against the profession of journalism.

