Business sources and documents
Wendell Cochran, American University
IRE National Conference 2005

2443

Banks and banking: We're told in politics to follow the money, but the same advice seems
to apply to business reporting as well, as the Rocky Mountain News stories on Qwest
executives and their apparent stock trading misdeeds shows. One way to do that is to pay
attention to banks and bankers. With a little bit of digyng and use of widely available (and
also very clean, reliable data), you can go a long way toward understanding the state of the
banking industry in your coverage area and begin to build insights into relationships between
banks and other businesses and civic entities.
Some story ideas where bank records could help:

A general overview of the condition of financial institutions. Now is a good time in the
business cycle to look at what's happening with the banks with low interest rates, they've
made a ton of money and are generally in strong shape around the country. But rising
interest rates cause problems for borrowers and eventually for their banks. You can look at
profits and losses, deposit and loan growth, etc. You can download this data from the
FDIC's Web site: hrtix .'/~>~v\s..fcii~.~-c'ov

Real estate dependency:There's been a lot of talk about the prospect of a major pullback
in real estate prices. By using data the FDIC makes available, you can figure out which banks
in your area have made the biggest commitment to real estate development and to mortgage
lending. You would want to add detail by checlung mortgage and land records in your
county.
Social networks: In most cities, the leading banks and bankers are at the center of most
important networks. They have banking relationships with major companies, nonprofits,
churches and influential individuals. Their boards are h l l of well-placed people who are
connected in myriad ways to others in the power structure.
Enforcement actions: The major bank regulators (states, Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,
the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Board) put notices of sanctions and
fines they levy against banks and bankers onto their Web sites. For example, in the past
couple of years they have fined quite a few banks for violating some provisions of the
national flood insurance rules. There also have been major fines for money laundering and
improper takeovers.
Here are some other assorted documents and ideas that could make good @st for
investigations o r just be handy to have around:
The federal government makes its list of terrorists and drug dealers, maintained by the
Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets control, available in PDF and database
format. It seems to be one of those things that just might be handy to have around at some
point. The list, just updated in June, has names of individuals, organizations, addresses and
other information: ll-tto:/ / \ ~ : ~ ~ ~ . t '... !
~c>ft:rces
: ~ : ~/ '~e . i ~~~f ~ ~ r c e ~ ~ ~ e ~ ~ t / ~ f ~ ~ i ~ d n /
V,

Business sources and documents
Wendell Cochran, American University
IRE National Conference 2005
141so related to money laundering and the Bank Secrecy 14ct is a category of institutions the
government calls Money Services Businesses.These include check cashing, issuance of
money orders, traveler's checks and other related companies. Regulation is done by Fincen,
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, also a Treasury Department agency. The list of
companies that have regstered (the rules are a bit convoluted, of course) in each state is
available in Excel format. It includes the legal name of the organization, the doing business
(DBA) name, street, city, state, zip, number of branches, and codes describing the business
the company is registered to perform. One idea for this would be to map the data for your
city, along with data for location of banks and branches and ATMs; you might find little
overlap in the poorer or heavily minority areas of your city. 14nd this whole area is one that's
ripe for abuse in many ways. Here is a link to the most recent list, which allows you to get
the spreadsheet for a particular state: t:rr~:/ / wxw.rnsh.mv :'~uir;i:itic~:
i ' m ~ i t;at~sc:li'~t.o~.l)hD
x
. ..
Campaign finance records, pamcularly those showing campaign expenditures, can help
you explain relationships between businesses and politicians. Which hotels in town does
your legislator or governor prefer? Where do they like to eat? Who gets the printing
business? Similarly, you can look at how members of Congress and the Senate (and in most
states, legislators) spend their ofice allowances?Who owns the building where the
representative has his district office? Lobbying records can show you who's chatting up
whom over what issues. How much does your city/school board spend in a year lobbying?
Who are the lobbyists? Don't forget contracts. In Prince Georges County, Md., the school
superintendent just had to resign because he gave a $1 million contract for software to the
woman he was living with.

