Terri Langford
Houston Chronicle
terri.lanqford @ chron.com
713.362.7276
IRE 2005lDenver

Tips For Document Hunters
Remember, there's a real landscape to record keeping systems.
Knowing who generates and keeps the documents is absolutely
essential to successful document collection.
Things to keep in mind when searching for documents:
1. Define. What document am I looking for? What do I want it to
reveal to me? Is this a state or federal document?
2. Locate. Who are the document keepers? Who must be notified
about my topic of interest? Agencies? Lawyers? Employee
Groups? Special Interest Groups? Academics? Think Tanks?
Courts? Judges? Private contractorslcompanies?
3. Refine. Do I need everything an agencylindividual has on one
particular topic? Don't know? Then ask for a list or index of all
documents kept on that topic. Be selective in your requests.
The Big Dos and Don'ts:
1. Find a spirit guide to help you navigate the records
architecture. The spirit guide can be within the agency or within your
newsroom. Don't be afraid to approach your colleagues. While you
may excel at all things courtroom, you may not have a clue as to what
to do with a tax appraiser's database. Or how to find a public
employee's personnel file.
2. Be persistent. Don't be obnoxious. Don't ask for everything and
the kitchen sink if you don't really need it. You're wasting your time
and that of your source. Record keepers have long memories when it
comes to recalling which reporter is the biggest pain.

3. Always, always, always pick up the document you requested.
Even if you've already done the story and you don't need it anymore.
FOlA officers and lawyers/clerks handling open records requests
won't remember what you asked for, but they WILL remember what
documents you failed to pick up after demanding that you HAD TO
HAVE IT NOW.
4. Don't let ego get the best of you. Do some homework about
your subject but don't be afraid to reveal your ignorance. You have no
idea how much record keepers love a little humility out of a reporter
after dealing with all of the show-offs and blowhards.
5. Don't be afraid to compromise. If you're not going to get
anything, be ready to ask for redacted records if it still gets you what
you want.
6. When possible, talk to the record keepers when you are not
on deadline. Just finished a story? Great, now spend the next
morning taking a tour of the district clerk's office or juvenile court.
Introduce yourself to judges, clerks, court coordinators, social
workers, etc. Ask them what records are in their possession. If you're
visiting your state capital, stop by agency offices. Always try to meet
the people you're talking to for records. This will pay you back in big
dividends when you need them on deadline.
7. Know your state's public records law. Know it like your life
depended on it. Don't "think you know it. Know it. Find a serious
clinic about your state open records law through bar associations and
the attorney general's office. Take it today.
8. Ask with confidence. Don't let them push you around. Don't be
nasty, be confident. Knowing the records law, allows you to do this.
9. Always try to ask for a hard-to-get document in person. If the
document is that important, then it is worth your time to get off your
rear end and ask for it in person.
10. When getting static about a record, go straight to the
institution's general counsel. Odds are your request is coming
through a staff attorney's office anyway. Beat them to the punch.
You'd be surprised how often just talking to the attorney can get you
the record.

