Alison Young
National Correspondent – Investigative Team
202-383-6092
ayoung@krwashington.com

The Editing Process: Strategies for Reporters
GETTING EVERYONE INVESTED: Managing Up, Way Up and Around
•

Know your newsroom: Who are the key decision-makers when it comes to putting
a project in the paper? How do their interests and approaches to editing differ? How
well do they communicate with each other? Where are the points of potential
conflict? What are the potential roadblocks? Anticipate problems and head them off.

•

Sell the project with a story memo: Editors too often are busy and distracted by
daily events. Get their attention with a tightly written, well-researched story memo.
Include a brief description of what your proposed investigation is about (minimum
story and maximum story), give examples of whatever initial information you’ve
gathered that supports the thesis, provide an estimate of how long the reporting will
take (minimum and maximum), identify any potential barriers, and explain why doing
this project contributes to your newsroom’s goals.

•

Bring the key players together at the start. If your direct editor approves of the
story proposal, discuss whether other supervising editors should receive a copy of
the proposal – and be given an opportunity to provide input. If you have hands-on
supervising editors, include them in periodic story conferences and be responsive to
their suggestions. Keeping them in the dark can lead to significant (and painful)
course corrections late in the project.

•

Keep key players involved. Beyond formal meetings, schmooze if you have to. Let
supervising editors in on some of the exciting finds along the way. Did an editor give
you a good idea or approach to pursue? If it pays off, let them know. Keep an
informal conversation going and help them become invested.

•

Collaborate with visual journalists. Brainstorm early with photo, graphics, the web
and design about opportunities. Not only will the project be better for it, the
enthusiasm from other departments builds momentum for the project within the
whole news organization.

•

Communicate, communicate, communicate! None of the key players should be
surprised by the content, approach and form of the project when it heads into the
final editing process.

GETTING IT RIGHT: Bulletproofing and the final edit
•

Develop a plan for bulletproofing the story. Make sure your line editor – and any
key supervising editors – understand what fact-checking, final interviews and other
bulletproofing tasks must be done before a story draft is actually ready for
publication. These tasks must be factored into their editing and publication
schedules. Some of them can be quite time consuming and editors should be alerted
if there’s the potential for any significant change depending on the results of these
activities, which include:
1) Verification letters/faxes/emails. Used to share specific results of data
analysis or other collected information prior to publication to give subjects the
opportunity to dispute methodology or content. Can be used to detect errors,
outdated information or simply to give subjects an opportunity to respond in
detail and have their comments included in the article.
2) Final/confrontation interviews. Could the results of these interviews
significantly change the project, or any portion of it?
3) “Miranda Warning” Letters: Used with subjects of articles who have refused to
grant interviews or respond to interview requests. These letters, sent by
FedEx or certified-signed receipt mail, formally present to the subjects what
you’re about to write about them, document all other previous attempts to
contact them, and give them one final opportunity to talk with you.
4) Line-by-line story fact checking: Done on the final version of the story.
Checks each fact (names, titles, numbers, quotes, documents, etc) against
original source documents and interview notes.

•

Develop a plan for bulletproofing other project content. A reporter can only do
so many things at once. Make sure editors schedule time for bulletproofing visual
elements: photo cutlines, graphics and web content. Is there unique and additional
content in the web presentation? If so, has time been scheduled for review and factchecking between the time web producers finish the site and the date of publication?
Does that time window conflict with the editing crunch for the print product?

•

Bring everyone together. Reporters can get slammed with requests from various
departments at the end of the project if workflow isn’t scheduled. Bring everyone
together near the end to discuss how all departments’ needs will be taken care of.
This meeting also serves as a reminder that each department’s needs shouldn’t be
viewed in a vacuum.

•

Flag changes for fact checking. Insist that edits, deletions, word changes made in
the final editing stages be highlighted in some way so (potentially bleary-eyed)
reporters can immediately spot them and make sure they’re correct. Reporters know
the story best. What an editor thinks is just an innocuous word change for the sake of
clarity or a deletion to save space has the potential to insert error or remove an
important qualifier.

