Banking on the Poor: Documenting the Big Business of Poverty
Ron Nixon, Minneapolis Star Tribune
With help from Holly Hacker, Dallas Morning News
Hollywood C.A.R. conference March 17-20
rnixon@startribune.com
612-673-4725
Credit is the lifeblood of a community. It enables people to invest in their future
by buying homes, send their children to college with the promise of a better life and it
allows them, among other things, to purchase things such as furniture or a car.
But for many moderate and low income Americans, credit can come at a steep
price. For these residents, there is a two-tier economy, one made up of traditional banks
and financial institutions and a second made up of what is known as the “fringe financial
industry”. This industry posts revenues in the billions of dollars each year mainly from
customers who lack access to banks or other mainstream financial institutions. The
Minneapolis Star Tribune explored the world of “fringe financial industry” in a series last
year.
The industry consist of:
Payday Lenders:
These are small loans backed by a post dated check where the consumer borrows a
certain amount—typically between $150-$500—until his or her next payday. In some
states the amounts may be larger.
Car Title Lenders:
These are loans where a vehicle is used as collateral against a small loan. These are
typically for a period of 30 days. The issuer of the loan will take possession of the car if
the loan is not repaid in the time allotted. Car title loans are illegal in Minnesota, but
many Wisconsin companies advertise the service here.
Check Cashing outlets:
Check cashing outlets perform a variety of services from cashing payroll and government
checks to selling money orders or transferring funds. These stores usually charge about 3
to 10 percent of the face value of a check to cash it. Some of these stores also offer
payday loans.
Pawnshops:
Pawnshops provide a small loan to customers in exchange for merchandise held for a
period of time by the shop with the agreement that the customer will reclaim the property
in the future. The customer must also pay interest on the loan and a storage fee.

Rapid Refund Loans:
Although most people think of Rapid Refunds as tax refunds, they are actually loans
made by national Banks through companies like H&R Block for a fee in anticipation of a
refund from the IRS.
Rent-to-own stores: These are stores were customers rent furniture on a weekly basis.
The stores cater mostly to low-income communities who pay anywhere from $25 or
higher a week for items like televisions
Sub-prime loans: High-cost loans usually intended for borrowers with poor credit, heavy
debt or both. Sub-prime loans often carry interest rates of 8 percent to 20 percent and fees
of 4 percent to 10 percent of the total loan. The high rates and fees are designed to protect
the lender in the event a borrower defaults on the loan.

Getting the story
1. Know the law. Check the statutes that govern payday lenders, check cashers and
others. In most states this is a largely unregulated industry. In states where the
industry is regulated, the statutes will give you some idea of what information or
data these industries have to provide for reporting purposes.
2. Check court filings. Court files are a rich source of information about the
practices of the industry and can also point you to people who feel they have been
wronged.
3. Get a firm understand of how the fringe financial sector works. Several books can
be helpful in understanding the business: John Caskey’s “Fringe Banking;”
Robert Manning’s “Credit Card Nation;” Mike Hudson’s “Merchants of
Misery;” and David Caplovitz’s “The Poor Pay More.” The Consumer
Federation of America and the industry trade group, the Financial Services Center
of America, can also provide information.

Getting the data:
1. Census data to study the demographics of the areas surrounding payday lenders,
check cashing stores, etc. This data is especially important for mapping.
2. Payday loan financial information. Some states like Minnesota require lenders to
provide information on the number and amounts of loans, defaults and carry over
loans. Check with state regulators to see what is required.

3. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. This data joined with the Department of
Housing and Urban Developments list of sub-prime lenders can show you who’s
being targeted for these types of loan. IRE sells the HMDA data and you can find
the list of sub-prime lenders at www.huduser.org/datasets/pdrdatas.html
4. Bank and Fringe Industry locations. You can find information on bank locations
at www.fdic.gov/quicklinks/analyst.html. Location for payday lenders and check
cashers can be found with licensing data on the state level or at
www.RefenceUSA.com
5. Uniform Commercial Code filings. Payday lenders and check cashing outlets like
to bash banks, but many of them have cozy relationships. Banks have been central
to the growth of the industry and their financial relationships can be tracked using
the UCC filings, which shows debts owed.
6. Community Reinvestment Act reports. These performance reports show how well
banks are serving the communities in which they are located. You can get the
information directly from the bank or download them at
www.ffiec.gov/cra/ratings/htm
7. Court filings database: Run the name of payday lenders, check cashers and other
fringe bankers through a civil court database. This will give you insight into their
business practices and possible sources.
8. State Licensing Agency compliance records: Although payday lenders and check
cashers aren’t regulated in all states, most states do regulate them and you can
check the compliance database for actions taken by state or local officials against
these business.

The Star Tribunes series on the poverty industry in Minnesota, “Borrowing Trouble”
can be found at http://www.startribune.com/borrowing
A primer on how we did the story can be found at
http://www.businessjournalism.org/content/5375.cfm

