The Editing Process: Strategies for Editors
Getting it right:
Test the hypothesis: Don’t let reporters set out to prove the premise of your investigation. Make
sure they also set out to disprove it. Gather evidence that contradicts the theory, hear from all the
critics and do everything you can to shoot down the premise. If the premise is wrong, it’s better
to know before you publish.
Edit on paper, as much as possible: The longer you keep your hands off the keyboard and the
reporter’s hands on the keyboard, the better your chances for accuracy.
Put yourself in the shoes of each person named in the story: What would they think was unfair or
inaccurate? Have they had a chance to fully comment?
Build in time for fact-checking: Have an established process that is agreed on by the reporter(s.)
Every fact in the story should be verified back to source documents, interviews, etc. as you
approach the final edit. This takes time and should not be done during rewrite, but after.
Consider readbacks: Reading back quotes and parts of the story to sources is something a lot of
reporters aren’t comfortable with, but it’s worth helping them get comfortable. It’s not a chance
for the source to take back or polish up a quote; it’s a chance for your reporter to get clarity,
context or nuance he or she might be missing.
Consider an investigative copy editor: We have one, and folks fight to be edited by her. Among
her skills: she highlights every assertion in the story (usually at the top) and finds where (and
whether) it is fully supported lower in the story. She prosecutes the story.
Take time with page proofs: That’s when you can find the errors in headlines, cutlines, subheads,
etc.
Make sure every reporter involved sees the proofs: If you have an early edition like a Bulldog,
make sure someone reads the story in the early edition. Niggling little stuff shows up in the
Bulldog that you would swear was not on the page proofs.

Getting it published:
Consider your team. Presumably, the reporter(s) and photographer are already chosen. As you
approach publication, add a designer, a designated copy editor and possibly a graphic artist. You
will get better work and a more collaborative process if they are part of the team, rather than just
picking up an “assignment.”
Set the stage: Tell your team that they are getting to work on some of the best work your
organization produces. That’s both an honor and a responsibility. For getting the time that
investigative work takes, they have to agree to some things in return. For starters: be
collaborative, expect extensive editing and give up the notion that they have ownership of the
story.
Edit all along: Any good editor is a coach and never is it more important than on investigative or
project reporting. The editor needs to talk with the project reporters extensively and regularly,
agreeing on reporting strategies, goals, what to go after next, etc. It is unreasonable to expect an
investigative reporter, cut free with lots of time and little guidance, to bring home the goods.
More likely, the reporter will get lost in the muck. As an editor, you have to keep the reporter
from getting lost in the muck.
Side-by-side storyboarding: Work with the reporter(s) to develop the story structure, outline, or
whatever organizational process proceeds the writing. If you get the structure right, the writing
goes easier and the editing is faster. You have to help because your reporter is lost in the muck.
Set the schedule: Establish clear interim deadlines with everyone -- a backout schedule that has
time built in for every step -- even for the managing editor to rewrite the lede. That time,
however, has to come long before the day before publication. If a week out or two weeks out you
are off your backout schedule, push the story back.
Manage up: Projects and investigations are too important to the organization for top editors to
only get involved at the end. Consider showing first drafts up the line, and getting feedback then,
rather than waiting until the copy is all wonderfully polished.
Drafts, drafts, drafts: It’s a rare story investigative story that is not significantly edited and
polished. Take considerable time with each draft; make sure the reporter knows multiple drafts
are expected and buckle in for hard work.
Be honest: It’s hard work… some of the hardest we do. That’s why we all have to be very, very
kind to each other.

