TEARING UP THE HIGHWAYS
2005 IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE, DENVER
Aaron Wische
E.P. Investigations & Special Projects
WFTS-TV Tampa/St. Petersburg
awische@wfts.com
813-354-2914

Mark Greenblatt
Investigative Reporter
KHOU-TV Houston
mgreenblatt@khou.com
713-284-1086

Local highway projects make great fodder for investigative reports. The subject
matter affects a huge base of viewers and readers. There are millions of public
dollars at stake, not to mention the quality of life of your community. But, these
investigations can require “heavy lifting.”
Here are some ideas to help you along:
•

Daily Construction Reports (or Logs): Most highway projects will have
daily reports or logs detailing the events of the day. This is where we
found numerous discrepancies documented by construction crews.

•

Repair Directives: These documents detail any repairs that have been
ordered on the project. Once you’ve located the repair directive, check for
supporting documentation that the repair has actually been made (work
order for supplies, concrete, timesheets etc). We found many repair
directives that were signed, but no evidence that the repair was actually
made. Most projects require that repair directives be reviewed and signed
by a licensed engineer. Check for the signature, and then check the
background of the individual. Your state’s board of engineering should
have a record of the individual. Make sure their license is current and in
good standing.

•

Board Minutes: If there is a local board or state agency overseeing the
project, go through monthly board meeting minutes. Many documents that
officials claimed did not exist, were in fact discussed during monthly board
meetings. We caught them in a lie. We also uncovered even more
problems that expressway officials had tried to keep quiet, simply by
reading the minutes.

•

Who is in Charge? We found many conflicts in the oversight of Tampa’s
Crosstown Expressway Project. The firm that designed faulty support
piers was also the general engineering contractor. The fox was watching
the henhouse. The Executive Director of the project was not a licensed
professional engineer even though he claimed to be on all public
documents and on his own business cards. A simple check of his

credentials eventually resulted in his resignation. If you’re investigating a
locally managed project, find out if there is any oversight at the state level.
•

Invest in Experts: Most journalists are not engineers. The terminology is
foreign, the documents might as well be in another language. Early on in
our reporting, we identified a forensic engineer to help us understand
exactly what we were looking at. Forensic engineers investigate things like
bridge collapses and structural failutes. His consultation work was
invaluable. Have other structural or forensic engineers review the
documents as backup. Check their credentials too, to make sure they are
reputable.

• Financing: How is the project being financed? Are bonds being issued?
What is the bond rating on the project? If user fees such as tolls are
paying for construction, check periodically to see what percentage of the
tolls are going to construction and if toll increases will be used to cover
construction overspending. Ask to see a detailed financial plan for the
project. Monthly board meetings are also a great source for keeping up
with financial aspects of major projects.

Predicting Failures Before They Happen
More than one out of every ten bridges in America is considered “structurally
deficient” by national engineering standards.
•

HOW TO FIND THEM: Obtain the National Bridge Inventory database
from the U.S Dept. Of Transportation, or from IRE & NICAR (the IRE
version is the same data, but it is in a format that is easier for beginners to
work with).

•

WHAT TO LOOK FOR:
*Structurally Deficient Bridges
*Functionally obsolete bridges
*Scour Critical Bridges- these bridges are highly susceptible to a washout
because of serious erosion problems that you often CANNOT see from
above water.

KEY DOCUMENTS:
•

SCOUR REPORTS: Ask to see the complete bridge inspection files- for
both the above water inspection, and also for the “scour inspection” on
any bridge that is built above water. Most journalists forget to ask for
these scour reports, but they can reveal important warnings about
dangerous bridges. In Houston, we found dozens of bridges the state’s

own engineers had already declared “unstable” due to problems with
erosion. Scour has been known to cause multiple collapses leading to
deaths across the country.
•

INTERNAL MEMOS: Make sure you go beyond the database. The data
only scratches the surface on the story behind highways and bridges.
You’ll find your most revealing material in the memos state engineers write
back and forth. In Houston, we found one major bridge on U.S. 59 that
engineers had warned needed “immediate” repairs to prevent a
catastrophic failure. Seven years later, the repairs had not been done.
By the time we looked at the bridge with an expert engineer- the columns
that hold the bridge up had begun to bend, lean, and were on the verge of
breaking at any moment.

•

MAINTENANCE RECORDS AND DATABASES: Each department of
transportation will keep records on what has been done to maintain
deteriorating bridges. Look for recommended actions, and check to see if
they were ignored. Many DOTs keep this information electronically now.

•

MAKE YOUR STORY BULLETPROOF If you are doing a story BEFORE
a collapse happens, it is more important than ever to get multiple experts
to interpret key documents. In Houston, we look for three or more experts
to confirm our findings. Even if you only use one expert on camera or in
print, you sould attempt to interview more and take detailed notes on what
they say. When you publish or air your story, the department of
transportation may attempt to downplay your findings. It is a good idea to
have as many experts on the record confirming a bridge is in danger,
BEFORE you publish.

DOING THE BREAKING NEWS INVESTIGATION
•

HAVE THE DATABASE ON HAND- By having the latest bridge
inspection data on hand, in the event of a bridge collapse in your area you
can use it to immediately access details about the bridge’s history. You
might just find inspectors already knew the bridge was structurally
deficient, but that no action had been taken to fix the problems. By
having the data on hand and familiarizing yourself with it BEFORE
breaking news happens, you will gain a considerable edge over your
competition. You can have an in-depth, investigative story on the air
almost immediately while everyone else across town is still waiting for the
PIO to call them back. They’ll be scratching their heads wondering how
you found what you did- so fast.

