TIPS ON CITY HALL BEAT REPORTING
By Kevin Flowers
Erie Times-News
205 West 12th Street
Erie, Pa 16534
(814) 870-1693 Work
(814) 566-8882 Cell
e-mail: kevin.flowers@timesnews.com
Develop a system that helps you get and keep a handle on what’s going on.
n Get meeting agendas beforehand so you know what the issues are and what will be discussed. Just as
importantly, learn how to read an agenda —know the difference between an ordinance and a resolution,
what purchase orders are, how contracts are awarded in your municipality. Develop a relationship with
someone (the City Council president, the county clerk, etc.) who can clue you in on what the hot agenda
items are each week. That will help you prepare for the meeting and clue you in on developing stories.
n Make a point of getting to know the officials you cover and those who work for them (secretaries, etc.).
Stop in and talk to them as much as you can when you don’t want information for a breaking story. Ask
about their families, what’s going on in their lives, how they like their jobs, etc. That helps develop
relationships you need to get information out of city hall, and that’s when you find out what’s really going
on. These folks, over time, will start to trust you and will then tell you about interesting tidbits that often
become good, meaty stories.
n Find out from other reporters, municipal workers, politicians, etc. which individuals on your beat have
the most “institutional memory’’ —that is, the ones who know the inner workings of the city or town, who
the players are, how politics play there, etc. Pick their brains for story ideas and possible sources. Work
them for background information on beat-developed stories. These people can be very helpful in pointing
you toward the context and depth your stories need.
n Get a municipal directory, if one is available, of all the officials at city hall, the courthouse, etc. If one
is not available, create your own from a personnel list. These are public records.

Try to be interesting and creative in your work:
n Example: If you can, resist the meeting story for a later enterprise piece, which more fully explains the
issue, covered in a meeting. News of record stories are boring. Any beat reporter’s focus should be on
interesting stories about the problems and issues on that beat that affect how people in the community
live, whether government is doing the job people expect, if officials are abusing their positions, etc.
Editors love reporters who are constantly thinking and trying to develop their own stuff. And when you
deliver, you’ll often be rewarded with more time to keep doing your thing.
This mindset can be applied to any type of beat work. Think about what kinds of stories you want to
read about your city government, police department, court system, local nonprofits, etc., and to after
them.

Enjoy the digging.
n Unearthing the facts—especially when some bureaucrat doesn’t want you to—is one of the most
rewarding things about our job. Develop a love for research. Buy books about it, if you have to, to learn the
most effective ways. Two of the best are “The Reporters Handbook—An Investigators Guide to Documents
and Techniques’’ by John Ullmann and Jan Colbert (this is an IRE publication) and the classic “How to
Investigate Your Friends and Enemies’’ by private investigator Louis J. Rose. Go to the library and check
out books about the history of your municipality, if they exist. Research such history on the Internet. Talk
to folks at the local historical society or its equivalent to mine ideas for historical-type beat pieces. You can
never have enough information, and it’s much better to dig too much and end up leaving much of it out of
your story than to be lacking crucial facts and details.

Get out of the office and knock on doors.
No one gets great stories by sitting at their desk. Get out and meet people in the community. Walk a

neighborhood, if you get a chance, and ask people about their main concerns. Tell their stories, because
more often than you may think, they are willing to share those details.
Make sure you know what you have access to.
Research open records laws so you know what kind of documents, etc. you can peruse when you need
to. Ask city employees how their vital information is stored and what kind of databases they use. Then ask
them how you can access those databases and if there are any fees for obtaining the data. If you cover a
governmental body, all their reports and studies, much of their correspondence, overtime lists, employee
rosters, sick time lists, salaries, and much more are typically public information. There are reams of stories
in all that paper if you’re willing to dig.
Be fair, but let them know you’re serious.
Don’t be a jerk when asking questions or requesting information or interviews, but don’t let public
officials, cops, etc. walk all over you and try to intimidate you, either, because they will try. The best way
to empower yourself as a reporter is to get the story right and tell it fairly and with context. When you do
that, officials know that not only do you know what you’re doing, but you don’t play favorites and you’re
willing to dig to get to the truth. They keep score. And when they know you don’t play favorites, even your
best sources will realize that if they screw up, you won’t hesitate to write about them either. Learn to
walk that line and you’ll be successful.

