INVESTIGATING INFRASTRUCTURE: SOURCES FOR DATA
IRE Conference - 2005
Adam Symson
E.W. Scripps Broadcast Group
• FARS (Fatality Analysis Reporting System):
Contains data on all vehicle crashes in the United States that occur on a public roadway and
involve a fatality.
• State-Based Crash Data:
Where the FARS data comes from. Find out who sends FARS data to the Feds to learn how
they keep the data. Some states keep very detailed crash info.
Some of the states have latitude and longitude data for every crash while others include the
detailed info about every person involved. In many states, the data is very detailed in
description of the road and driving conditions.
• Pothole Complaints:
Most cities keep a running internal database of pothole complaints from citizens. Track down
where the complaints are and what areas get fixed fastest.
Do it Yourself version:
Attach an accelerometer to a vehicle and take measurements of the G-forces affected on
your vehicle on the areas most traveled roadways.
• Dept. of Public Works Data:
Find out what data the department keeps.
Most agencies keep track ‘electronically’ of the maintenance of sewers, gas lines, electric
poles etc…
• Road Conditions Databases
Many cities, counties and even states keep databases of road conditions that help them to
determine timelines for repairs and improvements. When budgets get tight, these repairs
often get pushed off. These databases tell the story of where the roads are at their worst. If
you map the roads and add in demographic data about the economics of the neighborhoods,
you could find interesting stories here.
• Broken Fire Hydrants:
Usually kept by the water or fire depts.
• Federal and State Contracts:
Who’s profiting off the infrastructure development. Look for pet projects and new
technologies to see if they are being implemented with the right due diligence.
• Moving Violation Databases:
Either from law enforcement or the courts, you can get a copy of a ‘snap shot in time’ of
tickets given out in a municipality.
Look beyond speeding tickets for other moving violations that tell a story about an area. For
example: No Insurance Zones: Track down where all of the tickets are given for no insurance
and then add data about where the accidents occur in which at least one of the parties had
no insurance at the scene.

• National Inventory of Dams:
Also make sure to check out http://www.damsafety.org for sources in your state willing to
speak openly about the issue.
•

Coast Guard’s U.S. Recreational Boat Accident Database:

• FAA Accidents and Incidents:
Follow up with a request from the regional FAA of operational errors, or runway incursions.
Then, for broadcast, follow up requesting audio tapes of the incidents from the towers. They
are supposed to keep all tapes for two years.
• Tornado / Public Emergency Sirens:
GIS Map them: How far away is the sound supposed to be heard (buffer zone) and yet how
far away from each other are they. Where are the gaps between the buffer zones.
• Fire Department and Police Department response times:
FD and PD response times can be investigated by getting data from various sources. The
National Fire Incident Reporting System tracks fire department response times. For a very
thorough reporting of nationwide response issues, see Bill Dedman’s Boston Globe’s series:
http://www.boston.com/news/specials/fires/
You can also get a data dump from the Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system your
agencies use to analyze response time. Many of the systems are easily interfaced with GIS
maps help analyze growth issues.
Possible issues to take a close look at are: staffing levels, traffic and growth related
congestion, how growth has hampered resource allocation and fire/police station locations.
• Snow Removal Maps and Databases:
Whose getting the bulk of your city’s salt and snow removal services. An analysis of a
community’s snow removal plan may reveal interesting facts about who gets the best service,
and when.
• Traffic Flow:
Many states have installed traffic monitoring sensors in freeways, expressways ad major
roadways to help them monitor traffic on a daily basis. Private companies are already
tapping into the data on a real-time basis to provide traffic reports on television and radio.
The data, if extracted and averaged over a long period, would tell an interesting story of
where the choke points and heaviest traffic areas are.
• Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS):
The Federal HPMS is a national level highway information system that includes data on the
extent, condition, performance, use, and operating characteristics of the Nation's highways.
The data is used to help determine how the DOT and FHA will “invest tax payer
• Street Lights:
Take a look at city records regarding both placement and outages on street lights. There are
‘best practices’ to how often lights should appear on the street to be financially prudent while
also cutting down on light pollution. A look into records may reveal that a community is overinstalling lights to a cost of hundreds of thousands of dollars in maintenance and electricity.
Add in NASA Sat images of light pollutions to see how your community shows up at night.
Also, find lists of street lights that are in need of repair, or out, and find out if the city allows
certain neighborhoods to remain in the dark while catering to others faster.
*Thanks to many NICAR Listers for ideas and input.

