Find partners in Europe
By Nils Mulvad, executive director of Danish International Centre for Analytical
Reporting, nils.mulvad@dicar.dk

IRE-conference Denver 2005: Roundtable on international networking: Contacts and resources to
take investigations overseas.

Contact Scandinavian IRE-like organisation
In Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden there are established IRE-like organisations. They are a
good starting point if you want to go to Europe. They have all existed for around 15 years.
Addresses are: www.fuj.dk, www.dicar.dk, www.tutkiva.fi, www.skup.no and www.fgj.se.
These organisations are all professional in the best sense of the word and will help you to the best of
the ability.

Find other organisations
The membership-list of Global Investigative Journalism Network contains other organisations
around Europe, which might be useful to cooperate with. Find the list of members here:
www.dicar.org/gijn

Join the Global-L mailing list
Ideas and discussions pop up on this list. Go to the overall site of the network,
www.globalinvestigativejournalism.org and click on Join the Global-L listserv.

The first case of cross-border data in EU: agricultural subsidies
For many years we have been talking about coordinating access-work in the EU. Now we run the
first case wanting access to data regarding all beneficiaries of EU agricultural subsidies. Until now
we have got data from Denmark, England, Sweden, Spain and Estonia. We’re presently running
requests and new requests in Finland, Sweden, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Scotland, Ireland,
Belgium, The Netherlands, France, Slovakia, Slovenia and Hungary and also on a central level in
EU. Approximately half the EU-budget is spent on subsidies. All experiences gained from this case
can be used in upcoming cases. The coordination is done by The Foreign Policy centre in the UK
and Dicar. Data and documentation will be placed on a web-site.

Good contact in Brussels is necessary
Many cross-border stories in EU will be coordinated from Brussels. You often need to have
somebody there and approach correspondents from different media to find the right ones to work
with in each country. You also have to be careful. In France, for instance, there’s backlash on
investigative journalism. Journalists are scared and you need to find somebody who can stand up
against all this.

Property, income, crime, elections, environment, corporate, health, school,
lobbyists and court records?
There are great variations as to how these records are stored in each country and how you get access
to them. There’s not he same level of access as in the US, but things are changing. Dicar and other
European organisations are working together to make other test-cases besides agricultural subsidies
to get an overview of what we can get access to within each of these areas, and how we can make
data comparable from country to country.

New access-rules in EU will come
EU is in a process of being more transparent. The same counts for the member-states. Of course
there are also areas where there is a reverse development. The general situation is opening up,
though, and media are beginning to run cases and use them for setting up regulation system. So
what is not possible today might be tomorrow. The Commission is right now preparing new
directives on communication policy and access to documents inside the Commission. For an
impression read the speech by commissioner Siim Kallas. It’s placed here:
http://europa.eu.int/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=SPEECH/05/130&format=HTML&ag
ed=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en
On May the 18th 2005 this was accepted as policy for the whole Commission and due to the plan
from the Commission a new green paper will be submitted in October this year. This is the first step
for making a new directive.

Go to global conferences
The whole idea of these conferences is to strengthen a global network making possible the building
of new organisations in countries where there are none today and to strengthen the cooperation
between existing organisations and individuals – both on methods and on basic partner-finding.
Already knowing somebody somewhere makes it easier to make initial queries on issues in that
region. Make your own network.

