Breaking and Entering
How to dissect an organization
Eric Nalder
Seattle Post-Intelligencer
101 Elliott Avenue W
P.O. Box 1909
Seattle, Wa. 98111-1909
Seattle Office Phone: 206-448-8011
Home Office Phone: (360) 394-9500
Email: enalder@mercurynews.com

In our bellicose jargon, we refer to them as targets . . . as in ``the target of my
investigation.'' Perhaps that's because they pop up like shooting gallery icons in the
course of a newspaper reporter's life.
One day a tipster introduced me to the fascinating world of nuclear weapons plants,
and then a faulty o-ring sent me packing to a Utah rocket plant. The errant crew of the
Exxon Valdez redirected my attention to tanker companies, a screwed up deregulation
program in California switched me to electricity and the attack on the World Trade
Center caused me to examine airport security. I learned about Coast Guard, the
University of Washington football team, the Seattle Fire Department, a bunch of crime
labs, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the California Governor’s
office, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the FAA, the IRS and, most recently,
the ConocoPhillips tanker fleet.
If our best stories are told through people, our toughest reporting tasks often involve
cracking the associations they form. The challenges are myriad since the 265 million
people in this country have created -- so far -- 6.5 million businesses, 1 million non-profit
organizations and 85,000 state and local governments. Each has its own culture, and more
are being formed every day.
Ergo, the first rule for investigating organizations is to be flexible.
The second rule is that you must stop thinking of them as targets. After all, you are not
going to shoot the organization. You will lift off the lid, pull out the parts, read the
operating instructions and discover how it works.
Then you may expose its flaws, and in the process write some meaningful poetry.
First, though, you must lift off the lid.
The manual for dissecting an organization starts with basic questions:
--Who are the players?
--Who is in charge?
--Who are the regulators?
--What are the rules?
--How are things done?

--Where are the mistakes recorded?
--Where is the spending recorded?
--Who knows the story and how can I get it?
To answer these questions, here are some suggestions:
WHO ARE THE PLAYERS?
Lists: Every organization and government agency has payroll lists and phone books,
which are frequently available on computer disc or online (one example: The California
On-Line Directory, www.cold.ca.gov). Scan government agency phonebooks for a library
or research center and contact the record keepers to learn more about what is in their files
and data collections. Visit them if possible. For the government agencies you cover,
routinely make FOIA or state public disclosure requests for the best documents and
databases, as well as the job-application resumes and personnel files. At private
companies, cultivate helpful employees to provide the same. A company librarian might
be helpful. In all cases, be sure to ask for outdated payrolls rosters and phone books to get
the names of former employees (a computer can be used to compare the lists and pop out
the names of ex-employees).
Newsletters: Most organizations publish internal newsletters that contain employee
names, and other bonus information. Writing about a secretive Army Ranger battalion -which had a classified roster -- I gleaned a third of the names from a year's worth of the
post newspapers at the Ft. Lewis library, just because the Rangers were frequently
mentioned as accomplished athletes.
Associations: Contact professional associations and unions since they sometimes give
out rosters, and they publish newsletters. They also hold annual conventions where you
can meet lots of potential sources. Books on file in the library have lists of professional
associations.
Courts: Check the local courts for lawsuits that might list employees, and keep in mind
that disgruntled workers who have sued the firm or agency are sometimes good sources
of information. Even an innocuous suit involving a land dispute might contain helpful
names. Be on the lookout for depositions.
Whistle-blowers: State personnel boards and the U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board
in Washington D.C. have on public file the names of government employees who have
appealed disciplinary actions. Some cases involve whistle-blowing. For towns and
counties, check the local civil service commission. To contact people who have submitted
confidential ethical, consumer, environmental and-or safety complaints to state, federal or
even private agencies (like the Better Business Bureau), try getting around the
confidentiality requirements by asking the agency to forward a letter from you to the
complainants.
Licenses and Permits: State licensing bureaus provide lists of a wide variety of
professionals who have state permits, including real estate agents, surveyors, undertakers,
manicurists, architects, and nurses. You can frequently search for them by company
name. The FAA has the names of pilots employed at an airline. The Coast Guard
registers crew members on U.S.-flagged merchant ships, but don’t overlook information
available from companies representing international flags like International Registry Inc.

in Reston, Va. (Marshall Islands) and the Liberian International Ship and Corporate
Registry in Vienna, Va.
Contracts: Contracts with government agencies frequently include the names of the
employees who work for contractors. For example, a housing authority applying for a
HUD grant often includes resumes of key employees and officers.
Bankruptcy: Federal bankruptcy court records are a gold mine, since they contain,
among other things, the names of employees who were stiffed for their wages and lists of
creditors who might know the names of other sources.
Newspaper morgue: Stories mentioning the organization will contain useful names,
and don’t ignore obituaries which will open the door to family connections or routine lists
in the business section of people promoted, etc.
Old city directories: Newspaper and public libraries have old copies of the city
directories that list the place of employment of local residents.
Newsroom sources: Interview your fellow reporters because they might know of
people in the organization or other sources.
Outsiders: You can get information on employees from a company's customers,
suppliers and competitors. And remember, too, union leaders and shop stewards.
Companies have lawyers and accountants, and sometimes they have ex-lawyers and exaccountants. Ex-wives of company bosses can also be helpful. And don't assume that a
banker won't tell you anything.
Gripes: Try the people who register their gripes with the Better Business Bureau, or the
city licensing agency, or the licensing department, or in letters to the editor.
Hangouts: To meet sources, hang out at the restaurants, bars and cafes located near the
company office. Or maybe there's a gym where the troops play basketball.
Tour: Take a tour of the agency. Meet people. Take note of the names you see on
desktops and on those little magnetized ``in'' and ``out'' signs that are frequently located
at the receptionist's desk.
Interviews: The best sources, of course, are the employees themselves. When you
interview them, ask each one to tell you what they know about the others. You can
quickly build a roster this way. Ultimately you want to know how people interact, and
who is the best source for each type of type of information. If you already have a payroll
list or phone book, or you have built a dossier (see next item) read out the names to
prompt your interview subject's memory. During one recent investigation, had each
interview subject to through a roster and by doing so I developed very useful dossiers.
When an employee tells you something important, always follow-up with the
question: ``How do you know that?'' The answer will frequently include the names of
other players.
Dossier: Enter all the information you gather on each person into a computer
database. I use Excel. On my database, from left to right, I provide cells for last name,
first name, middle initial and a code word for the person’s role (i.e., “manager”,
“supplier”, “union”). Going further right, I provide a cell for comments that includes
information on their likes, dislikes, any behavior or act that is significant to my story,
connections and notable quotes, etc. Next are cells for date of birth, phone numbers
(office, home, cell, fax, etc), address, employer and perhaps other identifiers.

WHO IS IN CHARGE?
Government: It's relatively easy to obtain a roster of bosses at government agencies.
Resumes should be available and much of the personnel file should be open for your
perusal. Pay attention to the place where the bosses formerly worked, because you can
learn a lot about them there. Verify what they have said on their resume. Do background
checks on former employees using on-line resources.
Disclosure: Elected officials, of course, file documents disclosing their finances and
campaign contributions, but keep in mind that the top appointed officials at the federal
and local level must frequently do the same. Check out your state, county or city ethics
commission. Do background checks on major campaign contributors. Use a database to
group contributors by industry and-or interest group. Arrange contributions by date and
look for clusters that might indicate who is influencing the person in charge.
The unofficial hierarchy: Learn about the shadow bosses. Sometimes a member of the
city council runs the show at city hall more than the mayor, or a particular contractor has
more power within a state agency than the director. Ask employees about this. Request
the desk calendars of the bosses to learn who they meet with regularly, and get travel
records along with an itinerary.
Private companies: One of the best resources is Dun and Bradstreet. The free version
of a Dun and Bradstreet report has bare bones information, but the $100 version is much
better. Another source of the names is your state's corporations office. In addition, the
county recorder keeps records regarding limited partnerships. Loan documents on file at
your state's Uniform Commercial Code office frequently contain names and social
security numbers. Credit reports are available on line. The local Chamber of Commerce
might have information as well. Of course, the company phone book is a key. Service
club directories contain names of company leaders. Bankruptcy records point fingers of
blame when a company gets into financial trouble. Keep in mind as well that employees,
suppliers and customers can provide additional information on informal hierarchies. Who
does it/he/she contribute to? How much? Why? What do the politicians who received
donations say about your subject? Does the business have it's own PAC? Many large
companies, including privately held ones do. And if they've got a PAC, they've got to file
with the FEC and, often, with state and municipal authorities as well (often there'll be two
PACS, one for federal elections, one for state). If a company has its own PAC take a
close look at who contributes to it. You'll most likely find key company officers and,
perhaps, friends or business associates who can offer other avenues for reporting. A
particularly good web site for FEC data is: http://www.tray.com/fecinfo/
Publicly-traded companies: The Edgar site operated by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml) provides valuable documents such as the 10K
and the proxy (known as Def 14A). These have names of executive officers including
their wages and perks, age, title, time with the company, familial relationships and a brief
biographical description. Annual reports, available from the company's investor relations
office, contain more puffery but have additional valuable information. Ask the relations
office for resumes on company officers. Stock analysts are a great source of information
on company bosses and on the informal hierarchy. Lists of stock analysts are available in
Nelson's Directory of Investment Research and Bloomberg News. Be aware of possible
bias if the analyst works for a brokerage house that serves as the company's investment
banker.

Non-profits: The IRS 990 form contains the names you want plus financial
information. Non-profit organizations are required to release the 990 if ask for the
document at the office during normal business hours. You can also fax your request to the
IRS. The proper address in our region is the office of Return and Income Verification
Services, Ogden (Utah) Service Center, 801-620-6671. The reply should take 30 days.
Dan Langan, formerly with the National Charities Information Bureau, says you’ll get
quicker service from the IRS if you cite the IRS CODE and DO NOT cite FOIA. Keep in
mind that some 30 states require charities to keep their 990s on file with the state, and
you will frequently get quicker service there. The agency in Washington is the Charities
Division of the Secretary of State. GuideStar (http://www.guidestar.org/) is a good online
source for 990 forms. It contains PDF images of actual 990’s filed by many non-profits.
Other sources: Nothing is more valuable than the contacts you make with secretaries
and clerks. Take a tour of the company. Sometimes these are offered to the general
public. Talk to competitors, suppliers and customers. Check court files and interview the
litigants. Talk to the boss' neighbors and his buddies at the golf and country club.
WHO ARE THE REGULATORS?:
Federal government: The inspector general offices for each federal agency have web
sites, and a directory for them is located on Ignet at www.ignet.gov. You can search
inspector general reports by key word or topic. The General Accounting Office is a good
resource, as are the internal audit agencies (i.e., the Army Audit Agency, etc.). Cultivate
sources at the audit agencies. Staff members from congressional committees are
sometimes helpful, and there are directories that can help you locate them. The U.S.
Merit Systems Protection Board and the U.S. Office of Special Counsel receive
complaints on personnel issues. Check the court files and the Federal Election
Commission.
State and local governments: The state auditor's office is a good starting place, but
don't forget legislative committees and the city council staffers, as well as the various
offices of internal audit. The state attorney general's office and the state police conduct
investigations at state agencies. Each government agency has an office that answers
complaints and claims. Remember the personnel office, the unions and OSHA. For
police, there is the office of internal investigations and frequently there is an
ombudsperson.
Private companies: You might locate some government audits if the company has a
government contract. The GAO and the IG might also get involved. The SEC acts as a
regulator for publicly-traded companies and, in an ad hoc way, so do the various stock
analysts. What kind of business is your company engaged in? If it is involved in a
regulated business -- as most are -- then you can get information from a variety of
sources; i.e., for transportation companies you can get reports from, among others, the
FAA, ICC, NTSB, local state highway police and (if waterborne) the U.S. Coast Guard.
The city business registrar will have some basic information. The city engineering and
building departments, and the county assessor, will have data on the structures that the
company owns. As mentioned before, the state licensing department might have
complaints filed against licensed professionals. The Uniform Commercial Code Office
keeps a record of loans. The state revenue department will have some releasable
information. OSHA and your state labor office will supply reports on safety and wage-

and-hour complaints (you can also look up OSHA inspection reports online at
http://www.osha-slc.gov/oshstats/). It might even be relevant to ask the police and fire
departments for records on emergency calls to the business location. Check the court files
for lawsuits, of course, and the Better Business Bureau for complaints. (Council of Better
Business Bureaus has information on businesses and charities at http://www.bbb.org)
Non-profit: While the IRS 990 form is one good source of information, an even
better one is the audited financial statement. Under some circumstances, charities are
required to release their financial statements. Langan gives the example of public TV and
radio stations which are required by agreement with the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting to make their financial statements publicly available. In some cases,
charities file their audited financial statements with the state. Or you can always ask the
people at the non-profit agency to give you a copy. If they don’t, ask them why they are
not willing to release it.
Watchdogs on the perimeter: Organizations like the Government Accountability
Project receive whistleblower complaints, while environmental organizations take care of
the dirty discharges and poisonous products. Your library will have a list of private
organizations that watchdog various businesses. Lawyers who have sued the company
might also be aware of organizations, and-or groups of complainants. Canvass the
neighborhoods surrounding a company for activists who might keep an eye on the place,
and cruise the internet. Think about the work that the company performs, and imagine
what kind of people might come in contact with that work. I found information about
tanker companies among the ship pilots, tugboat drivers and oil terminal operators. Use
your imagination.
WHAT ARE THE RULES?
Government agencies: You'll be buried for too long if you try to read every law and
regulation that affects your agency. Learn to use the indices in the federal law, and the
code of federal regulations, to more precisely locate the sections that apply to your
subject. For a shortcut, watchdog agencies and organizations can point you to the relevant
language. You can get a government agency to do the work for you by filing a FOIA
request asking for any and all laws, regulations or internal policies that apply to whatever
you are writing about.
Private companies: Use the same process, but in this case go to the government
regulators who oversee the business. Find the laws and regulations that they are
empowered to enforce. Remember, too, that there are general laws governing the
operation of a company -- taxes, unfair consumer and labor practices, wages, etc. -- that
might be relevant. Various agencies, like the Labor Department, administer those laws
and they can help you with the details.
Internal regulations: Agencies, non-profit organizations and companies all have their
own internal policies and regulations. Request them from government agencies and get
someone inside the private organization to provide you with the rulebook.
The history: When you find the rules and regs you are looking for, read the legislative
history and interview the experts to learn how the law or regulation into being. Local
county law libraries are a good source for looking up older state-level statute changes. In
California, the Senate and Assembly websites contain information on legislative histories.
You might find that the old problems that were supposed to be fixed by the new law

haven't gone away. Or you might find that new problems have arisen as an unintended
consequence of the law. You can also locate the people who spurred the change in
regulations, and get their perspective on current events.
HOW ARE THINGS DONE?:
Tactical plan: Once you have a grasp of your subject, sketch out a plan for figuring out
how organization works. As a general rule, you should file your FOIA requests to the
government agencies early in the process. While the agency is deciding whether to honor
your request, you will be getting to know some employees who will leak the documents
to you.
People trail: Decide who are you going to interview and in what order. Sometimes you
must catch certain people quickly before they are scared off. Other times you must circle
them, talking to their friends and associates. Also decide where you are going to
interview people. It is frequently best to talk with them at the place where they are doing
the thing you are writing about. But sometimes you might want to surprise them at home,
where they are likely to be more candid. Talk over the plan with your editor and your
fellow reporters.
Getting the inside story: Once you have your roster of players, you'll need an insider
to guide you to the players who are most likely to talk freely about the hidden stuff. Find
the home addresses for those people and visit them at a convenient and non-threatening
time (7 p.m. is often a good). Tell them you are working on a story and you could really
use their help. Offer a brief rundown of the story you are working on because,
sometimes, their curiosity about your story will get you in the door. And telling them
something about your story is a good way to prompt them to give you more information.
It also helps to use your roster and ask the person about others in the company. People are
sometimes more comfortable talking about others rather than themselves. If that doesn't
work, apologize for the intrusion and appear as though you are backing off. Get the
person to talk about something else. Anything else. Maybe you noticed an unusual plant
next to the walkway, or the family dog, or something on the wall that indicates a hobby.
Say something about it. As a general rule, if you can get people talking about anything,
you can gently move them back to the subject you are interested in. As you move back to
the subject that interests you, start with non-threatening questions. Ask the person about
the work that they do, and then ask what they know the person or the problem you are
interested in. If the interview subject balks, reassure them that they are not the only
person you are talking with and ``it's really no big deal.'' You explain that what you need
as a reporter is a little help. Be honest. (See my interviewing handout -- Loosening Lips -for other techniques.) As you get to the most important stuff, it's important for you to
organize your approach. Follow a chronology. When the person says something
significant, always ask -- ``How do you know that?'' That question is a perfect door
opener to other sources, and for some reason it usually gets people to say more. Also ask
for examples. When a person tells you that the bosses are unfair, ask for an example. And
always ask people to suggest other ways of getting the information you need, and other
sources. ``If you were working on this story, how would you do it?''
More on the paper trail: Get your hands on the memo traffic, the emails and the
internal letters, whether you are using FOIA with a government agency or a mole at a
private company. If the agency or company is in trouble, or if rules are being violated,

there will be plenty of memos. Make sure you follow the memo trail to the end. Audits,
of course, are helpful. Travel records and desk calendars are good sources of information.
It is very important, at some point, that you visit the department that keeps the records
and meet the record keepers. Drop in unannounced, if that's possible, and do so in a
friendly and casual manner. Ask for a tour. Your goal will be a detailed explanation of
the records system in the agency or company. An alternative is the midnight visit. If a
source works the graveyard shift, ask if they can bring you to work one day and give you
a tour (as long as it is legal).
WHERE ARE THE MISTAKES RECORDED?
Anecdotal: As you meet with sources, ask people to tell you where the mistakes are
written down. Every company and government agency has a system. Sometimes there is
more than one place where the mistakes are recorded. At Department of Energy nuclear
weapons plants, for example, some screw ups were described in ``Unusual Occurrence
Reports'' and others were memorialized in ``Off Normal Reports.'' There were also audits,
internal memos, internal letters and surveillance reports.
Paper trail: Government agencies are required to release lists of relevant documents.
With private companies, you've got to ask people to describe the system (more on that
later).
WHERE IS THE SPENDING RECORDED?
Anecdotal: Besides the obvious internal sources, you might find yourself a friendly
private auditor who has dealt with company or agency you are examining. Be wary of
organizations that keep two sets of books. It does happen. If necessary, try to find a mole
within the bookkeepers office by visiting people at home.
Paper trail: Reading a balance sheet is never easy. Find yourself an expert, maybe an
inside source or perhaps someone from the accounting office in your own newspaper.
Remember that a balance sheets shows you how the money was spent, and a budget
shows you how they planned to spend the money. You'll want both. Be sure to follow the
budget trail. Get the budget proposal made by the agency head to the agency chief
executive, and the one submitted by the CEO to the council or legislature. Look for stuff
that gets lopped off or added, and read the narrative to learn more about the agency's
needs.
WHO KNOWS THE STORY AND HOW CAN I GET IT?
After you have made your document requests, and toured the plant, you need an
excuse to move in. Sometimes the best excuse is the simple act of copying documents.
Whether you have made a FOIA request of a government agency, or talked a
company into sharing some of its records with you, you can win friends by offering to
help with the copying. Once you get there, get yourself assigned to a table, and ask
directions to the restroom and the soft drink machine. Be courteous and don't get in the
way. Meet people. Chat. Listen to conversations. Basically, you want to become a part of
the operation. Doing so, you will witness stuff you would never see in the annual report.
Come up with an excuse to return several times. Move around with confidence. Act
like you belong. Act like they are lucky to have you there.

Ask people to retrieve records for you, and accompany them to the file cabinets.
Learn how the filing system works, and offer to pull out the stuff yourself. Pretty soon
you'll get direct access to the records.
Drop in on the bosses several times. Have valid questions, don't be a pest, but get
them accustomed to talking with you several times. Ease them into informal
conversations.
If something important happens -- a critical meeting, an accident or a major incident
-- be there. Instruct your sources to inform you whenever they expect a significant event.
If necessary, ask sources to keep diaries for you on what goes on in the office.
If your story involves a factory, get down on the floor and learn how to operate the
machinery. Don the protective clothing that the workers wear, and handle the same tools.
If you are writing about crooked cops, hang out with the cops. It pays to be on the scene.
The best interviews are conducted with the eyes, as well as the voice and ears. Be there,
and you will be aware.
If people are nervous about giving you access, explain to them that you can write
more accurately about their operation if you have firsthand knowledge.
Organizing your material is your best method for cracking the code inside any
establishment.
As you collect information, organize it into two major files. One is a chronology and
the other is the dossier, which I described earlier.
I usually start building a chronological database when I begin reporting. I use an
Excel database. The chronology will contain an entry for every event, large or small, that
is described or simply mentioned in records, clips or interviews. On my Excel file, from
right to left, I have a cell for the date when something happened and another for code
words describing where in my story that event might be relevant (i.e. “Governor” for
anything pertaining to the Governor). Next is a cell that describes any information I have
on the event or on the people involved in the event. Next is a cell describing where in my
files or interview notes that event is mentioned. You can have other cells as well. For
example, another cell might remind you of reporting tasks (I also make “to do” lists
separately).
You can organize the chronology by date or subject matter. You can create small subchronologies. Scanning them, you will discover relationships between events. It may tell
your story for you. And as you write, it is a powerful writing tool.
Before you write, decide what the story is. A poorly written investigative piece is
usually the work of a disorganized reporter who is not sure of the point.
If you cannot write with authority, then you are not ready to write. Do more reporting.
Thanks to the following people for their help: Leigh Poitinger, Rick Tulsky, Pete Carey,
Mark Gladstone, Duff Wilson, Stanley Holmes, Tom Boyer, Tom Brown, Dan Langan,
Deborah Nelson, Greg Heberlein and David Boardman.

