Networking in Europe
Marjan Agerbeek, VVOJ, e-mail bestuur@vvoj.nl IRE conference Denver, June 3rd 2005

Before you start
-

-

-

Don’t expect a German journalist to help you find a colleague in Spain. There are over 50
countries in Europe and they all have their own language; some even more than one. Cross
border contacts between journalists are not common (yet).
Every country has its own journalism culture. Expect differences in: the focus on topics, the
number of investigative projects, the level of journalism methods and skills, the extent of
independence from politics etc.
Try to find a common interest before you ask for help. Journalists don’t like to be used as just
a source.
Try to meet with the journalist you need help from. You’ll get a better idea of his/hers
professional skills and the journalism culture he/she is working in. Tip: Visit the Global
Investigative Journalism Conference in Amsterdam, September 29th – October 2nd. More
information is available on http://www.vvoj.org/.

Western Europe
The Netherlands and Belgium
Vereniging van Onderzoeksjournalisten (VVOJ) – Dutch-Flemish association of investigative
journalist: www.vvoj.org (English) and www.vvoj.nl or www.vvoj.be (Dutch)
The VVOJ was founded in Amsterdam on February 26th, 2002. The VVOJ wants to improve
conventional investigative methods and introduce relatively new methods involving the use of
information technology. The association seeks international cooperation; this may lead to better
coverage of international news and to adding an international context to domestic news more often.
Useful information on the website:
- Report ‘Investigative Journalism in the US and Sweden - Lessons to the Low Countries’ full
text on http://www.vvoj.nl/publicaties/amerika_zweden/rapport_20030927a.html.
- Information and registration for the third Global Investigative Journalism Conference
September 29th- October 2nd 2005 in Amsterdam http://www.vvoj.org/.
- After the Global Investigative Journalism Conference: a database with English summaries of
200 recent investigative projects done in twenty European countries
- After the Global Investigative Journalism Conference: report ‘Investigative Journalism in
Europe’, a description of the state of investigative journalism in twenty European countries,
based on 150 interviews with investigative reporters, documents and other sources.

European Journalism Centre (EJC): www.ejc.nl
The European Journalism Centre (EJC) is an independent, international, non-profit institute dedicated
to the highest standards in journalism, primarily through the further training of journalists and media
professionals. Building on its extensive international network, the Centre operates as a facilitator and
partner in a wide variety of training projects. It is not a member organization.
Useful information on the website:
- European media landscape –media information about 35 European countries: the written
press, audiovisual media, national media policies, accountability systems, media
organizations, main recent media developments; prime sources for detailed information.
http://www.ejc.nl/jr/emland/index.html.

Germany
Netzwerk Recherche: www.netzwerkrecherche.de
Netzwerk Recherche is a lobby association for investigative journalists. The central goal of the
network is to support journalists that do investigative work, and to improve basic and advanced
training. The website is in German, but there is an automatic translator available.

United Kingdom
Summer school: www.investigativereporting.org.uk
In 2003 and 2004 the Lorana Sullivan Foundation ran a Summer School on investigative journalism at
the University of Westminster, London, UK. Experienced UK, US and continental investigators and
trainers presented sessions on a number of important aspects of reporting.

Central and Eastern Europe
South-East Europe
SEE IR website: www.netnovinar.org/netnovinar/compiled/p521.htm
The Investigative Journalism website for South-East Europe (SEE IR website) is the first educational
and informative resource of this kind in the region. Founders: Mediacentar Sarajevo (Bosnia and
Herzegovina), Medija centar Beograd (Serbia), Investigative Journalism Centre Zagreb (Croatia).
Supported by SCOOP – a support structure and network for investigative journalism in Central and
Eastern Europe (Ukraine, Moldova, Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro, Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Belarus)
Useful information on this website:
Directory with 450 investigative journalists
Projects database in English
Training materials
Discussion forum for investigative journalists in Romania, Ukraine, Serbia, Bulgaria and
Moldova.

Serbia
Media Focus: www.mediafocus.latest-info.com
A group of young award-winning journalists from the biggest Serbian independent media established
Media Focus in the early summer of 2000. Their goal is to work together on investigative projects.
Investigations have been published in Washington Times (USA), Sunday Times (UK), Mail on
Sunday (UK), IWPR (UK), Transitions Online (Czech Republic)), Rabble (Canada) etc.
Contact info can be found on the website.

Romania
Romanian Centre for Investigative Journalism: www.crji.org/e_index.htm
Useful information on the website:
- An open discussion forum
- A help offer: "RCIJ offers to foreign investigative journalists or experts on different sensitive
issues (like traffic of weapons, environmental issues etc) a database for documenting,
resources for research, local contacts, in the purpose of conducting professional investigative
reports. This offer is also available for investigative journalist within the country, which need
contacts in other parts of Romania or abroad. Contact info can be found on the website."

Global
The Global Investigative Journalism Network: www.globalinvestigativejournalism.org
The Global Investigative Journalism Network is a group of independent journalism organizations that
support training and sharing of information among journalists in investigative and computer-assisted
reporting.
Useful information on the website:
- Global-L listserv
- 28 links to the websites of the member organizations

