Tipsheet: Sources for Covering Your Local Transit Agency
Driving CAR:Transportation Investigations Panel
IRE National Conference, Denver, June 2005
Prepared by Newsday Staff Writer Tom McGinty

The National Transit Database, from the Federal Transit Administration
Official site:
http://www.ntdprogram.com/NTD/ntdhome.nsf7?Open
National Transit Database compilation by Florida International University
http://www.eng.fiu.edu/LCTR/Ftis/ftis.htm
Who pays for your local subway or bus system? How much comes from fares, how much
from local and state subsidies? Has ridership gone up or down? How often does the
equipment break down? How much crime is there on the system? The annual release of
the National Transit Database can answer all of those questions and more, and it can track
how the answers have changed over time. The NTD collects a broad array of financial
statistics and performance indicators that must be reported by all American transit
systems that receive federal aid (which means just about all of them), so you can also
compare your system with others in similar cities. The official site of the NTD has free
downloads of spreadsheets going back to 1997, but there are dozens of spreadsheets per
year and they are arranged for publication, not data crunching, so you'll have to do a lot
of clean up if you want to sort and carry out other spreadsheet functions. A better source
might be a free database that has been compiled and updated annually by Florida
International University. FIU's database goes back to 1984, providing data not currently
available on the NTD site, and includes a custom front end that allows users to choose the
transit agencies and stats they want to see and seamlessly export them to Excel.

U.S. Census Bureau Data on Public Transportation Use

"New York is the only city where the majority of workers-55 percent, or 1.9 million
people--commute from home to work via public transportation. That is by far the highest
percentage among the nation's largest cities," according to the survey. How many people
in your community commute via public transportation? Spreadsheet tables available here
can tell you.

The Annual Urban Mobilitv Study by the Texas Transportation Institute
http://mobility.tmu.edu/ums/media~infomation~news~release.stm
This is the report you see quoted by the nation's media each year telling you that traffic
delays in Los Angeles or New York or wherever grew to be even longer than the
intolerable delays experienced a year earlier. The study also includes little-noted
estimates of how much road congestion is relieved by public transportation. For example,
(continued on other side)

2

$shdy
estimates that traEc delays would have been twice as long for the average
driver in the New York-Newark, N.J., urban area in 2003 if all of the commuters who
rode buses, subways and trains had driven to work instead. The cost for that extra
congestion would have been $6.3 billion in lost time and wasted fuel, the study estimates.
Miscellaneous Must-Read Documents and sources for Coverinp Transit:
Bond Offering Statements: These are issued whenever a municipality or governmental
agency borrows money to fund public works projects. They are great one-stop sources of
information because the agency or municipality is required by law to tell potential
investors about any "material" (that means important) facts that could have an impact on
its ability to repay the loan. They also generally give a good overview of the
Audited Financial Reports: Most transit agencies will have a section on their Web sites
where important financial documents, including annual audited financial reporters, are
available for download (these sections typically are labeled "Investor Information"). This
is where you'll find the kind of in-depth information that government agencies usually
don't want to trouble the public with.
Who does your transit agency report to? Prying information from governmental
agencies can often be difficult, but before you engage in an all-out war, figure out if you
can get the information from some other agency the government is required to report to
(the National Transit Database mentioned above is one good example). Here's another
example: I have found that the state comptroller's office in New York is an excellent
source of largely unvarnished information about two agencies I have covered-the Long
Island Power Authority and the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority. (I say
largely unvarnished because the current comptroller is a Democrat, and the current
governor, who controls those authorities, is a Republican.)

