Tipsheet: Sources for Covering Auto Accidents
Driving CAR: Transportation Investigation Panel
IRE National Conference, Denver, June 2005
Prepared by Newsday Staff Writer Tom McGinty
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's Fatal Accident Reporting
System:
http://www-fars.nhtsa.dot.aov/

The FARS Web-Based Encyclopedia (get slides of national stats and below reports) For
example, in the report on children, in the first three paragraphs, you see that NHTSA used
Census, Mortality and FARS data for its analysis - all available online or from NICAR
Also, check out create a query, create a map, laws and regulations.

About the data:
Why does it exist:
To provide an overall measure of highway safety, to help suggest solutions, and to help
provide an objective basis to evaluate the effectiveness of motor vehicle safety standards
and highway safety programs FARS data are critical to understanding the characteristics
of the environment, trafficway, vehicles, and persons involved in the crash. Quarterly
files are produced for analytical purposes to study trends and evaluate the effectiveness
highway safety programs.
What does it encompass:
To be included in FARS, a crash must involve a motor vehicle traveling on a trafficway
custoinarily open to the public and result in the death of a person (occupant of a vehicle
or a non-occupant) within 30 days of the crash. FARS has been operational since 1975
and has collected information on over 989,45 1 motor vehicle fatalities and collects
information on over 100 different coded data elements that characterizes the crash, the
vehicle, and the people involved. MAY NOT INCLUDE DEATHS AT THE WHEEL
NOT RESULTING FROM CRASH (HEART ATTACK, FOR EX.)
How Fresh is the data:
The performance measures for NHTSA under the Government Performance and Results
Act include the creation of the annual electronic data files for FARS by the annual target
dates of July plus three additional quarterly files and a final file one year afier the data
collection year.
Data structure:
Three related tables: Accident, People, Vehicle and Driver (NICAR has incorporated the
look-up tables so that the data is in real language, rather than codes, and the look-ups are
unnecessary). Accident: Info regarding the accident reliable. VehicleIDriver: Violations
spotty. Lat/Lon blank - though I understand as of 2003, it's fairly well filled in. Vehicle
(Continued on back)

*TI9

-

spotty but could be checked with aYkff'reccrrda Pawn: W
coho1 spotty at best (state compariscm riray*t&ky tvecmm 1if you can test for alcohol vary)

M btb rcliabIa:
sqpkitiag w h and

Other dab:
State lev&
In NY,includes fatal, personal injury and prop

Local police and court reports:
More d&d, pwthldy for &.urges,
~t4mcnts

Other:
Go see the cars:

They'll have been impounded. You can find out stuff like what was in the CD playa,
what was in the trunk,that there was a crucifix hanging Erom the rear view mirror, etc.

