Covering Indian Gaming is a Tough Job
By Mike Adams
The Baltimore Sun
410 332-6122
Mike.Adams@Baltsun.com
2005 IRE Conference.
Have you ever covered a 5-alarm fire on a 90 degree day and dealt
with an uncooperative fire chief. Then when you return to the office
with a story thin on facts, you get yelled at by an unsympathetic city
editor? You think that's a bad day? Well, every day is like that when
you cover Indian gaming. It's Ground Hog Day every day.
Indian tribes have sovereignty, they only answer to the federal
government. And the federal government has a trust relationship with the
tribes. In return for tribes giving up their land and moving onto
reservations, the government is their protector and ensures their
welfare. This combination is a nightmare for reporters.
Tribal governments are usually small and insular and hardly
democratic. Once I asked a Kansas tribe for information about its
casino, and one tribal leader said, "The U.S. government doesn't ask
France how much its casinos make? Why are you asking us?" Another
replied: "That's a trade secret, Donald Trump wants to know that. And
that's none of his business." Needless to say the day was a waste.
Before I met with the tribal council, a retired air force officer had
taken me on a dog and pony show. This guy, who had been hired as an
administrator, showed me the tribe's new fire station, and the new Head
Start center and the new housing development and the herd of buffalo
that had been transplanted on the reservation. He strongly suggested
that all this had been done with casino money. Later, I would learn that
the federal government gives tribes billions of dollars for all kinds of
programs. It's a fair presumption that casino money did not pay for all
the improvements I was shown.
The tribes report their financial figures to the federal
government, but the government won't give them to you unless the tribe
approves it. The figures are protected by tribal sovereignty. Needless
to say, if you sent a FOIA request to a tribe, it will probably wind up
in the trash can.
So how do you cover Indian gaming? Well, here are some tips from
me and my colleague Robert Little. Bob and I did some digging and
discovered that David Cordish, a Baltimore developer, stands to make
$1.3 billion over a decade from a deal to build a couple of casinos for
Florida's Seminole tribe. Neither Cordish nor the tribe would give us
details about the deal. In fact, Cordish told us that we were too dumb
to understand the deal even if he bothered to explain it. You know, he
might have been right about me but not Bob - the guy has an accounting
background. By using every possible resource, we were able to able to
piece the deal together.
Here's some suggestions:

The Tribe:
It might seem pointless to look toward the tribe for information
about its private dealings, but never forget that Indian tribes are
political organizations just like any other government and often like no
other government. Their small membership roles and sometimes large bank
accounts make a turbulent mix of special interests, which often spits
out disgruntled contrarians and potential sources. Take the time to
investigate the most recent series of tribal elections, and be sure to
check in with the losers.
Marketing agreements and other contracts with Indian tribes are
often closely guarded by both parties involved. And since Indian tribes
don't generally have public records laws, there are no FOIA-type methods
of obtaining copies. But because of the frequent need for public
financing or some governmental approval, the deals often are exposed
through some more obscure and less obvious channels.
Some places to look:
COURT RECORDS: We got tons of background information about the inner
workings of the Seminoles by combing through court records on civil and
criminal cases involving the Seminoles. This cache included depositions
from then-chief James Billie and other members of the tribal council.
So, check federal and state records to see if there are cases involving
the tribe or key tribal members.
The National Indian Gaming Commission.
1441 L Street, NW, Suite 9100, Washington, DC, 20005. 202 632-7003.
Chairman, Phil Hogen, 202 632-7703."www.nigc.gov" NIGC is the government
agency charged with monitoring and regulating
tribal casinos. It's a bureaucratic morass that frequently waits six
months or more to respond to a FOIA, the NIGC is nonetheless a custodian
of much illuminating information about tribes and their business
dealings. If the tribe's contracts meet the law's definition of
"management agreements" they must be submitted for approval. If they
don't meet the definition, they often are submitted anyway to seek out
formal verification of this. The NIGC won't necessarily give you the
contracts or other proprietary information, but it will disclose
redacted correspondence and other regulatory documents that often lay
out the specifics.
The Nationally Recognized Municipal Securities Information
Repositories: Before sniffing around any Indian gaming deal, say a
little prayer that the tribe dipped into the municipal bond market. It's
becoming increasingly common, and it exposes the transaction to more
public scrutiny than deal made by public corporations. The best
searchable website is probably www.dpcdata.com, but there are others. A
tutorial on the Bloomberg machine will yield even better results. Look
for the "Official Statement" spelling out almost everything, but also
for notices of default, IRS correspondence, defeasances or other
"material events."
The Municipal Issuer: For The Sun's investigation of the Seminole

Tribe's deal, this was the mother lode. The municipal government
sponsoring a public bond offering keeps a shelf full of documents,
virtually all of them public, that is commonly referred to as the binder
or the "bond transcript" and it's a gold mine. Whereas the official
statement has summaries, the bond transcript has actual contracts and
supporting documents, such as attorney opinions, licensing agreements,
subcontracts and even blueprints. The Seminole transcript contains such
imponderable finds as attorney billing records, home addresses and phone
numbers and correspondence with prospective investors. If you've found a
municipal issuer then buy a plane ticket, bring your own copier and
count your blessings.
The Securities and Exchange Commission
Any brush with a publicly traded company is likely to get
mentioned in disclosure documents. Management discussions within
quarterly reports and particularly annual reports often reveal details
like percentage of profit they collect and the scope and terms of the
deal. But if you're lucky the deal might have relied on a public bond
sale for some of its financing. Then you can expect to find a
prospectus, or "offering memorandum" giving a rundown of the details
nearly as complete as the contracts themselves, and often with marketing
studies, financial projections or other commentary about its projected
payout. www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml is the place to start.
The Mohegan Tribe of Connecticut is one of the few tribes that's
issued Wall Street bonds. And if you want to get a peek at the tribe's
finances do this: Go to the Edgar web site and click on company filings.
Then click on historical Edgar archives and do a search under Mohegan
Tribal Gaming Authority. Go to the 10-Q (May 19, 2005). There's lots of
information in the quarterly report that can serve as a primer to help
you understand other deals. You can also use Edgar to find information
about Mississippi's Choctaw tribe.
Senate Committee On Indian Affairs
Check web site for transcripts of the most recent hearing on the
regulation of Indian gaming on April 27, 2005. Witnesses include Phil
Hogen, NIGC's chairman: Earl Devaney, Inspector General, U.S. Department
of the Interior; and Thomas B. Heffelfinger, U.S. Attorney for the
District of Minnesota, U.S. Department of Justice, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. Testimony from this hearing is extremely useful in
understanding the hows and whys of Indian gaming and the problems it
faces.
The National Indian Gaming Association
The trade organization representing gaming tribes. Its mission is
to promote tribal casinos and all the information it disseminates has
that spin. 224 Second St. SEWashington, DC 20003. 202-546-7711 Phone
202-546-1755 Fax. www.indiangaming.org
Internal Revenue Service (Indian Tribal Gov'ts)
www.irs.gov/govt/tribes
If you think the tax code is complicated, consider this: the IRS
has a special web site for Indian tribes. Worth checking occasionally.

Department of the Interior
www.doi.gov
U.S. Interior Department web site has information on the Interior
Appropriations budget and links to the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
other resources. Usually, there's not much here directly related to
Indian gaming, but it has lots of information of other stuff happening
in Indian country.
Department of Justice
www.usdoj.gov
Call up this web site and click on components and go the link for
the Office of Tribal Justice. Its mission is to advise the Attorney
General on matters that impact Indian tribes, to coordinate the
Department's policies and positions on tribal issues, to consult with
federally recognized Indian tribes, and to cooperate with appropriate
federal, state, and local governmental institutions. This site also
lists the Presidential Executive orders on tribal sovereignty.
The FBI has jurisdiction in investigating criminal activity on
tribal land. In 2003, the NIGC and the FBI created the Indian Gaming
Working Group, which reviews big cases and coordinates the investigation
and prosecution. In states with tribal gaming, the U.S. Attorneys have
the power to initiate criminal cases and forfeiture actions under the
federal laws governing Indian gaming.
Bureau of Indian Affairs
www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html
To compensate tribes for giving up their lands and moving to
reservations, the federal government assumed the trust responsibility
for the tribes. In essence, the tribes became wards of the federal
government and the Bureau of Indian Affairs serves as the gatekeeper for
government's trust responsibility. The Bureau of Indian Affairs has a
complicated role in relation to Indian gaming. The National Indian
Gaming Commission is charged with monitoring and regulating tribal
casinos. But the BIA examines applications for tribal recognition, which
creates a government-to-government relationship between the tribes and
the federal government. The BIA can also take land into trust for the
tribes, an essential step for some tribes that want to open casinos.
Office of Inspector General
U.S. Department of the Interior
Go to the web site and check the special reports and semi-annual
reports to congress. Sometimes there are tidbits about thefts from
tribal casinos, but there's other information about crime and corruption
in Indian Country. Go to www.oig.doi.gov/
Address:1849 C St. NW / MailStop 5341
Attn: FOIAWashington, DC 20240 .Telephone: (202) 208-4356 FAX:
(202)
219-1944.
Pechanga.net
An online newspaper that's worth checking. Lots of news stories
and links to web sites on American Indian issues including gambling,
sovereignty and cultural issues.

Indian Country Today
www.indiancountry.com
Online newspaper run by the Oneida tribe of New York, which owns
the Turning Stone casino and related businesses. News and links.
Indianz.com
Great resource. Lots of Indian gaming news with links to stories
in the mainstream new media.
PoliticalMoneyLine
www.fecinfo.com
A web site devoted to tracking campaign contributions and
lobbying. Use it to track the lobbyists representing the tribes in
Washington and to monitor tribal contributions to candidates in federal
races. Co-founder Kent Cooper is extremely helpful. PoliticalMoneyLine
recently ran figures on money tribes pumped into political campaigns.
Opensecrets.org/
A non-profit Washington-based research group run by the Center for
Responsive Politics in in Washington, D.C. Web site can be used to
tracks money in politics and its effect on elections and public policy.
Generally, its information is not as current as PoliticalMoneyLine but
still a valuable resource.
Indian Law
Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School
www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/html/uscode25/usc_sup_01_25.html
Title 25 This is the primary volume of the U.S. Code dealing with
Indians. It is not the only place in the Code where Indians are
referenced.
GAO reports
www.gpoaccess.gov/gaoreports/index.html
The GAO Reports application contains reports ("blue books") on
audits, surveys, investigations, and evaluations of Federal programs
conducted by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). All
published reports, testimonies, correspondence, and special publications
are included. Products that are restricted or classified are not
included. The current fiscal year's database is updated within two
business days of a report's release. Reports are available as ASCII text
and Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) files.
Thomas Library of Congress
thomas.loc.gov/
Track federal legislation and activities by congressional
committees.

