Monday October 18, 2004
THE STATE
Frequent Fire
* The LAPD knows little about why a tiny number of officers have used
deadly force much more often than their colleagues
Series: Second of two articles on LAPD shootings.
Home Edition, Main News, Page A-1
Metro Desk
93 inches; 3587 words
Type of Material: Series; Infobox (text included here); Poll or survey
By Scott Glover, Matt Lait and Doug Smith, Times Staff Writers

Most Los Angeles police officers go through their entire careers without ever
firing a shot in the line of duty.
Not Bill Rhetts.
He shot and killed a gang member who was firing a handgun at him. He shot
and paralyzed a man wielding a pistol. He wounded a teenager brandishing
what turned out to be a BB gun. After leaving the LAPD for the Riverside Police
Department, he shot an unarmed suspect hiding in a doghouse.
After the last incident, a psychiatrist declared him unfit for duty. Rhetts said he
was angry -- until he reflected on how his years in uniform had changed him.
"I became very desensitized. You know, callous, angry, hateful," said Rhetts,
45, now a police chaplain. "I didn't see it then, but I see it now. I became more
aggressive in defending my life."
Officers such as Rhetts represent a mystery and a challenge for police
administrators. In the Los Angeles Police Department, they make up a tiny
fraternity who have used deadly force much more often than their colleagues, a
Times investigation found.
Officers who have shot at suspects three or more times represent less than 1%
of the force. But they were involved in 20% of all LAPD shootings since 1985.
Little is known about why they pull the trigger so often. Few researchers have
paid attention to the phenomenon. The LAPD does not track frequent shooters.
It does not even know who they are.
The Times discovered the cadre of repeat shooters through a computer analysis
of 1,437 officer-involved shootings from 1985 through mid-2004.

Of an estimated 16,000 officers who worked field assignments during that time,
only 103 fired at suspects on three or more occasions, the analysis revealed.
Among 9,100 active officers, just 69 have three or more shootings.
Some of these officers serve in SWAT teams, narcotics squads or other high-risk
units. But that does not explain their propensity to fire. In their use of deadly
force, they stand out even when compared with officers in identical assignments
in the same parts of the city.
Moreover, many continued to fire frequently even as the overall number of
officer-involved shootings declined over the last decade.
Experts in police behavior say departments should monitor repeat shooters
closely.
"The simple fact that an officer is involved in a disproportionate number of
shootings raises a red flag," said Geoffrey Alpert, a professor of criminology at
the University of South Carolina. "The department needs to start taking more
notice of these shootings and look for patterns or trends."
The 103 frequent shooters identified by The Times are not easily categorized.
Some have won the department's Medal of Valor. Others committed notorious
acts of misconduct: Former Officer David Mack robbed a bank. Edward Ruiz
framed a man on a gun charge.
Five of the repeat shooters were implicated in planting evidence, beating
suspects or covering up shootings in the Rampart scandal.
Only three of the 103 are women.
Frequent shooters have sparked controversy this year.
In February, Officer Manuel Solis was captured on live news broadcasts firing
repeatedly into a car whose driver had led police on a high-speed chase.
The motorist, Nicholas Hans Killinger, 23, was suspected of holding up an
Agoura Hills gas station. The 90-minute police pursuit ended in front of Santa
Monica High School, where Killinger hit a curb while trying to make a U-turn. He
then put his Ford Tempo in reverse and backed up slowly toward two patrol
cars.
Solis and two other officers fired a total of 22 rounds, killing Killinger. LAPD
officials said Solis believed Killinger was trying to run him over. The shooting -Solis' third -- remains under investigation.
Officer Charles Wunder is another three-time shooter. In July, he and a fellow
officer shot and killed a man who had been behaving erratically at a downtown
bus station.

The man was crawling through an opening in a ticket counter, clutching a 6-inch
metal stake. Wunder and the other officer opened fire while a third officer was
still trying to subdue the man with a nonlethal stun gun.
Police Chief William J. Bratton expressed "significant concerns" about the
shooting, which is also under investigation.
Wunder and Solis both declined to be interviewed.
The sparse scholarly research on repeat shooters offers some tentative
explanations for their behavior.
Social scientists believe that some of them are innately aggressive or anxious.
Others may have family problems. Still others appear to place themselves in
danger through carelessness or poor judgment, leaving no recourse but to
shoot.
The Times analysis and interviews with frequent shooters suggest another
possible factor: that the experience of firing at a suspect for the first time leaves
a profound psychological mark, lowering an officer's threshold for shooting.
Nearly 90% of the officers who have worked field assignments since 1985 never
fired their weapons in the line of duty. But after a first shooting, an officer's
likelihood of shooting again rose sharply -- from 1 in 10 to 1 in 5. Those with
two shootings had a nearly 1-in-3 probability of becoming involved in a third.
"It definitely is easier to pull the trigger a second time," said former Officer
Hank Cousine, who was involved in three shootings during a 15-year career with
the LAPD. "You kill a lot of paper targets, but shooting a human being is
different."
Police are required to visit a department psychologist after a shooting to
determine whether they need counseling or a break from street duty. But
officers who have been through the 45-minute consultation describe it as
perfunctory.
"Pretty much all they do is say, 'Gee, Dale, how do you feel?' " recalled Dale
Suzuki, who had five shootings in 10 years with the LAPD. He left the force in
2000 to become a wilderness guide in Alaska.
"It's pretty brutal," Suzuki said of the emotional aftermath of a shooting. "That's
what a lot of people from the outside don't see. You know ... did I do the right
thing? Maybe I should have waited a second longer."
'Bare-Bones' Data
The department's failure to identify and monitor repeat shooters is remarkable
given the city's history of explosive controversies over police use of force.

The 1991 Christopher Commission, established after the Rodney King beating,
called on the LAPD to make statistics on officers' shootings and other uses of
force "readily accessible" so that supervisors could detect signs of trouble.
In response, the department developed a database called the Training
Evaluation and Management System, or TEAMS. But a 1996 report said the
system provided only "bare-bones" information and was a "far cry" from what
the Christopher Commission had proposed.
In a 2000 consent decree with the U.S. Justice Department, police officials
promised to do better. They said they would create a comprehensive "early
warning" system, dubbed TEAMS II, to track use of force, citizen complaints and
other data on all officers.
The department is still struggling to get the system running. LAPD officials now
say they expect it to be operational by July.
Samuel Walker, a criminal justice professor at the University of Nebraska at
Omaha and an expert on police oversight, said there was "no excuse" for the
delay.
"It has now been 13 years" since the Christopher Commission report, he said.
"The one thing we have learned is that these problems are manageable."
The Police Commission, the five-member civilian panel that oversees the LAPD,
reviews all shootings to determine whether officers obeyed department policy
on the use of deadly force.
But in judging a case, the commission deliberately does not consider any
previous shootings by the officer involved, lest that information prejudice its
decision.
Commission members say, however, that after they make a ruling, they
examine the officer's use-of-force history to determine whether intervention is
called for.
Bratton said repeat shooters should be monitored, but not shackled with
restrictions. Many of them are exceptional officers, he said.
"They make some phenomenal arrests because they've got that sixth instinct,"
he said. "They're more inquisitive. They're not going to drive by something that
somebody else might not even notice."
Bratton said it would be unfair to restrict such officers to desk duty simply
because they were involved in numerous shootings. "The reality is a lot of these
cops prefer to work in [dangerous assignments] and they are good at what they
do, and that is the balancing act."
Among LAPD officers, a history of shootings generally is no cause for
embarrassment. Repeat shooters are often viewed as tough and fearless.

Keith Lewis shot at suspects seven times in an eight-year span while working in
the Narcotics Division. In an eighth incident, he accidentally wounded a fellow
officer while shooting a snarling dog.
Four of Lewis' shootings were deemed unjustified by the Police Commission. In
one of those cases, Lewis shot and wounded a suspect who he believed -mistakenly -- had a gun in his hand.
In another incident, the commission found that Lewis fired "indiscriminately"
into a car after one of the occupants allegedly pointed a gun at him. Two
unarmed women were wounded along with the alleged gunman.
Yet among Lewis' friends on the force, his shooting record was hardly taboo.
When they organized a retirement party for him last year, his buddies had an
artist draw a caricature that made light of his propensity to fire.
The caricature, published in the Thin Blue Line, the police union's monthly
newspaper, depicts Lewis in plaid golf pants, hunched over a putter -- with a
pistol hanging from his waist.
A dialogue balloon has the grinning Lewis saying: "When in doubt, shoot it out."
Lewis, 45, did not respond to a request for comment.
Another prolific shooter is Bob Crupi, a 30-year veteran. He has fired at
suspects three times since 1985. LAPD records list eight earlier shootings, but
provide no details.
In a brief interview, Crupi recalled a shooting from 1988. A suspected hit-andrun driver, fleeing police on foot, climbed a chain-link fence. Crupi tried to pull
the man down, but backed off when he waved a sharpened screwdriver, police
reports say. Crupi then shot the suspect, wounding him in the back.
He said his captain later criticized him for being too quick to fire.
"I was told I should have retreated and reassessed," said Crupi, now a
motorcycle officer in the San Fernando Valley. "I told him 'retreat' wasn't in my
vocabulary."
'A Lot of Shootings'
Officer Jamie McBride has what police call "good obs."
He notices things others might miss: a slyly executed street corner drug deal,
the evasive body language of somebody trying to hide something.
Spotting concealed guns is one of McBride's specialties. He's taken scores of
them off the streets of South Los Angeles, repeatedly winning praise from
superiors.

"McBride has established himself as one of the most industrious, productive,
hard-charging officers in the Division," reads a performance review from 1995.
"McBride has consistently led not only his watch, but also the Division in the
recovery of and arrest for possession of concealed firearms."
The review made no mention of another statistic in which McBride led his
division that year: He was involved in four shootings in five months.
"That's a lot of shootings," McBride, a 14-year LAPD veteran, said in an
interview. "That's a lot of shootings in a career, let alone a year."
The first of those shootings stemmed from a jaywalking stop. Jermaine Stewart,
then 20, and a friend were crossing the street when McBride and his partner
pulled up in a patrol car. Stewart said an officer's voice boomed over the
loudspeaker: "Come here, fat boy."
Stewart, who had a .380-caliber pistol in his waistband, took off running, police
reports say. At one point, he pulled the gun and allegedly pointed it at the
officers. McBride, behind the wheel of the patrol car, fired at Stewart through
the open window, hitting him in the leg and arm.
A departmental review found that McBride was justified in shooting Stewart, but
faulted him for "driving, issuing verbal commands and ... defending himself and
his partner in an armed confrontation" all at the same time.
McBride has been involved in a total of six shootings, the most recent in 2001.
The LAPD has repeatedly criticized him for putting himself and fellow officers at
risk with careless tactics. Records show that he has been chastised for failing to
take cover, to call for backup or to make fellow officers aware of his
whereabouts during shootings.
McBride said he has no regrets.
"I honestly believe that when I take a firearm off the street -- as corny as it
sounds -- I actually prevented a crime from occurring," he said. "Of all the guns
I've gotten over the years, I know I've prevented at least a few homicides."
Two years ago, McBride was transferred to the relatively sleepy Devonshire
Division. He has not been involved in any shootings since then and was recently
named the division's officer of the year. Now 35, he said he had no interest in
returning to the city's south end.
"I don't have time for that ghetto gun-fighting anymore," he said. "I'm getting
too old for that. That's not what I'm about."
Exercising Restraint
Hank Cousine makes no apologies for his three shootings. In fact, he says, there
are people all over Los Angeles who should count themselves lucky he didn't
shoot them.

This is a common refrain among repeat shooters -- that statistics don't reflect
the restraint they exercised in the face of danger.
"I could have legally killed a hundred people on any given week. Without a
doubt," said Cousine, 44, a former Army Ranger.
He said he was able to escape such situations without firing because he used
superior tactics, such as taking cover behind his patrol car or a building. This
allowed him to negotiate with suspects to drop their weapons and surrender.
In some cases, he said, he held his fire even when in danger because he didn't
want to pile up too many shootings.
Once, he said, he refrained from shooting a man who was threatening him with
a butcher knife because he was working an off-duty security job without
department approval.
"If I had filed my work permit, bang, bang, he's going," Cousine said.
Cousine has always been one to speak his mind. After the Rodney King beating,
he publicly criticized the officers involved for swinging their batons like "little
girls."
He was one of 44 "problem officers" identified by the Christopher Commission
on the basis of citizen complaints, shootings and other criteria. Assigned to desk
duty, he complained that he was "a soldier ... doing a secretary's job."
Cousine was fired in 1998 for participating in an illegal pyramid scheme. He sold
real estate for a time and now sells his own line of motocross gear.
In 1988, Cousine shot a man who pointed what appeared to be a handgun at
him, police records show. The weapon turned out to be a toy.
"Why me?" he recalled thinking. "I don't want to take out a nut. I want to take
out a bad guy."
His next shooting, in 1989, occurred while he was off duty and driving his
Corvette on Eastern Boulevard in Bell Gardens. Seeing a woman he knew, he
pulled over and struck up a conversation. Then a car pulled up behind him. The
woman said the men in the car had been following her and making sexual
comments.
Cousine stepped out of his car and told the men to leave. The driver gunned his
engine and drove straight for him, Cousine said. The driver sideswiped
Cousine's Corvette and sped away. A passenger in the car pointed a gun at
Cousine, who pulled out his own weapon.
"They're going down the road and I'm 'boom, boom, boom, boom, boom,' " he
said.

His last shooting, in 1989, stemmed from a domestic disturbance. When
Cousine tried to arrest an abusive husband, the man lunged at him with a razor
blade. Cousine shot the man in the leg.
"I didn't want to blow this guy's head off in front of his kids," he said. "There's
certain things you don't do in front of the kids unless you really have to."
'One Squeeze -- Boom!'
On Nov. 14, 1991, Bill Rhetts, then an LAPD vice officer, and his partner were
sitting in an unmarked car watching a hooker stroll down Figueroa Street.
Suddenly, a gang member walked toward the car, pulled out a handgun and
started shooting.
Rhetts said he was slow to return fire. Then his academy training took over: "I
put the front sights right on his head and with one squeeze -- boom! -- he was
down on the ground. He was dead."
The shooting made a deep impression on him, Rhetts said. "I'm not going to
allow the suspect to shoot at me first the next time," he recalled thinking,
"because this time he almost killed me."
In 1996, Rhetts shot and paralyzed a man who he said pointed a gun at him.
His partner, who also had his gun drawn, did not fire.
Four months later, Rhetts and another partner responded to a call about a "man
with a gun" near a market on Huntington Drive in East Los Angeles.
"I did not want to be in another shooting," Rhetts recalled. So he and his
partner agreed that if it became necessary to shoot, the partner would do it.
At the scene, the officers confronted a 16-year-old boy with a handgun in his
waistband. They trained their guns on the suspect and shouted at him to raise
his hands. Instead, Rhetts said, the youth drew his weapon and raised it in their
direction.
Rhetts waited for his partner to fire. Suddenly, the partner appeared to jerk
backward, as if he had just fired his shotgun, Rhetts said. But there was no
sound. Rhetts guessed the weapon had malfunctioned. Then he took matters
into his own hands.
"I gave him two rounds and he went down," Rhetts said.
The boy suffered a leg wound. Rhetts said he was devastated to learn that the
weapon was a BB gun.
"I cradled him like a baby," Rhetts said. "I remember he was apologizing to me
and I was apologizing to him."
An LAPD report on the incident makes no mention that Rhetts' partner tried to
fire at the suspect. The officer declined to comment.

Rhetts resigned from the LAPD soon after and took a job with the Riverside
Police Department.
On Feb. 11, 2000, he shot a parole violator who had run from police and was
hiding in a doghouse, according to court documents and interviews with lawyers
involved in the case. The man had been described as armed and dangerous, but
in fact was unarmed. The shooting injured his leg so badly it had to be
amputated.
Afterward, Rhetts' superiors ordered him to see a psychiatrist, who found him
unfit to serve. Looking back on his career, Rhetts said he came to realize that
the psychiatrist may have been right.
He recalled shooting steroids and pumping iron during his days as a street cop
in the Northeast Division. He remembered getting drunk on bourbon while
driving home to cope with the stress of the job.
He said he also thought about the four shootings -- and wondered whether any
of them could have been avoided.
"To be honest with you," Rhetts said, "I can look back and think, 'Should I have
been a cop?' "
Times researcher Offer Egozy contributed to this report.
*
(BEGIN TEXT OF INFOBOX)
Pulling the trigger
Police shootings are concentrated in a small percentage of officers. Nine out of
10 LAPD officers who held field assignments between 1985 and mid-2004 never
fired at a suspect.
Total number of officers: 16,000
Nearly 90% of officers had no shootings
One shooting: 1,316 (8.2%)
Two shootings: 229 (1.4%)
Three or more shootings: 103 (0.6%)
Probability of shooting
For the same pool of LAPD personnel, the likelihood that an officer would fire his
weapon increased markedly after his first shooting -- and continued to rise after
each subsequent shooting. The reasons are unclear, but some officers say the

trauma associated with a shooting made them quicker to pull the trigger
thereafter.
All officers: 10% probability of shooting
Officers with:
One shooting 20%
Two shootings 31%
Three shootings 32%
Four shootings 36%
Five shootings 50%
*
Source: Times analysis of LAPD statistics. Graphics reporting by Doug Smith
*
(BEGIN TEXT OF INFOBOX)
About the Numbers
This report is based on a computer analysis of Los Angeles Police Department
data on officer-involved shootings.
The analysis focused on 1,437 incidents from 1985 through mid-2004 in which
police officers shot at suspects. Excluded were accidental shootings, shootings
of dogs or other animals, and "tactical shootings," such as when officers fired at
the tires of fleeing vehicles.
For each shooting at a suspect, The Times gleaned information -- including the
date and location and the identities of the officers involved -- from LAPD reports
and Police Commission records.
Because many shootings involve more than one officer, the number of officers
who fired their weapons at suspects -- 1,648 -- exceeds the number of
incidents.
Aspects of The Times' analysis were based on an estimate of the total number
of LAPD officers who have served in field assignments since 1985. That estimate
-- 16,000 -- was calculated using figures on officer deployments and
separations from the force, published annually in the department's Statistical
Digest.

Descriptors: LOS ANGELES POLICE DEPARTMENT; POLICE SHOOTINGS;
POLICE REFORM; LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS

