CAR and COPS: A few places to dig for computer and paper records
Lise Olsen, Special Projects, The Houston Chronicle (713) 362-7462
1. UCR data
These FBI databases, most often mined just for crime rate data, will allow you to explore
trends in homicides, in clearance rates, in who's being arrested and a plethora of other
topics. There are lots of limitations in the data, but it will often point you to interesting stories.
Available through IRE'S database library.
2. Medical Examiner's Ions
Most of the time, indexes to autopsies are kept in computer databases by county medical
examiners or coroners. Fields I've obtained include victim's names, cause and manner of
death, place of death, names of those who did the autopsy, age and sex of victim, etc.
Medical examiners also are a source of data about unidentified dead, some 40,000 of whose
cases are unresolved nationwide.
3. Racial profilina data
Most police departments are tracking this these days and many have databases or paper
records you can use to create your own. In some states, this is being tracked by a state
agency.
4. Internal Affairs data
Departments may allow you to get an index of all founded internal affairs complaints, since
these are generally public record. Should include at least the officer's name, date and general
findings. Paper IAD reports and personnel files (if available) should help you fill in the details.
5. Directories of police officers
You'll often need these to make sense of relationships between officers and determine
assignments of officers. Ask for electronic and paper files. Alternatively, you can also request
the payroll database for officers, which should include their ranksltitles, pay, full names and
sometimes home addresses (or at least zip codes).
6. Police shootinas indices. Ask whatever body or agency in your city or county that
investigates police shootings for their case log. In Harris County, Texas, for example, the
DA's log of officer-involved shootings includes names of officers, names of shooters, dates,
findings of the grand jury who reviewed the shootings. It was the basis for an expanded
shooting database that we created.
7. Missinn and Exploited Children data
You can find at least the cases for your area at http://www.missingkids.com/. A valuable
resource, though incomplete. In Washington state, the Seattle Post-lntelligencer also was
able to get the database for missing adults as well, which is part of NCIC. Whether state
police provide this data or not to the public varies from state-to-state.
8. Sex offender data. Used often by reporters to show that the registration system is
inadequate. Often available through a county sheriffs office.
9. State criminal historv data, sometimes available in database form from the state police
and/or the state prison system, depending on the state. State prison systems also can be
mined for data about inmate health, inmate deaths, personnel dealing with inmates, etc.
10. Police officer licensina data, which gives you a paper trail of where officers have
worked in the past and sometimes disciplinary information, is usually available through the
state police licensing agency.
11. Police staffinn data, iail data, etc. and other valuable statistics are frequently available
through the state agency that contributes to the UCR reports for the FBI. The agency varies
from state to state, sometimes it's part of the state police sometimes it's a statewide police
association. Similarly, individual departments will have detailed information that is more up to
date for cities and neighborhoods, often in computer format.
12. Computerized police reports can be obtained -though sometimes it's a difficult
negotiation since information like the names of witnesses or victims or suspects must often
be redacted. It usually involves a database that represents a snapshot in time.
13. Courts system database - usually a database of a snapshot in time of court dockets are
also available, either through the courts own computer system or through a statewide system.

query gave us a list of officers involved in multiplc
shootings. We ended up profiling one narcotics officer who had been involved in six separate incident:
-including one case in which he and another office]
were accused of engineering a cover-up in a pend.
ing civil suit.
We also used the fifth anniversary of a controversial shooting of a mentally ill woman to examine
reforms the Houston Police Department had implemented to better deal with people in mental crisis.
While officers had been trained, reporters Roma
Khanna and Steve McVicker found, the people
with training were not called to many mental
health emergencies.

Cop shoot database

Miguel Aleman,with the League of United LatinAmerican Citizens,marches in downtown Houston.Thegroup was
protestingthe killings of Hispanic teens by the Houston Police Deptment.

POLICE
SHOOTllVGS
Creation of database reveals patterns
in the use of deadly force by officers
BY LlSE OLSEN AND ROMA KHANNA
HOVSTONCHRONICLE

1 .

T

he calls started coming in after an unarmed teenager died on Halloween 2003 in Houston,
shot in his mother's SW by a moonlighting cop who had been vigorously protecting a
movie theater parking lot.
The calls came from citizens. And they came from other police officers. Virtually everyone

said: This should not have happened.
Then, it happened again. An officer shot and killed another unarmed Hispanic teen - in the
head at point blank range. Now there were two kids dead in just three weeks.
We, as reporters at the Housron Chronicle,were
flooded with questions with no easy answers: Were
local police trigger-happy? Were they undertrained?
Why weren't alternative weapons like Tasers and
pepper spray being used or at least being made
available? Were officers on extra jobs playing by
different rules? Were a few bad-apple officers being
protected by the internal review system and by the
district attorney?
Our investigation, which eventually would consume six months, began with a couple of quick-hit
stories.

First, we asked officers their opinions about
training and alternative weapons. Several senior
trainers told us, on the record, that even the programs offered by the area's largest department
were inadequate. A couple of national experts on
police shootings, criminal justice professors David
Klinger of the University of Missouri-St. Louis
and Sam Walker of the University of Nebraska at
Omaha, provided valuable insights.
We filed our first open records request and
analyzed the county district attorney's office log
of police shootings. Doing a simple "group by"

Those first stories gave us a base of research
from which we could tackle something bigger: An
all-out analysis of five years of shootings from
more than a dozen different departments in Harris
County.
To build our "cop shoot database," we started
with the DA's index, which included officers'
names, names of those shot (the index called them
"opponents;" we used "civilians"),dates and results
of the prosecution (almost always a "no bill" by a
grand jury.) From there, we added what we had onhand: police press releases (in some cases available
in searchable format on a Web site) and our own
archives. This%ave us the basics of all shooting
cases. To flesh it all out, we filed a series of public
disclosure act requests. The key documents were:
autopsy reports and accompanying investigators'
reports from the medical examiner's office;
internal investigation reports and completed
investigative files, which we did not obtain from
all agencies, though all provided interviews with
key investigators and supervisors;
c l a i m s and civil suits filed by those who had been
shot, or their families;
incidentreports and court cases filed in connection
with the shootings;
personnel records, including any disciplinary
action or commendations related to shooting
incidents;
court records - we checked to see if all of those
who survived being shot were later charged with
assaulting an officer or with any crime in connection with the incidents.
Collectively, these took months to get. And in
the process, the county attorney dragged his feet
and eventually adopted a new and more time-consuming review before releasing autopsy reports on
shooting cases.
Yet, each document gave us key pieces of
what eventually became a three-part series on
police shootings.
At first, we recorded only basic facts in our
database. The fields included time and location of
the shooting. race, age, sex of all parties, any indica-

COVER STORY

RED FLAGS
Potential red flags t o look for in police
shootings:
1. Foot chases and car chases.
2. Shootings by off-duty officers
working security.
3. Shootings at occupied cars.
4. Shootings during drug arrests.
5. Mentally ill, disabled or teenaged
civilians shot.
6. Those shot who were not charged
and had no criminal record.
7. Shootings in the back or side.
8. Unarmed people injured or killed.
tion that the "opponent" was mentally ill, the reason
for the officer's initial amvallpursuit (including
whether it was a planned narcotics sting), and
whether the officer was assaulted or worse. We
also included a summary field and a notes field,
which became a grab bag for anything odd. For
those who had been killed, we added the number
of wounds, whether someone was confirmed shot in
the back, other injuries, time and place of death and
level of intoxication. Eventually, a good part of this
data went on the Internet in enhanced searchable
form at www.chron.com/shootings.

Potentially problematic
After going through all the fatalities, which we
had more information about because of the autopsy
reports and because of better initial coverage of the
cases, we spotted obvious red flags.
Our first red flags included: mentally ill,
disabled or teenaged opponents or those with no
criminal record at all; people shoi in the back; and
cases in which those shot were unarmed. Later, we

Family members examine the bullet-riddled vehicle in which Karl Koch was fatally shot at close range by a deputy
after the Harris County Sheriff's Departmenttargeted him as dangerousduringa high-speed chase.Koch had only
one prior misdemeanor arrest.
added cases in which officers had shot at people
riding inside cars, cases in which officers were
disciplined (which was rare) or in which officers
had provided conflicting accounts, foot chases and
shootings that took place while officers were offduty working extra jobs.
Finally, by running all of the "opponents"
through criminal databases, we identified those
who had never been charged with criminal activity in connection with the shooting or who had
been acquitted of charges. While the group was
small, their shootings proved to be among the most
problematic.

Tattered police tape marks the area where Jose Vargas Jr. was shot and killed by an offduty police ofiicer.

AU of these categories were based on our review
of summaries and on scenarios and practices that
sociologistsand police experts already had flagged
as potentially probkmatic.
Our rough index gave us a list of shootings that
had from one to six of these factors. It worked sort
of like a restaurant rating system. Interestingly, the
cases with the most stars tended to be the cases that
we already had pulled as being among the most
questionable. For example, in one case, a disabled

Our UPUNK
There are several police performance stories
in the January-February issue of Uplink, the
newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting (www.ire.orglstore1
periodicals.html).Among them:
Heather RatcliffeandTrishaHoward of the St.
Louis Post-Dispatch show how they analyzed
data using spreadsheets to compare police
department performance in their areaSome
departments measured up poorly.
Doug Smith oftheLosAngelesTimesexplains
how hetookdata about unsolved homicides
and turned it into telling maps using geographic information system software.
Ian Demsky and Christian Bottorff at TheTennesseandemonstrate howthey used database
and GISanalysis to show how often Nashville
police had violated their own pursuit rules.

COVER STORY
teenager with no criminal record and no weapon
was shot dead in his pickup truck by an off-duty
officer at a skating rink. That one got six stars and
became the lead of our second-day story.
This list gave us what we called our "gray area
shootings" -cases that we wanted to look at harder.
All of the shootings would be represented in our
story in statistical form. But our focus was trying
to figure out what had happened in cases where the
reasons behind the shootings were less clear-cut.
We weren't as interested in investigating "slamdunk" shootings in which the officers had a clear
reason to fire. So, we weeded out cases for our
investigation in which the so-called "opponent"
was clearly armed or where he or she was actively
threatening the officer with a knife or gun. We also
weeded out those in which violent crimes were in
progress when officers responded.
Our goal was to isolate the cases in which officers had achoice. Then, we planned to analyze the
factors that seemed to contribute to the shooting or
killing of a citizen.
What our analysis gave us was a list of 100 of
those kinds of cases over five years. The majority involved unarmed opponents, so ultimately
we decided to focus on pattems in more than 60
shootings of the unarmed. These patterns became
the basis of our stories.

Extended vignettes
Our next step was giving all of our findings
to the local police brass to take apart. We faxed

Tipsheets from the
RESOURCE CENTER

and e-mailed summaries of our main findings for
findings, we ran extended vignettes that described
individual departments to the three largest police
shootings from each category, including a naked
agencies in the county and to two smaller ones. All
man shot in his own living room and a mentally
five agreed to meet with us to discuss the facts and
ill man shot repeatedly - and in the back - while
issues raised by the pattems in the shootings.
having a crisis.
Ultimately, we did three stories. The first
The third story showed, as observers predicted,
focused on more than 20 shootings by sheriff's
that officers rarely were disciplined for the actual
deputies of people riding in cars, including three
shootings.
involving high-speed chases. In one case, depuOne unexpected and noteworthy finding, which
ties had sought and received authorization to end a
we were able to identify because we asked for complete disciplinary records on the officers, is that
chase with fatal force. The deputy pulled his cruiser
they also were not disciplined for violating other
alongside the truck of a crawfish salesman named
departmental policies in the course of the shooting
Karl Koch. The deputy fatally shot him at pointblank range after Koch, high on cocaine, had sped
investigation.For example, officers for many agenthrough a neighborhood and a couple of parking
cies drew stiff penalties for dishonesty in the course
lots, though he had injured no one.
of their jobs. But officer shooters were almost never
disciplined when internal affairs' investigations
We did that story first, because the sheriff's
revealed that there were significant discrepancies
department acknowledged that shooting at cars was
against training and, after meeting with us, said they
in their accounts of the shootings, including their
intended to act quickly to update their policies and
position at the time and whether they called for
discipline deputies who continued to do it.
backup before a shooting.
The second story looked at how and why
The story generated a huge reaction -much of
the unarmed got shot. The sections in that story
it the "you hate cops and we hope that you're the
next crime victim" variety.
included: summaries of the shootings of the
But it also brought an immediate policy change
mentally ill; shootings by off-duty officers who
at the sheriff's department and added valuable
had often fired at folks fleeing from the scene of
information to the local debate about the need for
property crimes; and shootings during narcotics
sting operations.
alternative weapons, like pepper spray and Tasers,
Though many drug bust shootings were clearly
plus the value of increasing use-of-force training
for officers.
justified, some had resulted in the shooting deaths
of unarmed people, including bystanders uninvolved in the deals. Two narcotics-related shootLise Olsen is a special projects reporter at the
Housron Chronicle. Roma Khanna covers criminal
i n g ~were the subject of the only two successful
recent federal civil suits. To put a face on our ( jusrice issuesfor the paper.

Check out the IRE Resource Center (www.ire.org/resourcecenter)for a
variety of reporting tipsheets written by journalists who have covered
police conduct.Here is a selection of what i s available:
No. 1196:'Policing the police," by Clea Benson, Mark Fazlollah, Michael
Matza, and Craig McCoy, The Philadelphia Inquirer. This tipsheet provides information for reporters interested in researching the police. In
particular, it provides resources that focus on how police handle rape
cases. (2000)
No. 1356:'Some basics to becoming a thorough crime reporternaby
Tom
Spaulding, Thelndianapolis Star. In this tipsheet, Spaulding argues that
crime stories should be treated in the same way as epidemic stories.He
stresses reporters include three classes of information about stories:
perspective,identified risk factors, and consequences and costs.ln addition, he gives a set of guidelines for crime reporting, story ideas and
helpful resources. (2001)
No. 1357: "Courts/cops records," by Dianna Hunt, the Fort Worth StarTelegram.This tipsheet details the courts and cops records to help you
track important stories. Records discussed include: offense/incidents
reports, police calls, arrest reports, search warrants, arrest warrants, sex
offender registration and many others. (2001)
No. 1701: "Covering cops," by Steve Mills, the Chicago Tribune. This
tipsheet offers eight tips for covering the police and where to look for
information and story ideas. (2002)

No.1700:'Getting beyondthelBlue Wall of Science,"'by Craig Whitlock
and David S.Fallis,The WashingtonPost.This tipsheet,which is based on
a story investigation, presents steps to follow when investigating cop
shootings and the use of deadly force by the police. (2002)
No. 1868:"Covering law and order:itls a lifestyle,"by John So1omon.The
Associated Press.Solomon makes the case for immersion in the criminal
justice beat. In the tipsheet, he stresses common sense, research and
hard work to get the difficult stories.(2003)
No. 1926: 'Deals with cops may be more than you bargained for," by
CharlesTobin, Holland and Knight LLEThis tipsheet offers advice from
media attorneys on how to get access to police scenes and activities,
including drug raids.Tobin details the legal implications of working with
police departments and explains ways to avoid certain pitfalls.(2003)
No. 2158:"Keeping the beat: First day at the cop shop," by Cheryl W.
Thompson, The Washington Post.Thistipsheet offers ideas for reporters
who are new to the police beat. It includes suggestions for working on
larger stories while keeping up with the daily beat. (2004)
No.2257: "The crime beat:The data and statistics of injustice," by David
A.Milliron,TheAtlanta Journal-Constitution.This tipsheet highlights the
data kept by the criminal justicesystem, how it i s used by law enforcement and how to get it.lt provides tips on creating your own database
and includes copies of uniform crime reports. (2004)

