Unsung Documents
IRE Annual Conference
Friday, June 3, 2005
Denver, Colo.
``The government produces so much information that they can't hide the truth all the
time.'' -- I.F. Stone
Jim Steele, Time Magazine
jim_steele@timeinc.com
Joe Stephens, The Washington Post
stephensj@washpost.com
Mike McGraw, The Kansas City Star
mcgraw@kcstar.com
Some of the best documents you'll ever use are little-known ones that you probably
haven't found yet. Don't assume the document you need doesn't exist. There's an endless
and continually expanding lode of documents and other sources to be mined.
Jim, Joe and Mike's five basic rules for finding and using documents:
1. Never view documents in a vacuum. Combining two or more documents or documents
and interviews is often the key to investigative stories. Such ``triangulation'' unlocks the
full potential of unsung documents and sources.
2. Always view documents over time; compare this year's annual report to ones published
five and ten years ago.
3. Please help short circuit the troubling trend of journalists failing to use the federal
Freedom of Information Act and state open records laws. Yes it takes time, yes there are
delays. But sometimes they work and work well. Either way, we have an obligation to
keep the machine well greased.
4. If someone refers to or reads from a document during an interview, ask for a copy.
Carry a disk with you so there's never an excuse for someone not to download what you
want.
5. Make copies of your documents before you start marking them up. That way, when the
graphics folks ask for copies for artwork, you won't feel so dumb.

Here, in no special order, is a list of some of our favorite documents and other
sources:
Federal tax liens (They can provide information on company inventories or whether
public officials pay their taxes).
State franchise tax reports.
Electronic time stamps on digital photographs
Campaign contribution databases.
FBI files on persons who have died (Dead men do indeed tell tales).
Docket pages at federal agency websites.
Administrative Law judge opinions at various federal agencies.
Statistical Abstract of the U.S. (Contains thumbnail tables of every conceivable kind of
statistic; footnotes to every table show you where to get the full document.)
Union "LM" financial reports
Government cell phone, ``calling card'' and 800 number information.
Desk appointment calendars and visitor sign-in logs.
Deeds, mortgages, real estate liens, certificates of value
IRS statistics of income
Federal OMB 348-0057 Reports (audits of states, local governments and non-profit
Organizations).
Gasoline credit card receipts.
Raw documents that governmental offices compile to later complete personal financial
disclosure reports. (Allows you to obtain the relevant information in real time, without
waiting a year or longer for its release.)
Flight logs and manifests for publicly owned aircraft (Such logs may also be available for
private or nonprofit-owned aircraft).

Letters written by individuals and companies commenting on proposed regulations. (Ex:
An airline lobbyists' explanation for why new security measures are not worth the delays
and added expense).
Financial and performance reviews conducted by internal and external auditors.
Reports made by inspectors general, performance auditors, the Government
Accountability Office (formerly General Accounting Office) or other oversight bodies.
Raw notes and transcripts of interviews made by auditors and investigators, as well as
drafts and early, unedited versions of audit reports or formal investigations. (GAO has a
policy of trying to honor at least some requests for documents used in audits.)
Logs or docket books of open record requests made by public officials, lawyers, and
private industry.
Company press releases, many of which are now archived by PR Newswire.
Industry magazines and newsletters.
Transcripts of congressional hearings.
Lists of all opinions and letters issued by your state's attorney or ethics officer.
Monthly lists of official documents and correspondence that are filed with your state's
archives.
Internet discussion groups where officials and experts often brag out-of-school and say
what they really mean.
Internal newsletters at private companies and government agencies.
Corporate annual reports.
Internal telephone directories, especially outdated ones, which may list former
employees, who may want to unload about their former employer.
Read the actual statutes applying to your subject in the U.S. code, state law and city
statute books.
Any and all court documents (regardless of who wins the case) civil, probate, family,
divorce, bankruptcy. LexisOne is a great free federal and state case search engine and you
can search by key words.
Corporate annual reports and proxy statements

Every federal web site now has, by law, an area reserved for posting the documents most
frequently requested under FOIA.
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings. (names collateral put up for loans)
Building permits.
990 tax reports for nonprofits.
Certificates of occupancy.
Names of potential federal government whistle blowers plucked from the Merit Systems
Protection Board website. (Cases are searchable by key word by year).

