TIPSHEET

EDITING PROJECTS
IRE ANNUAL CONFERENCE
DENVER 2005
Mark J. Rochester
Assistant Managing Editor
The Denver Post
Some thoughts about making stories airtight from
the beginning

Front-end the fact-checking process by having
reporters file reporting plans at outset of project
1. Determine the plan of attack. Reporters have
sniffed around on a story idea, presented a short
proposal to editors and the idea has been approved.
Save headaches at the end by giving some thought
now to what sources we're going to tap; what
government reports/data might be available; some of
the major questions you're going to ask; timeframe
reporting out each area/issue might take.
2. Define specific targets of the interviews and
how success is going to be measured at the end.
3. On key interviews, reporters should draft and
file the major questions they intend to ask
interview target, including any necessary context
or background about why that issue is important, if
not immediately clear. This helps when questions of
context or how specific questions were asked arise.
Transcribing interview notes
1. The most crucial element of project reporting.
2. To help guarantee you're capturing the true
nature of conversations with sources - subtleties
in tone, mood and vivid detail - interview notes
should be transcribed as soon as possible following

an interview. Preferably this would happen the same
day as interview, but if not, as soon as
practically possible. Notes should be transcribed
into computer system in a secure folder.
3. Transcribed notes should be written in memo
form - the transcription needs to be fairly neat
and organized so that other reporters and editors
can read and understand the notes. Don't have to be
in perfect order or grammatically correct. But
proper spelling and identification of sources,
addresses and factual data is mandatory.
4. Notes should also contain references to reports
or databases. If documents are the foundation of
some reporting, scan those documents into the
computer system and file with the notes. (Marking
page numbers where important facts are contained.)
Same with analysis of computer databases - write
down the major conclusions, but create links to
spreadsheets or tables containing the actual data
or include them in the project folder.
5. These files should be clearly labeled and
stored on the computer system so that other team
members and editors can find them without a secret
decoder ring. These files will be critical to factchecking the project at the end, prior to
publication; so being able to quickly locate them
is essential.
When appropriate, maintain chronologies of
important events in the investigation
1.
May not be necessary for every investigation
undertaken, but in team efforts or when pursuing a
complex sequence of events, maintaining this kind
of rolling document can really help put things in
context later. It's where you document the who,
what, when, where and how of the story, assigning
dates and places to key milestones in your
investigation. It's where you establish links
between players or who knew what, when in a quick
organizational chart fashion.

Fact-checking
1. Be prepared to participate in an aggressive
fact-checking procedure to ensure the accuracy and
fairness of your reporting.
2. Require that everyone working on a project
agree to follow your procedures, no exceptions.
3. It should be made clear to the reporters that
this is not an issue of trusting any individual
staffer, but to guarantee a high level of quality
control over your investigative projects. Even a
simple factual error can undermine the
creditability of a project or the newspaper itself.
4. Stories should be reviewed "line-by-line" with
reporters and editors working together to verify
the accuracy and fairness of a story.
5. Editor should review each statement of fact,
conclusions drawn from reporting or data analysis,
as well as routine elements like names, addresses,
etc., challenging the reporter to prove that every
such statement is factual and in the proper
context. Reporters must be able to provide the
"best possible" proof of accuracy in this
verification process. If a story refers to
government findings in a report, they must show the
proper passages from the actual report, not their
notes. If statements are from an interview, the
transcribed interview notes must be reviewed.
6. Because of the point of this exercise is to
have a second set of eyes independently assess the
veracity of statements, the editor cannot accept an
answer of "Well, I checked that already," or "I've
been covering this a long time, I know that's
true." The point is to review, discuss, and
evaluate accuracy of your reporting at a senior
editor level.
7. It is a painstaking, laborious and draining
process, but well worth it in the end, knowing that
every element of every project story has been
vetted and there is no cause for concern.

