STA YING SANE:
Managing stress and trauma on investigative projects
Investigative Reporters and Editors Annual Conference
June 3,2005

Bruce Shapiro
Field Director, Dart Center for Journalism and TraumdLecturer, Yale University
bruce.shaviro@vale.edu
www.dartcenter.org

EMOTIONS, TRAUMA AND GOOD JOURNALISM
Anybody who has regular contact with severely traumatized people is at risk for becoming
emotionally injured themselves. Investigative reporters may not be on the front lines of war or
tragedy. But interviewing victims and witnesses, reviewing records of tragedy, viewing photos
and video and assembling the stories of traumatic events all can have a profound emotional
impact. Psychologists describe this as "vicarious traumatization," which can result in the
symptoms of PTSD, depression, anxiety and other difficulties.
Emotional injury is not not a matter of being strong or weak. Recent neuroscience shows that
PTSD, depression and other issues reflect biological changes as well as psychological changes,
particularly in response to overwhelming events or horror.
Research indicates that prior exposure to trauma significantly increases the risk of developing
PTSD and related difficulties. An individual who has always coped well may suddenly find
themselves overwhelmed by a seemingly managable incident or story. "Trauma load" is
cumulative.
Emotional injury interferes with news judgement and reporting capacity as well as with "private
life."
Conversly, awareness of the psychological issues behind investigative stories will make you a
better interviewer, and better at building trust with deeply traumatized sources.

MAINTAINING RESILIENCE ON DIFFICULT STORIES
If you have listened to a trauma survivor's story or immersed yourself in records, photos or
other documents with traumatic, horrifying or haunting content, find a way to relax within a day
or two. No matter how demanding or engrossing the project, build in distancing mechanisms
every day - planned activities which take you away fiom the story. If you have a favorite
stress-reduction technique (exercise, yoga, art, etc), do it.
Regulate your "trauma load." If your project involves multiple interviews with victims,
witnesses or survivors, space them out. If you are reviewing upsetting photos or documents, don't
try to absorb everything at once. Take breaks.
Maintain a sleep schedule. Shortchanging yourself on sleep during an investigative project not
only increases your emotional vulnerability; it also interfei vith your news judgement and
professional capacity.
Beware of isolation. If you are working the story alone, talk, regularly to a trusted individual
who is a sensitive listener. If you are working in a team, check in with one another, and be alert
for changes in your team members' behavior or news judgement.
Know your limits. If you've been given a troublesome assignment that you feel you cannot
perform, politely express your concerns to your supervisor. Tell the supervisor that you may not
be the best person for the assignment. Explain why.
It's common to experience emotional distress if immersed in a story involving traumatic content.
If the distress doesn't subside over time, however, it can become toxic. Before he died in April
1945, war correspondent Ernie Pyle wrote, "I've been immersed in it too long. My spirit is wobbly
and my mind is confused. The hurt has become too great." If this happens to you, seek counseling
fiom a professional.

WARNING SIGNS
Whether for yourself or team members, while on a demanding project pay attention to changes in
behavior, news judgement, work habits and alcohol or drug use. Particularly be alert to:
Difficulties concentrating
Unusual irritability or short temper
Images or thoughts related to a project intruding at unwanted times
Unusual isolation or withdraw1
Disruptions of sleep
Increase in self-medication
The following is a list of ways individuals may respond emotionally to'a traumatic event, and

which can indicate whether a person is &king from an acute stress reaction. Generally six "yes''
responses indicate the pawewe of acute stress.

1. Upsetting thoughts or memories about @idevent that have come into yo* mind against your
will
/

2. Upsetting dreams about the event
3. Acting or feeling as though the event were bppmhg again

4. Feeling upset by remidas of the event

5. Bodily d o u s (such as Easr heartbeat, stomach churning, sweatirreJs, dimkss) when
mnindadof the event
6. Difficulty falling or staying asleep
7. Irritability or outbursts of anger

8. Difficulty concentrating
9. Heightened awareness of potential dangers to yourself and others

10. Being jumpy or being startled at something unexpected

Dart Center for Journalism & Trauma

~
~ with pemirsion
~
"
from the OlagnosUc and
Statistical Manual of Mental
Dkorden, Fourth Edltlon.
copydght 1994 Amerlcan
Psychiatric Assodation.

The Dart Center is a

global r e s o u r n for
Journalists who corer
trauma and vioknce.
Laarn m o m

...

which both of the following were present:
1) the person experienced, witnessed, or was
confronted with an event or events that
involved actual or threatened death or serious
injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of
self or others, and
2) the penon's response involved intense fear,
helplessness, or horror. Not.: In childran, thim may
be expressed Instead by disorganizad or aollstad
behavior.

.

,,,r r r , , , o r

..,.... .,..
8.8

~A. The
~ person
~ hasd been exposed to a traumatic event in

6. The traumatic event is persistently re-experienced in
one (or more) of the following ways:

..8r,sl..

1) recurrent and intrusive distressing
recollections of the event, including images,
thoughts, or perceptions. note: I n young children,
mpatltive play m a y occur i n which tharnas or aspects
of the trauma are axpmMad

2) recurrent distressing dreams of the event.
Note: I n children, there may be frightening
dreams without recognizable content
3) acting or feeling as if the traumatic event
were recurring (includes a sense of reliving the
experience, illusions, hallucinations, and
dissociative flashback episodes, including those
that occur on awakening or when intoxicated).
Nota. In younp children, trauma-mpecific raanmctmmnt
m a y occur

4) intense psychological distress at exposure
to internal or eternal cues that symbolize or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event.
5) physiolog~calreactivity on exposure to
internal or external cures that symbolize or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event.
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the
trauma and numbing of general responsiveness (not
present before the trauma), as indicated by three (or
more) of the fol\owing:
1) efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or
conversations associated with the trauma

2) efforts to avoid activities, places, or people
that arouse recollections of the trauma
3) inability to recall an important aspect of the
trauma
4) markedly diminished interest or
participation in significant activities
5) feeling of detachment or estrangement
from others
6) restricted range of affect (e.g. unable to

Page 1 of 2

Dart Center for Journalism & Trauma

have loving feelings)
7) sense of a foreshortened future (e.g. does
not expect to have a career, marriage,
children, or a normal life span)

D. Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present
before the trauma), as indicated by two (or more) of the
following:
1)diWiculty falling or staying asleep

2) irritability or outbursts of anger

3) difficulty concentrating
4) hypervigilance
5) exaggerated startle response

E. Duration for the disturbance (symptoms in criteria 8, C
and 0)is more than one month.
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or

impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.

Acute - duration of symptoms is kss than three months
Chmnic - duration of symptoms is more than three
months

Page 2 of 2

