The idea machine: Selected investigations from the past year and ways to do them in your
own newsroom

1. STATS FEMA paid for too many funerals
Sally Kestin, Megan O'Matz and John Maines of the Sun-Sentinel used federal records
to show that "the federal government has paid funeral expenses for at least 315
deaths" in the wake of hurricanes in South Florida last year, "including those of a man
who shot himself and a stroke victim hospitalized more than a week before the last
storm hit." A state official said that the actions of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency constituted a "Free Funeral Payment Act". The total cost of the funerals was
$1.27 million, according to the paper's analysis of FEMA data. The paper is suing to
force disclosure of the names of all recipients of FEMA aid related to the hurricanes.
April, 2005
2. STATS /DISASTER TRANS Disaster assistance flawed
Sally Kestin and Megan O'Matz of the South Florida Sun-Sentinel find the federal
government "approved $28,000,000 in storm claims" in Miami-Dade County, 100 miles
south of where Hurricance Frances landed. The claims were "for new furniture and
clothes and thousands of new televisions microwaves, refrigerators and other
appliances." Followed every lead, sued for the records that were blocked, and carefully
tested every assumption made in every record.

3. DISASTER Disaster funds pay for sand, signs, bike paths
Gilbert M. Gaul of The Washington Post obtained Federal Emergency Management
Agency records on money given to towns after Hurricane Isabel last fall, finding that
"dozens of wealthy beach towns and coastal communities turned to the federal agency
after Isabel and received tens of millions of dollars in taxpayer-funded disaster relief.
The bulk of the money was used to clear debris and pay for emergency workers'
overtime. Hundreds of thousands of dollars, however, were used to repair flagpoles,
signs, bike paths and ball fields. And, in what some environmental groups and
regulators say is a troubling development, the federal agency is paying for an estimated
$15 million worth of sand." The Post got the records through a Freedom of Information
Act request. Gaul is a longtime expert in this kind of coverage so if you are covering a
disaster and FEMA’s response, you might want to google his work..

4. STATS Data shows suspicious gains in test scores
Holly Hacker and Joshua Benton of The Dallas Morning News turned a story about one
school's alleged cheating on standardized tests into a piece about cheating across the
state. She used a statistical test called regression analysis to show some suspicious
improvements among historically low-performing schools, including a "desperately
impoverished school where the fourth-graders have trouble adding and subtracting but nearly all the fifth-graders got perfect scores on the math portion of the Texas
Assessment of Knowledge and Skills."

5. STATS Data shows extent, causes of animal deaths in marine parks
Sally Kestin of the South Florida Sun-Sentinel spent nine months examining the marine
park industry, using federal records that the government never analyzed, to find that
"more than 3,850 sea lions, seals, dolphins and whales have died under human care,
many of them young. Of nearly 3,000 whose ages could be determined, a quarter died
before they reached 1, half by the age of 7." Many animals die from preventable
causes such as contaminated water, accidents and stress-induced ulcers. "They've
eaten key chains, sunglasses and rocks. They've died while being treated for common
ear and teeth infections." The paper used records from the Marine Mammal Inventory
Report, which the National Marine Fisheries Service has compiled since 1972 but
never before released in electronic form, citing computer difficulties. "In October, the
agency allowed the newspaper's database editor, John Maines, to come to its
Maryland headquarters. It took Maines only three hours to download the data onto a
computer disk. His work has allowed the Fisheries Service to begin analyzing its data
for the first time and to share the information with anyone interested."
6. The 30-Year Secret
Willamette Week’s Nigel Jaquiss broke a blockbuster story that had been whispered
about for years in Oregon. Former Gov. Neil Goldschmidt, one of the state's most
powerful men, had forced a 14-year-old babysitter into a three-year sexual relationship
when he was a 35-year-old Portland mayor. "The 30-year Secret" detailed the
relationship's impact on the troubled woman and to what lengths Goldschmidt went to
hide it over the years. Jaquiss’ dogged reporting had to cover a lot of ground because
the victim wasn’t talking. The former governor was ultimately unraveled because of a
shady relationship with a PI that funneled money to the victim. The moral, if there is
one, is to not assume a story can’t be gotten.
7. The BALCO steroid conspiracy case
Another story that exemplifies that moral, and the case for digging deeply on a story.
The San Francisco Chronicle’s Lance Williams and Mark Fainaro-Wada followed the
investigation of BALCO, a steroid mill, by a federal grand jury, and found that
professional athletes have acknowledged privately while denying publicly using steroids
and other illegal substances. Great source work on a competitive story led them lead
the pack.
8. STATS Atlanta schools need $14 million a year for computer network
Paul Donsky and Ken Foskett of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution investigated Atlanta
schools' use of money from a national program designed to help poor children tap into
the Internet, finding that "with virtually no limit on spending, Atlanta since 1998 has built
one of the country's most lavish computer networks for schoolchildren. Now, Atlanta
says it needs $14 million a year — three times the district's textbook budget — just to
run and maintain the network. “ The E-rate stories included innovative use of open
records laws, obtaining records from private vendors when the school said they weren’t
available because they were destroyed in a flood. It was also the first publication to dig
deeply into the federal program that funds hundreds of school districts’ purchase of

computer technology. Trust me, it probably hasn’t been supervised well in your district
either as it has essentially been a fund for pigs at the trough.
9. STATS Parking records used to evaluate judges' hours
Andrea Weigl of The (Raleigh, N.C.) News & Observer, taking a page from The Kansas
City Star, analyzed parking records from the Wake Superior Court, finding that "five of
six Superior Court judges and nine of 16 District Court judges averaged fewer than 40
hours a week at the courthouse." One judge's average work day consists of 6 hours
and 14 minutes, including a 90-minute lunch break. "The judges say the hours don't
reflect the time they spend working at home and outside the office attending community
events. Besides, they say, courthouse hours may not be the best way to measure how
well they do their jobs." The paper studied 6,500 records from the judges' parking
garage spanning April 23, 2003 to Oct. 31, 2003. June, 2004
10. STATS.. GET MORE…Virus infecting military boot camps
Michael J. Berens of The Seattle Times finds that a respiratory virus that the U.S.
military used to vaccinate against now "infects up to 2,500 service members monthly —
a staggering 1 in 10 recruits — in the nation's eight basic-training centers." Adenovirus
has been associated with the deaths of at least six recruits since vaccinations ended in
1996. Four of those deaths were in the past year, according to an analysis of military
health-care records. Wyeth, the company that produced the vaccine, stopped making it
in the 1990s when the Pentagon stopped allocating funds to pay for it. "The Pentagon's
unwillingness to spend $5 million on health care is now costing taxpayers tens of
millions of dollars to remedy." The online presentation of the story includes links to
source documents worth examining. Also worth learning from is how Berens earned the
trust of some of those most affected: military doctors and military families.

11. STATS Feds failed in battle against meth
In this stunning report, Steve Suo of The Oregonian reports that "Congress and federal
authorities could have contained the methamphetamine epidemic, and still can."
Analyzing millions of records detailing arrests, emergency room visits and other drugrelated incidents, the paper found "striking correlations between government actions
and meth abuse. In two periods — 1995-96 and 1998-99 — federal authorities
interrupted the flow of chemicals to drug cartels. Each time, crime and addiction fell in
tandem as the price of the drug rose." Another piece tells how lobbyists for the
pharmaceutical industry helped to keep tighter regulation by the Drug Enforcement
Administration at bay: "Again and again, DEA officials agreed to compromises that left
open one or more crucial loopholes for traffickers to obtain their ingredients — the bulk
of which are made in only nine factories worldwide." October, 2004
12. STATS Conditions at Gitmo detailed; prisoners identified
Scott Higham, Joe Stephens and Margot Williams of The Washington Post tracked the
development of the prison at Guantanamo Bay naval base and its detainees, compiling
"the largest public list of detainee names, encompassing 370 out of the 745 or so men
detained at the camp since January 2002." Saudi Arabian nationals make up the
largest contingent among identified prisoners held at Gitmo. The report describes some
of the interrogation techniques used at the base, which had shrunk in size before the

2001 terrorist attacks but now costs about $118 million a year to run. The full list of
names compiled by Williams, the Post's research editor, includes an explanation of
how it was compiled and it’s worth studying.
13. STATS Developers save thousands through farming tax breaks
Allen G. Breed and Martha Mendoza of The Associated Press reviewed property tax
arrangements around the country to find that "millions of dollars in property tax breaks
intended to preserve farmland are going instead to companies that bulldoze farms to
build housing subdivisions, malls and industrial parks." Among the beneficiaries of such
programs are singer Michael Jackson, who received a 50 percent discount on property
taxes on his Neverland ranch through California's agriculture property tax break
program (he has since removed it from the program after an inspection). One Alabama
developer planted 54 acres of trees after building two hotels and two stores on the
remainder of a property and now paid a 2003 tax bill of $152 instead of $64,230. A
good example of using records from multiple jurisdictions to find a trend no one else
knows about. It’s happening everywhere, including in your area.

14. PERK LEDE Truck companies linked to campaign contributions
Tim Novak and Steve Warmbir of the Chicago Sun-Times tracked the city's habit of
hiring private trucks to haul refuse and other loads, finding that "Mayor Daley's
administration spends nearly $40 million a year hiring hundreds of trucks — primarily
dump trucks — that often do little or no work." The paper requested bills from six
participating companies, noting that many are not listed in the phone book and appear
to be run from an owner's home. Chicago officials could not produce records for two of
the firms, and the paper pegs the number of trucking companies favored by the city at
about 165. "Many are listed on campaign reports showing they contribute money to the
mayor and other politicians — in all more than $800,000 since 1996. Over the last five
years, more than 25 percent of the Hired Truck money has been spent on firms
operating out of the 11th Ward, the mayor's political power base." The story started
after one reporter observed a truck sitting around day after day and wondered what
was up.

15. PERK Congressional travel soars despite regulations
A team of graduate students from Northwestern's Medill School of Journalism, along
with Marketplace and American RadioWorks, researched congressional perks to see if
recent regulations have cut down on lobbysits' lavish expenditures. What they found
was there has been a significant decrease in expenditures, but not when it comes to
travel. More than $14 million was spent by corporations, universities and other
institutions, "sending representatives around the world, for sometimes questionable
reasons." Their research details how the process works, who is benefiting from it and
who the "king of travel" is. The group also has compiled data detailing individual
expenditures, as well as breakdowns based on party affiliation and the top beneficiaries
and spenders. January, 2005

16. PERK The National Institutes of Health: Public Servant or Private Marketer?

David Willman and Janet Lumdblad of The Los Angeles Times examine how payments
from drug companies to scientists at the National Institutes of Health cause a conflict of
interest that affects health care and policy recommendations. Even under the partial
reforms announced by the presidentially appointed NIH director in 2004, some NIH
scientists would still be able to take compensation such as stock options and consulting
fees. December, 2004

17. PERK Cleveland Police Death Squad
The I-Team of WJW-TV investigated members of the Cleveland Police Ceremonial Unit
who managed to rack up thousands of ceremonial compensatory hours by "'piling on' at
the funerals of retired officers." The team found that compensatory payments to the
ceremonial unit, hand-picked by the chief, added up to millions of dollars at a time
when the city was laying off 261 officers because of budget shortfalls. Tom Merriman;
Greg Easterly; Mark DeMarino; Dave Hollis; Matt Rafferty; Chuck Rigdon, February,
2004

18. PERK Insider Trading in City Hall
A tip to the Erie, Pa., Times-News about the sale of an Erie rental home uncovered a
secret scheme by associates of the city's mayor to profit off redevelopment of an old
industrial site. Reporters Kevin Flowers and Peter Panepento connected well-hidden
dots in such clear and powerful language and graphics that state and federal officials
paid attention and a grand jury indicted the mayor. January, 2004
19. WRITING Web of Deceit
The Charleston Gazette’s Eric Eyre relentlessly laid bare the misdeeds of a powerful
state legislator who held two public jobs but did little work for one of them, diverted
school money to fire departments, and broke promises not to use his influence unfairly.
Then the state Ethics Commission cleared the lawmaker after he produced letters
apparently disproving Eyre's work - until Eyre showed that the "too good to be true"
letters were dated before the stationery was created. Voters ousted the politician, he
and his wife were convicted of altering official documents and the speaker of the West
Virginia House apologized to the Gazette for not believing the initial stories. March,
2004

20. SCAM State agency invests millions in rare coins
Mike Wilkinson and James Drew of The (Toledo) Blade checked out one of Ohio's
government investment instruments: rare coins. "Since 1998, Ohio has invested
millions of dollars in the unregulated world of rare coins, buying nickels, dimes, and
pennies. Controlling the money for the state? Prominent local Republican and coin
dealer Tom Noe, whose firm made more than $1 million off the deal last year alone.
The agreement to invest the money in rare coins is rare itself: The Blade could find no
other instance of a state government investing in a rare coin fund. Neither the state nor
Mr. Noe could provide one." The paper details some problems with the firm managing
the investment, including the loss of two coins worth $300,000 in the mail. April, 2005

21. SCAM Contractor caught cutting guard rails below standards
Nancy Amos of WSMV-Nashville investigates a highway contractor the news team
caught on camera cutting guard rails below required standards. "Our investigation
found that when LU's workers had a hard time getting the posts into the ground, they
simply cut them short using a chain saw." The WSMV news team was tipped off by
Neal Adkins, a former LU employee. The investigation has caught the FBI’s attention.
April, 2005

22. SCAM Scout program overstated numbers to entice donors
The investigative team for WAGA-Atlanta investigated claims that Atlanta's inner-city
boy scout program grossly overstated their numbers to boost their image, in an attempt
to convince potential donors to donate. "Insiders say the way the Boy Scouts account
for members and troops inflates its numbers resulting in what insiders call Ghost
Scouts and Phantom Troops." They would do this by dispersing scout executives
throughout the communities having boys sign flyers saying they were interested in
joining the scouts. Then they would take these kids and add them to the list, without
checking to see if the boys even took the oath and joined the scouts. The team
uncovered many instances where large troop numbers were reported, however in
reality the numbers were small or even none. March, 2005

23. SCAM Captive Clientele
Diana Henriques of The New York Times looks at how some financial companies used
unethical, misleading sales tactics to sell costly insurance and investment products to
young military recruits. These companies use their military and Congressional
connections to keep their business growing while gaining access to military bases.
"And although the Pentagon has been warned about these exploitive practices for
decades, it has done almost nothing to prevent them." Glenn Cramon, Bill McDonald,
Sarah Slobin and Antoinette Melillo assisted. June, 2004

24. SCAM / MORETaser cited autopsy reports it never had
Robert Anglen of The Arizona Republic reviewed autopsy records and other documents
to show that the Taser industry's claims that the stun guns are not lethal were
unsupported by records. "Taser's claims are based on autopsy reports the company
never possessed," the newspaper reports. "For years, Taser officials cited these
reports as proof that the stun guns never caused 'injury or death to another human
being.' Now, officials acknowledge they never had those autopsy reports and didn't
start collecting them until April. The Republic's review of autopsies and interviews with
medical examiners found Tasers have been linked to at least five deaths." July, 2004

25. SCAM/TRANSITION TO SYSTEM Lifesaving incidents represent sliver of Taser
uses

David Migoya of The Denver Post used police and court records to find that Denver
police don't often use their Taser stun guns in life-threatening situations. "More often,
Denver police have used Tasers to force people to obey their orders, to shortcut
physical confrontations and, in several cases, to avoid having to run after a suspect."
Most people charged with crimes after being tased faced misdemea nor charges or a
ticket, and at least 16 people where tased while already wearing handcuffs. Included is
an interactive map of Taser incidents. May, 2004
26. SYSTEM Fired officers earning compensation during long appeals
John Diedrich of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel found that since 1994, "Milwaukee
has paid more than $2.1 million in pay and benefits to 30 fired officers who were not
reinstated, including six whose cases were still pending as of Friday." Fired officers
don't have to repay wages earned while they appeal their firings. Milwaukee
firefighters, in contrast, lose their pay while on appeal and get back pay if they are
reinstated. April, 2005
27. SYSTEM Low tax penalty serves as cheap loan for some businesses
Lee Davidson of The Deseret News used local records to show that "at least 443 land
developers, real estate companies and construction companies owed more than a
combined $5.17 million in back property taxes and penalties" as of January 2005. Ski
resorts, an airline and telecommunications firm MCI are among the other tax
delinquents in Salt Lake County, where some businesses elect not to pay taxes
because the penalties and interest are low enough that "many businesses view it as a
way to obtain relatively cheap and easy loans." State law assesses a 2 percent penalty
on late taxes and interest around 8.25 percent last year. February, 2005
28. SYSTEM State wastes millions paying workers never hired
Pam Kelley and Eric Frazier of the Charlotte Observer have a three-part series on
group homes that found that "North Carolina has wasted tens of millions of dollars
since 2001, paying group homes for workers who were never hired, a six-month
Observer investigation shows. That mistake made the group home business in North
Carolina so lucrative that hundreds of new homes opened, so many that the state
couldn't regulate them." The state raised the rate of reimbursement to group homes in
2001, costing taxpayers another $81 million through July 2004. The money was
supposed to go to hire more workers, but many facilities didn't increase staffing. The
series also focuses on group home violations and weak state oversight. January, 2005

29. SYSTEM Reservists frustrated by medical holds
Marsha Austin and Eileen Kelly of The Denver Post examined the "medical hold"
system used by the National Guard and the Army Reserve. More than 13,000 mentally
and physically ill soldiers have spent time in a "medical holdover" unit, a system that
some say denies them access to quality care. "Beyond the frustration of being cooped
up in a barracks, with untreated mental and physical ailments, reservists and
guardsmen say the system frustrates their efforts to be medically retired, a discharge
that requires an Army judgment of 30 percent disability and comes with a lifetime
monthly pension and access to military perks such as commissary stores." December,
2004

30. SYSTEM DWI suspects go free in N.C.
Ames Alexander and Ted Mellnik of The Charlotte Observer studied county records to
find that "more than 10,000 times a year, N.C. prosecutors dismiss DWI cases
involving suspects who test over the legal alcohol limit or refuse tests." One in five
suspects go free due to dismissals, the paper found, and nearly 40 percent of DWI
dismissals in Mecklenburg County occurred when cops didn't show up for court
hearings. "Sometimes the officers had military duty or other responsibilities that made it
hard for them to attend court. Other times, the Observer found, extra effort by officers,
their supervisors or court officials would have made convictions more likely." A graphic
shows dismissal rates by judicial district. November, 2004

31. SYSTEM Small group of officers responsible for shootings
Scott Glover, Matt Lait and Doug Smith of the Los Angeles Times, using data from the
Los Angeles Police Department, found that a small number of officers "make up a tiny
fraternity who have used deadly force much more often than their colleagues." The
officers who have shot at suspects more than twice "represent less than 1% of the
force. But they were involved in 20% of all LAPD shootings since 1985." In addition, the
Times found that the LAPD doesn't track officers who frequently use deadly force. Day
one of the project revealed the LAPD has frequently misled the Police Commission, the
organization that is supposed to scrutinize shootings. October, 2004
32. SYSTEM Distribution of homeland security money flawed
The Oakland Tribune, the Los Angeles Daily News and smaller sister newspapers are
publishing localized versions of "Missing the Mark: A Flawed Plan to Protect the
Homeland." The four-part series looks at where homeland security money is being
allocated. Thh investigation finds that California "replicated a widely criticized federal
funding formula that steers millions to isolated rural areas and leaves target-rich
communities high and dry." The Daily News says "Three years later, California's public
safety agencies are certainly better equipped — but not necessarily for terrorism, a
newspaper investigation found after reviewing more than 2,500 homeland security
documents and conducting dozens of interviews." The Oakland Tribune explains
"Congress set up the federal grant program to distribute 40 percent of the grant money
equally among states, without regard to risk." September, 2004
33. TOTAL SYSTEM FAILURE U.S. borders growing more porous
Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele of Time investigate U.S. border security, finding
that "the U.S.'s borders, rather than becoming more secure since 9/11, have grown
even more porous. And the trend has accelerated in the past year. It's fair to estimate,
based on a Time investigation, that the number of illegal aliens flooding into the U.S.
this year will total 3 million — enough to fill 22,000 Boeing 737-700 airliners, or 60
flights every day for a year." September, 2004
34. SYSTEM TOTAL TSA in crisis attributed to lax security, low morale

Cheryl Phillips, Steve Miletich and Ken Armstrong of The Seattle Times have a threepart series on security at the nation's airports, finding that "lax security and low morale
seep through the federal agency responsible" for protecting air travelers. "Management
memos, as well as firsthand accounts of more than 100 screeners and supervisors
interviewed by The Times, depict an agency in crisis." Documents reveal that
Transportation Security Administration employees face inhospitable working conditions
as well. The paper described its methodology and the resistance of the TSA to the
reporting. July, 2004
35. SYSTEM Slow wheels of justice costing Ohio county millions
Timothy Heider and Scott Hiaasen of The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer report that
"Cuyahoga County's court system is wasting millions of dollars a year in unnecessary
jail costs by making thousands of inmates wait months to be indicted or brought to
trial." The costs include renting space in other jails and the county's high rate of cases
that last more than six months. "Records show that more than half of the jail's $57
million annual budget is spent housing prisoners ... who have not yet been convicted of
anything." June, 2004
36. SYSTEM Despite willful violations, OSHA often fails to punish employers
David Barstow of The New York Times finds that in 93 percent of the cases in which
OSHA determined an employer's "willful safety viola tions" caused a death, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration declined to seek prosecution. The
report also finds that "OSHA's reluctance to seek prosecution persisted even when
employers had been cited before for the very same safety violation," even when the
violations caused multiple deaths, or when the victims were teenagers. (Note: IRE and
NICAR offer four sets of OSHA workplace safety data: one listing companies and
inspection results, and three subordinate databases listing worker accidents,
hazardous substance injuries and workplace violations.) January, 2004

37. SYSTEM Felony convictions regularly set aside in Fla.
IRE Winner……Manny Garcia and Jason Grotto of The Miami Herald have a four-part
series on the judicial practice of setting aside felony convictions in Florida. Based on an
analysis of millions of state and local prison and court records, the report found that
during the past decade, withholding adjudication has changed "into a handy tool to
close cases that, in many instances, appears anything but just. Rapists, child
molesters, child abusers, wife beaters, burglars, cocaine traffickers, repeat offenders,
even corrupt public officials got the break. Scores of regular lawbreakers avoided
convictions as many as five times." The paper's analysis found that white offenders are
more likely to be granted a withholding than blacks with similar crimes and prior
records, and that first-time offenders in particular got the break. "Almost three out of
four thieves had their convictions withheld following their first arrest. Folks charged with
battery got the break more than half of the time." The series includes an extensive
explainer we can all learn from…. it includes praise for their methods from academics
and state corrections officials. February, 2004

38. danger Athletic department purchased banned supplements

Danny Robbins of the Fort Worth Star-Telegram used the Texas Public Information Act
to show that "the Texas A&M University and University of Texas at Austin athletic
departments have routinely purchased tens of thousands of dollars worth of dietary
supplements labeled as containing ingredients that make them impermissible for
distribution to student-athletes under National Collegiate Athletic Association rules."
The two universities have spent about $120,000 during the past four years on such
supplements. May, 2005
39. DANGER Accused priests relocate, often with church's help
Reese Dunklin, Brendan M. Case, Brooks Egerton and Andrew Fa'asau of The Dallas
Morning News spent a year tracking Catholic priests accused of sexually abusing
children, finding that "from Africa to Latin America to Europe to Asia, these priests have
started new lives in unsuspecting communities, often with the help of church officials.
They are leading parishes, teaching and continuing to work in settings that bring them
into contact with children, despite church claims to the contrary." The first story focuses
on the Rev. Frank Klep, a convicted child molester and Australian priest who was sent
in 1998 to Samoa, where "Australian police can't touch him now because their country
has no extradition treaty with Samoa." A second piece reports that "a prominent
candidate to succeed Pope John Paul II recently sheltered a priest who is an admitted
child molester and now an international fugitive." The paper has posted a timeline and
other resources on its site. June, 2004

40. DANGER Va. assisted living troubled and worsening
David S. Fallis of The Washington Post has a four-part series on assisted living in
Virginia, finding "a troubled and worsening record of care at the facilities, including
avoidable injuries and death, and a system of state oversight that often failed to identify
or correct problems." A second piece examined violent crimes committed by residents
of assisted living facilities in Virginia. The Post used Virginia's public records law to
obtain documents and more than 20 years of data from the state's Department of
Social Services that had never been publicly released. May, 2004.
50.5 Staff shortages, poor training put elderly residents at risk
Kevin McCoy, Julie Appleby and Barbara Hansen of USA Today analyzed assisted
living facility inspection data from seven states to find that "staff shortages and
insufficient training place elderly residents at risk with inadequate care, delayed
diagnosis and treatment and even death." The paper examined records from
inspections of 5,305 facilities in Alabama, Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Indiana, New
York and Texas between 2000 and 2002. "Nearly one in five facilities inspected by
regulators in those states was cited for at least one staffing violation, ranging from too
few employees on a work shift to lack of a certified facility manager, the investigation
found. In some cases, residents were left to fend for themselves temporarily because
there were no caregivers on site."
May, 2004.

41. VOTE Fla. voting rights restored unevenly
Debbie Cenziper and Jason Grotto of The Miami Herald, continuing their investigation
of Florida's clemency system, reported that the state's Clemency Board "has restored
voting rights to murderers, rapists, batterers, drug traffickers and corrupt public officials
— at the same time it barred thousands of lower-level criminals from the polls." The
paper identified at least 400 felons released from custody between 2001 and 2003 who
had their civil rights restored even though they appeared ineligible under the state's
clemency rules. Dozens were convicted of violent crimes, such as battery on a police
officer, arson, armed robbery. December, 2004
42. VOTE Some elected officials don't vote regularly
Mark Greenblatt of WBBH-Fort Myers, Fla., examined the voting records of 34 local
politicians, finding that a handful voted less than half the time since 1990, while just five
voted in every primary and general election during that period. The chairwoman of the
Lee County School Board, Jeanne Dozier, missed 9 primaries and three of five general
elections. Asked why she didn't use an absentee ballot, Dozier replied: "That probably
is something I should have done. Sometimes we just get so wrapped up. In fact, I'm
already thinking right now I probably need to put that on a to-do list." May, 2004

43. VOTE Miscount: An Investigative Series
This series by Scripps-Howard’s Thomas Hargrove and Michael Collins was an
outgrowth of the problems that plagued Florida during the 2000 presidential election.
"Scripps Howard News Service spent a year examining voting records from the 1996,
2000, 2002 and 2004 general elections, looking for and finding significant
discrepancies between the number of ballots cast and the number of votes counted for
major offices." This investigation helped to uncover failures in election procedures, bad
ballot designs, misleading voting instructions, as well as a number of mechanical
failures in ballot-counting devices. April, 2004

44. COLD CASE New evidence casts doubt on convicted killer's guilt
Scott Glover and Matt Lait of the Los Angeles Times use scores of documents
shedding doubt on the guilt of a man convicted of killing his mother over 20 years ago.
Among the evidence discovered was a bloody footprint found at the scene that didn't
match the convicted killer's shoes and a mysterious phone call made from the crime
scene. The footprint was attributed to Bruce Lisker at trial. But a recent analysis by the

Los Angeles Police Department concluded "that the footprint did not match Lisker's
shoes, suggesting there was another suspect in the house at the time of the killing."
When the reporters contacted eight of the 12 jurors, "five said the new information
about the case would have prompted them to acquit Lisker." The former prosecutor in
the case, after being shown the findings by the Times, said, "The bottom line is I now
have reasonable doubt." The story includes PDFs of 14 documents ranging from a rap
sheet of a jailhouse snitch to an inventory record listing the contents of the victim's
purse, which includes the $120 that was alleged to have been a motive in the murder.
May, 2005

45. COLD CASES Racist covenants still exist
Judy L. Thomas and Gregory S. Reeves of The Kansas City Star studied homeowner
association rules in the Kansas City area, finding that "more than 1,200 documents
involving thousands of homes still contain racist language banning blacks, Jews and
other ethnic groups. For the first half of the 20th century, racially restrictive covenants
were routinely recorded in plats and deeds and placed in many homeowner's
association documents not only here, but nationwide. Yet many of the covenants never
were removed, even after being ruled unenforceable by the U.S. Supreme Court as
long ago as 1948 and banned by the Fair Housing Act of 1968. And their vestiges of
discrimination - a kind of 'curse of the covenant' - still linger locally." February, 2005

46. COLD CASES Forensics under the microscope
Maurice Possley; Flynn McRoberts; and Steve Mills at the Chicago Tribune examined
erroneous forensic evidence used to convict innocent people of vicious crimes. The
investigation looked at the unreliability of some areas of forensic science, including
DNA testing, fingerprinting, arson theories, and dental comparisons. As a result of the
groundbreaking series, two inmates will be released because of faulty forensic
analyses and several pending criminal appeals are using the report as evidence. Oct.
2004.
47. COLD CASE Defendants not notified of problems with evidence
Ruth Teichroeb of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer found that even after a state audit of a
forensic scientist's handling of crime evidence revealed problems with 17 cases, "none
of those 22 defendants has been notified that the crime lab evidence used against
them had been called into question." Five of the people convicted remain in prison.
Because the state maintains that the scientist's overall conclusions were correct, "that
meant there was no reason to notify counties about the findings of the audit." March,
2004 Crime lab has recurring DNA errors Ruth Teichroeb of the Seattle PostIntelligencer finds that DNA contamination and errors at the Washington State Patrol
crime lab are a recurring, and critical, problem. "Forensic scientists contaminated tests
or made other mistakes while handling DNA evidence in at least 23 cases involving
major crimes over the last three years, according to State Patrol and court records."
Through public records and interviews, Teichroeb offers a glimpse into what can go
wrong with DNA evidence. "Crime labs across the country are struggling with similar

problems but documented evidence has been hard to come by." Another story says
officials have "been slow to deal with misconduct by long-time employees."July

48. FDA knew of vaccine contamination
Mike McGraw of The Kansas City Star finds the U.S. government should have known
five years ago that a crisis was looming in the production of flu vaccine. McGraw
examined documents that showed widespread contamination in the vaccine in 1999
and experts he interviewed say "evidence was so overwhelming that regulators should
have shut down the plant or sought alternative flu vaccine sources long ago." The
report from a 1999 inspection "shows that FDA officials visited the plant for over a week
during a biennial inspection in 1999 and found 17 problem areas." Nov. 2004

49. DANGER Lead Jewelry
When a one-year-old baby was diagnosed with lead-poisoning, enough to cause brain
damage, WMAR of Baltimore’s Tisha Thompson and Bill Fink started to test costume
jewelry kids love. Results showed that all of the tested jewelry contained lead, and
some contained enough to cause illness. This investigation lead the Consumer Product
Safety Commission to announce a voluntary recall of more than 150 million pieces of
jewelry sold out of gumball machines. This was the single largest voluntary recall of a
children's product in the history of the agency. July, 2004

50. DANGER Candies from Mexico contain unsafe amounts of lead
Jenifer McKim, William Heisel, Valeria Godines and Keith Sharon of The Orange
County Register found California has withheld hundreds of test results showing more
than 100 brands of candy — most coming from Mexico — have dangerous levels of
lead. The Register spent two years tracing the roots of the problem to the chili fields of
Mexico and to a Mexican town connected to the candy industry that has become
contaminated. The newspaper conducted 425 tests and found alarming lead levels in
children, key candy ingredients and in candies — some of which the state or FDA have
never tested before."The Register reviewed about 6,000 pages of state, county and
federal documents obtained under public-records laws and built a unique database of
all candy tests conducted in California." April, 2004

51. WRITING The collapse of a spy case
Ray Rivera of The Seattle Times made heavy use of FOIA in his series on James Yee,
the Army chaplain accused of espionage but later honorably discharged. The paper
posted a collection of documents it obtained in reporting the story and also described
how the story was reported. January, 2005

52. WRITING Public defender caseload strains chances at justice
Ken Armstrong, Florangela Davila and Justin Mayo of The Seattle Times have a series
on public defenders in Washington State, where the promise of justice "is strained by
limited budgets, exploding caseloads, overburdened lawyers and indifferent officials."
Most of the state's county governments hire public defenders on a fixed contract basis,
leading some attorneys to shoulder huge case loads. One Grant County public
defender handled 413 felony cases last year, "a staggering figure that eviscerated the
chances of a vigorous defense." Grant County had the highest percentage of guilty
pleas in Superior Court cases between 1999 and 2003. April, 2004

53. WRITING Ga. laws tough on borrowers
Atlanta Journal-Constitution reporters Ann Hardie, Alan Judd and Carrie Teegardin
analyzed foreclosure laws in all 50 states, tracked foreclosure notices and interviewed
consumers, lawyers and bankruptcy experts about Georgia's foreclosure law, which
drives a bankruptcy rate that is among the nation's highest. David A. Milliron, computerassisted reporting and analysis editor, and news researchers Nisa Asokan and Alice
Wertheim contributed to the reporting. January, 2005
54. WRITING System lets traffic offenders buy way out of tickets
Clark Kauffman of The Des Moines Register spent eight weeks reviewing court files in
eight Iowa counties, focusing on prosecution of traffic offenses. In Cass County, he
found that "County Attorney James Barry has allowed offenders to buy their way out of
tickets by pleading guilty to equipment violations." Barry replaced 54 speeding and
other driving tickets with 148 equipment citations last year, producing more than
$21,000 for the state. "According to court records, the deals were offered to people with
past convictions for reckless driving and vehicular homicide, to teens involved in
accidents, and to professional truck drivers already at risk of losing their licenses." A
criminal law professor in Los Angeles judged the operation this way: "I've gotta tell you,
that is a really screwed-up system." February, 2004

55. TOTAL SYSTEM FAILURE Deadly errors and politics betray a hospital's
promise
Tracy Weber, Charles Ornstein and Mitchell Landsberg of the Los Angeles Times, with
assistance from Steve Hymon, Scott Wilson and Sandra Poindexter, spent months
investigating the state of Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center, a public hospital
in L.A.'s Willowbrook neighborhood. "The investigation reveals that King/Drew is much
more dangerous than the public has been told." December, 2004

- Shawn McIntosh, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution credits extra-extra at www.ire.org, the
source of most of these ideas.

