Tips for covering government contracts
Mark Fazlollah
Atlanta
Reporter, Philadelphia Inquirer
215-854-5831
Dollars”
mfazlollah@phillynews.com
http://www.philly.com

IRE National Conference,
June 18, 2004
“Tracking City Hall

Inquirer stories on City Hall corruption are listed at:
http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/news/special_packages/fbiprobe/
The 2003-2004 Philadelphia investigation of municipal malfeasance focuses on the
city’s pension fund, the minority business set-aside program, airport concessions, bond
deals and other areas of no-bid contracts . The investigation provides a roadmap for a
basic review of government contracts.

How it started: On Oct. 7, a special Philadelphia police unit checked the mayor’s office
in what as described as a routine security sweep. But the sweep became a huge news
story after the police found an FBI listening device.
The city was then in the midst of a heated mayoral race, and Democrats charged that the
bug was part a John Ashcroft plot to steal the election for the Republicans. Embarrassed
by the bug discover and the Democratic allegations, the Justice Department slapped a lid
on information.
Still, it quickly became clear that the investigation involved Philadelphia’s contracts-forcontributions political culture, commonly know as “pay to play.”
Where reporter found sources on key contracting areas:
1) Campaign finance disclosure reports provide a list of big donors, almost all of who are
active in government contracting. Long before the bug was discovered, the Inquirer’s
CAR team has built an easy-to-use web site for tracking all contributions reported in
Pennsylvania since 2000. Having that tool available was essential for reporting on the
bug investigation and added depth to dozens articles about government contractors.
2) Municipal bond deals can be followed using data provided by Thomson Financial,
which publishes Bond Buyer and numerous other publications. Thomson will help
without charge, providing detailed spreadsheets going back for 10 years or more, but it
must be credited in stories for its material.
Thomson’s press-friendly survey manager is Lisett Solana-Rodriguez, 395 Hudson
Street, 6th Fl, New York, NY 10014, 212-806-3150, fax 212-807-5933, or

lisett.rodriguez@thomson.com
The Thomson data, for example, showed the rapid grown of the Pennsylvania Republican
Party treasurer’s private bond firm. Thomson information also can be paired with
campaign contributions to get a quick view of whether the law firms contributing the
most money are also the ones getting the most bond work.

The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, (703) 797-6600, also can provide
information. The MSRP was established by Congress to develop rules regulating

municipal securities firms. It keeps records of consultants paid by securities firms, with
records kept on a user-unfriendly search site:
http://ww1.msrb.org/msrb1/pcocweb/search/search.asp
It doesn’t allow to you to do name searches for individual consultants,
but instead requires page-by-page scanning of PDF files from each
securities firm for each filing period. (MSRB is supposed to be
reforming the securities industry, but little is public. Even the
minutes of its board meetings are sealed.)
Still, the MSRB produced an important document in the Philadelphia
investigation showing that Chicago’s Loop Capital Markets, a bond
company that has earned more than $500,000 on bond deals since 2000.
MARB records show that Loop paid $30,000 to the young girlfriend of the
city’s top lobbyist, attorney Ronald A. White, although she had no
experience in municipal finance.
The National Association of Securities Dealers has an important web site that allows
searches on the backgrounds of individual securities brokers or securities firms.
http://www.nasdr.com/2000.asp
Using this site, we found that J.P. Morgan Chase dumped Charles LeCroy,
the boss of a broker whose name was listed on a subpoena shortly after
the bug was discovered. LeCroy’s underling, Anthony Snell, had been
fired on the same day.
We were able to get NASD’s U-4 filing on LeCroy. It stated that LeCroy
was removed because he submitted billings for payments to a law firm
although the firm did no work.
We were later found that the firm was the one owned by lobbyist Ron
White.

3) Pension funds can provide a list of these managers, often reported in the funds’ annual
reports. By matching those managers to campaign contributions, reporters often can
identify some of the politically wired ones.
In one article, we showed that several pension fund managers who had lost millions in
investments for the Philadelphia fund had been introduced to fund by an influential
lobbyist.
The SEC provides details on many of the investment firms. For one easy-to-use SEC
background check for investment firms, go to:
http://www.adviserinfo.sec.gov/IAPD/Content/Search/iapd_OrgSearchInit.asp
State agencies also track investment firm, and sometimes provide more detailed
information than the SEC.
Using the SEC search, for example, we found that an up-and-coming New York
investment firm had taken on Philadelphia’s leading lobbyist – attorney Ronald A. White
– as a partner.
Lobbyist White had no background in investment management before he became a
partner in the New York firm. One of the founding partners in the New York firm ran
another company that managed money for Philadelphia’s pension fund.
4) Airport concession contracts. These have been a source of pin-stripe patronage for
decades in many cities. All companies with contracts can be run through LexisNexis. This
is an essential service for tracking companies. For best results, check separately the names and

addresses of companies. If numerous companies are run out of the office of a lobbyist, for
example, that may be interesting. State liquor-control agencies also can provide important
information on bars operated at airports, sporting arenas and other government-financed
facilities.
In one story, we reported that the wife of lobbyist Ronald White had been included as a partner in
several lucrative airport bars.
5) Minority business contracts. Cities and states keep detailed records of minority businesses that
are eligible to qualify for special benefits in government contracting. These files can provide
important background information on people involved in companies getting special benefits.
Similarly, Dun & Bradstreet can provide background on the businesses.
In one story, we reported that a minority-owned company with no trucks and virtually no assets
was given $37,000 on sub-contracts to sludge from the city’s waste plant to upstate
Pennsylvania. In other stories, we reported that the wife and other relatives of lobbyist Ronald
White were included as a partner in several airport concession stands.
And interviews with businessmen involved in government contracts can provide important insight
on how the minority sent-aside programs are functioning.
In one story, the president of a nationally know insurance firm said he was directed to hire
politically wired minority businesses as his subcontractors. He said the subcontractors did no
work, though he was required to pay them a 10% cut on several contracts.
6) Bank loans to government officials. In Philadelphia, for example, Commerce Bank rapidly
entered the municipal bond business. At the same time Commerce was entering the market, it
was aggressively handing out loans to city officials and to their friends’ businesses. Many of these
loans were listed in bank’s UCC filings, which can be tracked by LexisNexis. In reviewing about
6,000 UCC filings, listed by NexisLexis, reporters were able to recognize many familiar names.
We reported that the mayor, deputy mayor and several other top officials received Commerce
Bank loans, as did the businesses of Ronald White and his daughter. At the time some of those
loans were given, White was Commerce Bank’s advisory board.
Watch what the feds have done around the country.
With the December 2003 indictment Illinois Gov. George H. Ryan Sr. and others, including a
leading lobbyist, the government set a precedent for prosecuting corruption cases. Prosecutors
alleged that the lobbyist became so influential that he could force people to pay him
in order to get contracts from Ryan. They said the lobbyist essentially crossed the
line from private figure to public player, and became subject to extortion statutes
covering government officials.
And in May, in a case involving a supposed bribe scheme in Minneapolis, the U.S.
Supreme Court upheld a powerful law that makes just about any bribe over $5,000
paid to a public official a federal crime.
In the words of one law professor, the government now has “a hunting license.”

Philadelphia Inquirer stories on City Hall corruption investigation are listed at:
http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/news/special_packages/fbiprobe/

