INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS & EDITORS
Panel Discussion on Contract Fraud
Friday, June 18, 2004
As Prepared for Delivery
David Barnes
202-366-6312
david.barnes@oig.dot.gov
Good Morning! Welcome to Atlanta. My name is David Barnes and I am the
communications director for the Office of Inspector General at the U.S. Department of
Transportation. I am also an associate member of IRE. This is the seventh IRE national or
regional conference I have attended since 1988. IRE has changed a great deal over the
years, and I want to take just a second to plug the website. One of my duties is to track
coverage of transportation issues around the country, and the IRE website is a wonderful
resource. I urge you to send your stories for inclusion in the “Extra Extra section” and get
them in the IRE database.
Before I begin, let me give you my phone number and my email address.
Today I want to talk with you about three major areas. First, I want to explain a little bit
about the DOT OIG - what we do and how we work with the media. Second, I want to
share with you some illustrations of how you can use our audits of highway and transit
projects and programs as a tool in your work. Finally, I’d like to give you some food for
thought on investigating transportation contracting issues.
The Role of Inspectors General
IG’s were created by the Inspector General Act of 1978 to consolidate federal audit and
criminal investigation functions. Cabinet-Level IG’s are appointed by the President and are
subject to confirmation by the Senate.
IG’s serve at the pleasure of the President. Unlike Cabinet secretaries and other
presidentially-appointed officials, if the President wants to fire an IG, he must send a
letter of explanation to the Congress.
The role of the IGs is unique in the government. They have dual reporting
responsibilities to the agency head and to the Congress. In practice, the role of the IGs
varies somewhat among the agencies, but their statutory authorities and responsibilities
are extensive. They range from detecting and preventing fraud, waste and abuse, to
evaluating program operations and management systems.
To be effective, an IG must be able to work with the agency head. An IG can serve as a
“early warning system” to alert agency heads of programs vulnerable to waste, fraud or
abuse. An IG can also help an agency head by flagging “hot button” items before hearing
about them from congressional sources or the media.

Ken Mead, the IG I work for, believes that IG’s can provide the Department they oversee
with “constructive” criticism while being independent. That is why we strive to balance a
generally negative audit with some positive actions the Department or its agencies are
taking.
However, and I must emphasize this, it is our role to point out problems and suggest
corrective action. We do not have the ability to force agencies to take action. Like the
NTSB, we can make recommendations, but it is up to the Secretary and the agency heads
– sometimes with the prodding of Congress, to take action.
IG’s also report to the Congress. Members of Congress can, and frequently request that
IG’s audit a particular program. We try to be responsive to congressional requests.
To ensure that our reports are not simply placed on a shelf by the Department, we
distribute them to the Congress and to the media. We post all significant reports and
results of investigative activities on our web site and are experimenting with e-mail
delivery and list-serves. I encourage you to visit our web site regularly. It is located at
www.oig.dot.gov.
Media Relations
Before I explain how DOT OIG operates, let me explain our media policy. Our first
responsibility is to the Congress and the Department. As a courtesy, we give the Congress
and the Department 48 hours to review a report before publicly releasing it.
We do not aggressively seek media attention, nor do we shun it. Here’s a few things you
should know:
1. We have a no leak policy.
2. We don’t engage in spin. My role is to help the media and the public understand
our often complex reports. That means I will help you find the relevant sections
of the report that will answer your questions.
3. The IG doesn’t do many “on the record” interviews. He prefers to let the reports
speak for themselves.
DOT OIG
DOT OIG has a staff of 425 people and an annual budget of $59 million with which to
oversee a Department of nearly 60,000 people and an annual budget of about $58 billion.
DOT OIG is broken down into divisions handling audits and investigations.
We have a staff of about 250 auditors and analysts who review DOT programs and make
recommendations to enhance their effectiveness and improve their efficiency. Some
audits focus on financial issues; others provide oversight of safety programs, contract
management, computer security and program performance. OIG audits must follow

government audit standards established by the General Accounting Office. The “Yellow
Book” can be found on GAO’s website: www.gao.gov.
We also have approximately 130 investigators who have federal law enforcement
authority to obtain search warrants and make arrests Our investigations can result in
criminal or civil actions filed in federal court or administrative actions taken by DOT
agencies. Our investigative priorities include: aviation safety, contract and grant fraud,
motor carrier safety and enforcement of Federal hazardous materials transportation laws.
SECTION II: OIG STEWRSHIP AUDITS
While OIG has oversight responsibility for the entire Department of Transportation, I’m
going to focus my remarks on our work in the area of transportation contracting,
especially for highway and transit projects.
OIG Audits and Testimonies
Since 1999, OIG has conducted audits of 20 major highway and transit projects ranging
from the Central Artery Project in Boston to the Tren Urbano rail system in Puerto Rico
to Interstate 15 in Utah and the Springfield Interchange in Virginia.
We have also testified before Congress five times over the past two years regarding the
TEA-21 reauthorization process on the need for better oversight of the federal highway
and transit programs. You can read our recommendations to Congress on our website:
http:www.oig.dot.gov.
Whether funds are lost to cost overruns, schedule delays, or fraud, the result is the same:
Fewer resources available for important transportation projects. Who here covers
municipal or city government? How much money do they spend on road projects? What
percentage of the total annual budget is devoted to maintenance and construction?
In May 2003, we testified before Congress on cost drivers on major highway and transit
projects. We listed several areas where FHWA need to take action. I’ve tried to localize
them for you.
1. Cost estimates. These are important because decision-makers and the public rely
on them to make to make decisions. Sometimes the engineers and designers get
the costs right – like the I-15 project in Utah. Sometimes they don’t. On the
Springfield Interchange project in Virginia, we found that cost increases occurred
because state officials excluded known or easily identifiable costs, including
basic items such as construction management, inflation, preliminary engineering
and even design. The baseline estimate was prepared far too early, using plans
that were less than 20 percent complete. So, when a cost estimate is given for a
project, ask how far along the designs are.
2. Did designers take a hard look at engineering alternatives? In 2002, Maryland
officials overseeing the Woodrow Wilson Bridge project rejected a proposal to
change from one type of girder to another. We found that the rejected proposal

was technically feasible and would not result in a cost increase, FHWA told
Maryland to reconsider. They did, and ended up saving $66 million.
3. Managing schedules to avoid costly delays. Ask if there is a master schedule that
ties together the work of all the contractors and identifies and tracks the costs of
labor, material and equipment resources required to complete each task.
(Springfield lacked a master schedule, which meant they didn’t anticipate
problems that put the project at risk of running late)
4. Recovering overpayments and resolving construction claims to control project
costs. Change orders are initiated by the project or contractors in response to
changes in the project’s scope or differing site conditions. However, some change
orders are the result of design errors or omissions caused by consultant engineers.
Change orders, even if they can be paid out of the contingency fund, can be
costly. As of last summer, the Big Dig had $53 million in change orders, yet they
had only recovered $30,000 (stet). That represents less than 1/10th of 1 percent of
the amount in question.
5. Using finance plans to identify cost, schedule, and funding. These are required
by FHWA on projects over $1 billion. At our urging, it looks like Congress might
require finance plans for projects costing $100 million or more . Ask to see the
finance plan. If the project doesn’t have one, ask them to walk you through how
they determined the cost, schedule, funding and risks.
6. State transportation plans. State DOT’s are supposed to issue regularly updated
finance plans explaining how they plan to spend federal and state money on
transportation projects. Not to pick on Virginia, but in our Mixing Bowl audit, we
found that their state transportation plans for six years listed a lot of projects
without explaining how they were going to be paid for. As a result of the cost
overruns, many of the projects were delayed or cancelled.
Some other things to watch:
•

Are contractors being provided bonuses if they complete work early or being
penalized for finishing late? The Dallas Morning News ran a story recently on
state highway projects. The paper found that many projects run late, but
contractors only rarely get fined.

•

Do the same contractors always seem to offer the lowest bid, then run up large
cost overruns?

•

You may want to read our November 2002 report on the Springfield Interchange
and our July 2003 report on Seattle’s Sound Transit light rail system. Both offer
insights of things to keep an eye on. For example, we cited the cost of utility
relocations as a possible cost-driver on the Seattle project.

PART III: CONTRACT & GRANT FRAUD
As I mentioned earlier, contract and grant fraud is one of our top investigative priorities.
Before I get into details, let me take a minute to explain our role in investigating fraud
and what I can and can’t say.
1. Most importantly, there has to be a hook for us to hang our hat on, such as
federal funding or violation of federal transportation laws and regulations. For
example, we wouldn’t investigate contract fraud on Seattle’s proposed monorail
because no federal funds are being used. If the monorail is built and safety issues
emerge, we could be asked to investigate.
2. We do review complaints from citizens. These usually go to our Hotline
Complaint Center. Often, those people also call the local media to tell them we
are investigating. Much like a newsroom receptionist, our Hotline operators
screen complaints to see if there is a federal issue – such as whether federal funds
are involved or if there is a safety issue. Sometimes it is purely a local issue that
U.S. DOT has no jurisdiction over. Often, we determine that the complaint would
be best handled by the DOT with direct jurisdiction. In other cases, we launch a
formal investigation.
3. It is also important to remember that we have several approaches we can take if
we find a violation of Departmental regulations or federal law. We can refer a
case to a federal prosecutor for criminal or civil prosecution. We can also
recommend administrative action by the appropriate federal agency.
Media Policy on Investigations
Like other federal agencies with law enforcement authority, we are bound by federal
regulations limiting what we can say. Details can be found in the U.S. Attorney’s
Handbook located on the Justice Department’s web site. In brief:
•

As a matter of policy, we cannot confirm or deny investigations.

•

We can tell you that we have executed a search or arrest warrant, but cannot
comment beyond it. With regards to search warrants, you can ask if the affidavit
accompanying the application for the warrant has been sealed. Check with the
U.S. Attorney’s office or the clerk of the appropriate federal court.

•

We can’t comment on grand jury proceedings.

•

Once we have referred a case to a U.S. Attorney for prosecution, we are required
to refer all requests for comment to them.

Those are the rules we have to follow. Now, back to some things I CAN talk about.
Here are the top 10 fraud offenses. Most are self-explanatory. Others I will explain.

1. Bribery/kickbacks.
2. Gratuities. This includes getting free tickets to sporting events.
3. Conflict of interest, such as when a city engineer awards a contract to his brother

in law.
4. False Statements. Lying on a government form.
5. Mail and Wire Fraud
6. False claims. These are things like charging for 100 loads of concrete but
delivering 85 loads.
7. Antitrust violations. This can include price fixing, collusion or bid rigging.
8. Conspiracy. We investigated a case where California specialty engineering
contractors conspired to rig bids and share the market of bridge design and
construction projects.
9. Product substitution and cost miss-charging. The specifications call for grade a
asphalt and grade asphalt is supplied
10. Defective pricing
DBE Fraud
The last area I’d like to talk about is fraud involving DOT’s Disadvantaged Business
Enterprise Program. This includes minority and women-owned businesses.
We are seeing an increase in fraud within the DBE programs overseen by the
Department. Why is this happening? We have concluded, based on several recent
investigations, that there is a lack of consistency in enforcing the regulations. We believe
the problem is so serious that we placed it on our annual list of top management
challenges facing the Department.
The DBE program is designed to foster equal opportunity in transportation contracting
for small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged
businesses. State and local transportation agencies accepting federal funds have to set
goals for DBE participants and certify the eligibility of DBE firms to participate in their
DOT-assisted highway, transit and airport construction and improvement projects.
DOT, through FAA, also oversees the airport concessions portion of the DBE program.
This includes businesses such as retail shops, restaurants, car rental agencies and firms
supplying goods or services to them.
While there are income limits for participants in other DOT DBE programs, there is no
personal net worth limit for participants in the airport concession program. This has led to
numerous complaints by the unsuccessful bidder and news articles in the past few years.
Is Jeff Meitrodt of the New Orleans Times-Picayune in the room? Jeff was the lead
reporter on a 2001 series that examined the DBE program in New Orleans. One of the
highlights of the series was the disclosure that the wife of Johnny Cochran had a DBE
concession at the airport. It was true, and it was legal and it is going on elsewhere. .”
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1206

In 2001, we investigated complaints regarding the awarding of a concession to operate
duty-free shops at Washington Dulles International Airport. In that case, the company
which lost the contract alleged that the winner was violating DBE regulations because its
minority partner was wealthy. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1162
It was that case, and our investigation that we conducted in New Orleans as a result of the
Times-Picayune series that led us to include the DBE program in our Top Management
Challenges report. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1217
We have recommended that the Department and FAA set income limits for those
companies participating in the airport concession DBE program. I understand the
Department expects to announce its new airport concession rule soon.
Our reports on the New Orleans and the Dulles airport cases are on our website in the
correspondence section. I also strongly encourage you to read the Times-Picayune series,
which is available on the newspaper’s website.
Here are some indicators of DBE fraud that are relatively easy to verify:
1. The prime contractor having a significant ownership interest in the DBE firm;
2. contractors for work for which the DBE has no previous history, licenses or
equipment;
3. the prime contractor always using the same DBE;
4. DBE contractors who have no business offices and little equipment; and
5. DBE businesses owned by the relatives of prime contractor (wife, daughter,
sister)
Here are some definitions commonly used to describe DBE fraud:
•
•

•

Front company: falsely represent ownership and control of a DBE firm. The DBE
is often paid a small amount of money to allow this scheme to be used.
Conduit company: DBE does not complete any of the contracted work. The
company sells his status to another company who completes the work. They
usually allow the use of the DBE name on invoices, trucks and equipment.
False eligibility: The DBE does not belong to one of the recognized socially or
economically disadvantaged groups. It provides false information concerning its
size or financial status. It has hidden assets or makes false statements concerning
the origination of capital.

•

Women-owned business enterprise: This usually involved the wife, daughter,
sister or other relative of a contractor who allegedly runs the company, but
actually does not.

Let me wrap up my talk with some suggested reading:
I encourage you to look at these websites:
www.aashto.org – The American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials has a weekly newsletter that tracks federal highway and transit policy. It’s well
worth the read.
www.agc.org – Associated General Contractors. They have a twice weekly email of news
articles from mainstream and trade press that is free. It’s definitely not spam.
www.enr.org – Engineering News Record. The bible of the construction industry.
The Seattle Times and the Seattle Post-Intelligencer. In addition to being must-reads for
anyone who covers the aerospace industry, the two papers have outstanding coverage of
local transportation issues. Their archives are free and I would strongly urge you to read
their ongoing coverage of the proposed monorail and light rail systems.
http://seattlepi.nwsource.com/
http://www.seattletimes.com
The New Orleans Times-Picayune series on the DBE program.
http://www.nola.com/unequalopportunity.
The Boston Globe’s series on cost-overruns at the Big Dig.
http://www.boston.com/news/specials/bechtel/
I can’t end without a brief commercial for OIG’s website. My talk today was based on
testimony and reports that are available on OIG’s website. I want to draw your attention
to two that I haven’t discussed:
On April 5, we released a report on inactive obligations at the Federal Highway
Administration. This is money that FHWA has given to states but has not been used. We
identified $284 million in money set aside for projects that were either cancelled, reduced
in scope or were completed. This is money that can be legally used for other
transportation projects. We identified inactive obligations in the following states:
California; Washington, DC, Georgia, Hawaii, Maryland, New Jersey, New York,
Pennsylvania, Texas and Virginia.
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1282.

If your community is considering seeking federal funds for a transit project, I encourage
you to read our April 28 regarding the process by which the Federal Transit
Administration selects light rail systems for federal funding. This testimony provides

some insights on the selection process and food for thought in evaluating your local
transit projects.
I am happy to talk with you individually. I am here until Saturday morning, so look me
up.

Other Recent OIG Audits
Central Artery/Tunnel Project’s Owner-Controlled Insurance Program
September 30, 2003
We performed a follow-up review of FHWA’s implementation of our recommendations
from a July 2002 audit report regarding the recovery of excess reserves from the OwnerControlled Insurance Program (OCIP) of the Central Artery/Tunnel Project in Boston. In
response to our recommendation to cease Federal participation in OCIP, the project
transferred $273 million from the Federal share of the OCIP budget to the Federal share
of the project’s construction budget. The transfer was completed by May 2003. We
determined that the amount transferred was appropriate and that FHWA issued final
OCIP guidance as recommended.
In May 1999, we reported that the Central Artery/Tunnel Project had used Federal funds
to overfund its OCIP. FHWA agreed to recover the excess reserves and implement a
policy to prevent future occurrences.
In July 2002, we reported the project used $153 million ($138 million Federal share) of
excess reserves to offset current premiums and also withdrew $50 million from the OCIP
Trust and returned the funds to Massachusetts’s Federal-aid account. However, we also
found that an additional $133 million in excess Federal funds remained in the OCIP, and
the project needed to complete an ongoing independent audit of the OCIP trust accounts.
We recommended that FHWA cease Federal participation in the OCIP and issue final
OCIP guidelines.
Seattle Central Link Light Rail Project's Initial Segment
July 7, 2003
We found that: 1) Sound Transit has significantly strengthened its proposal for
constructing the project’s first segment; 2) FTA has provided strong oversight of Sound
Transit’s plans; project cost, schedule, and funding appear to be reasonable; 3) Sound
Transit has adequately addressed the safety issues related to operating buses and trains in
the tunnel; and, 4) FTA’s requirements for a stand alone system have been met. We
recommended that alternative local revenues be committed to the project in case of a
funding deficit or shortfall and amendment of the finance plan accordingly. FTA agreed
with our recommendations. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1117
Oversight of the Cost Recovery Program of the Central Artery/Tunnel Project
May 21, 2003
We reviewed efforts by FHWA and the Central Artery/Tunnel Project, Boston to recover
costs paid by the project for change orders. The change orders might have been caused by
design errors or omissions by design and consulting contractors.

We reported that: (1) past efforts have not resulted in substantial recoveries—8 years of
work yielded only $30,000 in recoveries from a single consultant. In addition, efforts
have not been timely—76 items have been under review from 2 to 7 years. Adequate
controls are important to ensure that costs are recovered when appropriate and assure
taxpayers that the process is credible. The parties involved, including the Governor’s
office, need to agree on a proper governance framework and an appropriate review
methodology. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1102
Springfield Interchange Project
November 22, 2002
We found that project cost estimates have increased by $435.5 million—an increase of
180 percent since June 1994; construction problems have increased costs and could delay
project completion; and funding to pay for cost increases has come at the expense of
other state highway projects. We made six recommendations to improve planning, cost
estimating, project management, and oversight. FHWA agreed to implement all six
recommendations. The Virginia Department of Transportation also agreed with the
recommendations and committed to work with FHWA to implement them.
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=926

Congressional Testimony
The Rating and Evaluation of Transit New Starts Systems
April 28, 2004
The IG testified regarding FTA’s “New Starts” criteria before the House TransportationTreasury Appropriations Subcommittee. He testified that 38 projects are collectively
seeking $24.3 billion in federal funding, but the funds available for New Starts projects
over the next six years can support only a fraction of these. The IG’s testimony focused
on these key areas:
•
•
•

FTA can guide local authorities in analyzing alternatives to a light-rail system but
does not approve selection of the locally preferred alternative.
The New Starts evaluation process includes a variety of benefits for local
agencies to consider in developing a preferred alternative.
FTA has improved its ability to identify problems in forecasting local ridership—
the single most critical element supporting project justification—but project
justification will continue to be problematic without more reliable, up-to-date
ridership analyses. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1301

Controlling Costs and Improving the Effectiveness of FHWA and FTA and Federal
Transit Administration Programs
July 22, 2003
In testimony before the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, the IG
focused on four areas where audits and investigations highlighted opportunities to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of transportation investments, achieve cost
savings, and increase revenues to the Highway Trust Fund. The areas are:
(1) putting idle funds to use on important projects;

(2) getting more for the transportation dollar by strengthening project management
and financial oversight, such as preparing reliable project cost estimates;
(3) combating fuel-tax evasion to secure tax revenue to the Highway Trust Fund; and
(4) detecting and preventing fraud by strengthening debarment authority, enhancing
state oversight, and sharing Federal recoveries with the states.
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1132
Opportunities to Control Costs and Improve the Effectiveness of Department of
Transportation Programs
July 9, 2003
The IG testified before the House Budget Committee regarding fraud, waste, and abuse in
the Department’s mandatory spending programs. His testimony focused on opportunities
to use funds more efficiently and effectively, avoid unnecessary costs increases, and
reduce costs in Federal Highway Administration and Federal Transit Administration
grants to states and localities. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1129
Management of Cost Drivers on Federal-Aid Highway Projects
May 8, 2003
The IG testified before the House Transportation-Treasury Appropriations Subcommittee
regarding cost drivers on Federal-aid highway projects and FHWA’s oversight of Federal
highway funds. To obtain better value for the Federal investment additional action is
needed in eight areas:
(1) preparing reliable cost estimates;
(2) implementing more cost-effective engineering alternatives;
(3) managing project schedules to minimize costly delays;
(4) recovering overpayments from contractors and promptly resolving construction
claims to control costs;
(5) preparing finance plans to identify project cost, schedule, funding, and risks;
(6) ensuring that statewide plans properly represent how funds will be spent;
(7) strengthening efforts to prevent and detect fraud; and
(8) refocusing FHWA efforts on project management and financial oversight.
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1089
Improving the Delivery of Transportation Projects
September 19, 2002
The IG testified on transportation project delivery under TEA−21 at a hearing before the
Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works. He advised that specific steps can
be taken during reauthorization to improve management and oversight and facilitate the
delivery of projects to taxpayers approximately on budget, on schedule, and free from
fraud. The steps include: (1) refocusing FHWA's oversight to ensure that state programs
operate effectively and projects of national significance are well managed; (2) promoting
the use of proven project management tools; and (3) improving efforts to prevent fraud,
waste, and abuse. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1089

Ongoing Audits
Strategic Workforce Issues in FHWA
April 27, 2004
We are assessing FHWA’s workforce needs and progress toward obtaining a
multidisciplinary workforce capable of performing program and project oversight. As
part of the assessment, we will administer a questionnaire to employees of FHWA
division offices to obtain their views on their current work activities, how their future
workload is expected to change, and the workforce disciplines and tools they need to
perform program and project oversight. Congress directed FHWA to evaluate its staff
disciplines and skills and develop a more multidisciplinary workforce to perform
oversight activities. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1304
FHWA’s Cost-Recovery Actions
March 4, 2004
On October 14, 2003, we announced an audit of FHWA’s actions to recover costs
resulting from design errors and/or omissions on major projects. The objectives were to
evaluate FHWA’s oversight of states’ processes and procedures for controlling,
identifying, and tracking errors and/or omissions on major projects; and the progress
made by FHWA and the states in recovering costs resulting from design errors and/or
omissions. The scope of the audit was limited to major highway projects with an
estimated total cost of $1 billion or more, or projects approaching $1 billion, with a high
level of interest for the public, Congress, or the Administration.
Based on the results of our audit survey, we expanded the audit scope to all Federal-aid
highway projects, not just major projects, to increase opportunities for identifying cost
recoveries. As stated in the October 14, 2003 announcement memorandum, the audit will
not include an assessment of the cost recovery efforts on the Central Artery/Tunnel
Project, which will be addressed in the current audit of the 2003 Central Artery/Tunnel
Finance Plan. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1273
Monitoring Effort of Major Highway and Transit Projects
August 15, 2003
This ongoing monitoring effort will identify the status of selected, major highway and
transit projects in their final design and construction stages, and the risks that may
adversely affect these projects. We will also identify best practices being used by
grantees to manage project cost and schedules. The projects we will be conducting a
baseline assessment of are: New Haven Harbor Crossing, New Haven, CT; Katy
Freeway, Katy, TX; Chicago/Douglas Branch Reconstruction, Chicago IL; SE Corridor
Multimodal T-REX, Denver, CO; New Ohio Bridges, Louisville, KY; Springfield
Interchange, Springfield, VA; Woodrow Wilson, Alexandria, VA (& MD); Eastside
Corridor Light Rail, Los Angeles, CA; and, Marquette Interchange, Milwaukee, WI.
While there will be no formal report issued, we may initiate audits of individual projects
as a result of our work. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1153
FHWA’s Program Oversight of State Transportation Department Management
Practices

September 26, 2002
We initiated an audit in which we will evaluate the effectiveness of FHWA’s oversight of
the management practices of state transportation departments, as well as evaluate
FHWA’s risk assessment and review processes.
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=879
FHWA's 2003 Finance Plan for the Central Artery/Tunnel Project
October 6, 2003
We initiated a review of the 2003 Massachusetts Turnpike Authority’s finance plan for
the Central Artery/Tunnel Project in Boston. We will determine whether (1) the estimated
cost of the project is reasonable; (2) funding is sufficient to meet the project cost; (3) the
project schedule is reasonable and concerns raised in our previous report have been
addressed; and (4) cash flows and other project information are accurately presented. In
addition, we will evaluate FHWA and the Turnpike Authority’s progress in recovering
costs for design errors and omissions. At the request of Congress, we conduct an annual
review of the finance plan for the Central Artery/Tunnel Project. This audit will be
released in June 2004. http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=1187
Tren Urbano Rail Transit Project
October 4, 2002
This follow-up audit of the Tren Urbano Rail Transit Project in San Juan, Puerto Rico
will assess the: (1) reliability of the project’s current cost and schedule estimate; (2)
reasonableness of the Puerto Rico Highway and Transportation Authority’s (HTA)
financial plan for completing the project; (3) HTA’s efforts to resolve outstanding
construction quality problems; and (4) plans and procedures for beginning revenue
operations. HTA manages the Tren Urbano Rail Transit Project.
http://www.oig.dot.gov/item_details.php?item=890

