Teaching CAR from college to the newsroom:
Tips for the classroom
David Herzog, NICAR and Missouri School of Journalism
2006 Annual CAR Conference/Newark, N.J.

1. Find your students.
Assess you students’ skills and reporting experience. You can do this informally
in class and in one-on-one meetings with your students. After you have this
information, you can teach to their level.

2. Encourage mistakes.
(In the classroom anyway.) Think about how you learned to do computer-assisted
reporting. Most of us learned by trial and error. That’s how students learn too, by
lots of practice and working through roadblocks.

3. Keep it real, relevant.
Show current broadcast, print and online CAR stories. Extra! Extra! on IRE’s
Web site is a good place to hunt for examples. In class, use data from your own
city or university to which students can relate.

4. Go hands-on.
The best way to learn CAR is by doing it. Spend lots of time in class leading your
students through data analysis and give them time to explore on their own.

5. Promote the buddy system.
Sometimes it’s impractical to monitor everyone’s progress in class, so encourage
your students to “buddy up” and keep each other on track. This will not only help
to keep your lesson plan moving along, it will also encourage students to learn by
coaching each other.

6. Practice patience.
When in doubt, slow down. If you think you are going too fast, you probably are.
If you’re not sure, ask your students. Some database concepts, such as GROUP
BY, need more time and reinforcement, so take it. That time invested up front will
pay off later. Tell your students and remind yourself that everyone gets GROUP
BY in his or her own time.
David Herzog
NICAR & Missouri School of Journalism

dherzog@nicar.org
(573) 882-2127

7. Overlap.
This is particularly true with teaching database managers and SQL. Most students
are comfortable with spreadsheets, having used them for high school classes. But
database concepts are more difficult to grasp and cry out for reinforcement.

8. Meet questions with questions.
It’s easy to hop in and answer a student’s questions directly, and sometimes it’s
even appropriate. However, it’s often better to respond with questions or
guidelines that help the student think through the answer him- or herself. Another
strategy is to ask the class to discuss the questions.

9. Put it all together.
Students can get lost in the details of class, so it’s helpful to take some time to
look at how working journalists put together stories that used computer-assisted
reporting. Take one story and dissect it from start to finish yourself.

10. Go team projects.
Use team final projects instead of individual ones. When students work in teams
they assist each other and solve problems together, instead of always turning to
you, the instructor, for help. Besides, journalists need to learn how to collaborate
in the real world.

11. Promote freedom of choice.
Many of us remember preferring to work on the stories that we developed, rather
than what our editors assigned us to cover. That works the same way with
students. They get way more excited about their own project ideas, so encourage
them to choose.

12. Use guest speakers.
Working journalists who do CAR are great because they can show students how
the concepts you cover in class play out in the real world. Also, get someone from
city hall or the data shop in the police department to come in and talk about how
they deal with public records requests.

13. Use the IRE Web site.
Educators and students will find valuable resources for teaching and course work.
The Educators section has links to syllabi, training materials and data. Students
and educators who are IRE members can benefit from reading the tipsheets and
story reprints in the Resource Center.

David Herzog
NICAR & Missouri School of Journalism

dherzog@nicar.org
(573) 882-2127

