How Safe Is Your Food?
How to report on food safety and restaurant inspections
Tim Darragh, Investigations Editor
Chris Schnaars, Computer-Assisted Reporting Editor
The Morning Call
Allentown, Pa.
timothy.darragh@mcall.com, 610-778-2259
christopher.schanaars@mcall.com, 610-820-6770
http://www.mcall.com/food
2006 NICAR Conference, Newark, NJ
As Americans eat out more and more often, a serious public policy question arises: Is
food safety keeping up with America? Foodborne bugs cause an estimated 76 million
illnesses a year. Sometimes those illnesses require organ transplants or are fatal. Most
times those illnesses could be prevented if proper food-handling procedures were
followed.
Reporters interested in investigating this perennial story have two main angles to pursue:
1. Are places that serve food –restaurants, supermarkets, school cafeterias, street
vendors, church kitchens, daycare centers and the like –clean, and do they handle
food properly?
2. Are the public health agencies responsible for inspecting those food
establishments doing an adequate job?
As people eat out more, the likelihood of acquiring a foodborne illness probably
increases, since more reported outbreaks occur from restaurant and store-bought food
than home-cooked food. In addition, cash-strapped governments frequently put public
health low on their priority lists. Both factors set the stage for a public health crisis
anywhere.
Here are a few tips to help you cover food safety in your state or locality:
1. Know your state and local food safety laws and which agencies are responsible
for food safety. In Pennsylvania, the state Department of Agriculture, a local health
bureau or sometimes both are responsible for inspecting each food establishment. For
some types of food establishments (such as slaughterhouses, meat- and other foodprocessing plants and farms), one or more federal agencies may be involved.
Particularly problematic in Pennsylvania is the fact that local inspectors are not
accountable to any state agency, making one-stop shopping for data impossible. In
addition to who has oversight, you should know what the law allows and/or what the

agency's guidelines call for. The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture guidelines
call for at least one inspection per year, which is an outdated standard, but those
inspectors sometimes inspect a facility only once every four to five years.
2. Do the inspectors know what they're doing? The inspector might not have had any
training and might not have any background in food safety. We found codeenforcement officers who would routinely cite a facility for a burned-out Exit sign but
never thought to make sure the food on the steam table was hot enough to prevent the
growth of bacteria. We also found an inspector who was once a a secretary for the
health board and was asked to take over when the former inspector left. Her training
consisted of tagging along one afternoon with a state inspector. And she never kept
her records. She trashed them at the end of the year. Finally, we found lots of
agencies that were good at filing paperwork but did nothing to monitor the track
record of a food establishment and its violations.
3. What does it mean? Many agencies use a Food and Drug Administration scoring
s
y
s
t
e
mt
ode
t
e
r
mi
nehow“
c
l
e
a
n”or“
s
a
f
e
”af
oode
s
t
a
bl
i
s
hme
nti
s
.Butt
henumbe
r
and the technical definition do not provide enough context for you, or your readers
and viewers, to make sense of the report. A restaurant that gets cited for failing to
keep its tomato soup warm enough by one degree could very possibly have the same
score as one that holds fish or meat at dangerous temperatures. That means you must
get your hands on the narratives that accompany the reports.
4. As always, work your sources. Some state laws and HIPAA (The Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act) will make it difficult, if not impossible, to build a
firm link between a dirty restaurant and a foodborne illness outbreak. Some states,
including Pennsylvania, do not mandate that local authorities report outbreaks to
health officials. And in those relatively few cases that do get reported, state laws may
explicitly prohibit the release of information.
5. Get multiple years of data. A bad inspection should not necessarily doom a
restaurant. Likewise, a good inspection does not mean a place has a good safety
record. Food establishment inspections are snapshots in time, so they are best
reported collectively.
6. Apples to apples. I
fy
oude
c
i
d
et
oc
ompa
r
es
t
a
t
e
s
’ora
g
e
nc
i
e
s
’f
oods
a
f
e
t
ye
f
f
or
t
s
against each other, understand that not all inspectors are equal. Some places have fulltime inspectors. Some perform other inspections in addition to food establishments.
Public health professionals can be good sources, but also maddeningly unwilling to
make value judgments about other agencies or establishments.
7. Sources:
 Major universities in your state may have schools of public health. They are
invaluable.
 Seattle attorney Bill Marler has made a career out of representing people who
have been sickened by food. He also has created a pack of blogs relating to
foodborne illnesses. Go to www.marlerclark.com.

 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a good backgrounder site on
food-related illnesses. Go to http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/food/index.htm.
 The American Public Health Association has links to state offices and other info:
http://www.apha.org.
 Food safety advocacy organizations: The Center for Science in the Public Interest,
http://www.cspinet.org/foodsafety/index.html; Safe Tables Our Priority (STOP),
www.safetables.org; Consumer Federation of America, www.consumerfed.org.
 King County, Washington, has an excellent Web site on its food inspection
program. See http://www.metrokc.gov/health/foodsfty/inspections.htm. The state
of Louisiana shows what a good statewide inspection Web site should look like.
Go to http://www.dhh.state.la.us/ and scroll down to restaurant inspections.
 Related food safety sites include the federal government food safety portal,
www.foodsafety.gov; the Penn State food safety site,
http://foodsafety.cas.psu.edu/default.html; federal agency food recall
announcements, http://www.recalls.gov/food.html; and other industry, academic,
communications and advocacy links available at
http://www.fmi.org/facts_figs/resourcelist.htm.
Building a Food Inspection Database:
For our food-safety package, we built a database of health inspection records from 26
agencies, including the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, and made them
searchable by readers on our Web site. More than 200,000 inspection reports are
available through the site, and we are in the process of adding the rest of 2005 data.
When the site went live, it was the only source we are aware of statewide that had this
information. Since that time, the state has unveiled a site, but it only gives the name and
address of the facility, the date of the inspection and whether it is "in compliance" with
the state food code. We have not been able to figure out what "in compliance" means and
have yet to find an establishment anywhere in the state that is not in compliance.
From the time our series began to run on July 31, 2005, through the end of that year, our
database had 125,000 hits.
Here are some tips to help you if you decide to build a restaurant inspection database:
1. How many tables? If you cover multiple inspection agencies that don't conduct
inspections exactly the same way, consider creating a mini-database for each
agency instead. For us, we have about 200 tables for 26 agencies. This made the
Web site more difficult to build because each agency has its own unique page.
You should address this issue when you are setting up your database rather than
when you are done with your analysis.
2. How long will it last? You should have conversations with your editor early in
the process about the fate of your database after the story is published because by
the time that happens, your data already will be old. Interest will wane over time
(though you can re-plug the database every time you write a follow-up story), but
our experience has been that the site remains viable long after the shelf life of the

story. Unless you are lucky and can get all of your data electronically, adding
more data will be time-consuming and expensive. You should have a plan for if
and how to do this or to stop updating the database after some point in time.
3. Narratives. Of the 26 databases we built, only four were available electronically.
Of those, only one came with the inspectors' handwritten comments. These are
invaluable, and while they can increase the workload by a factor of 10 or more,
you should seriously consider adding them. If you don't, your database will only
be able to cite, for example, that a food establishment had a violation of "Item 35:
Presence of insects/rodents –outer openings protected; no birds, turtles and other
animals." With the narrative, the reader can find out whether the restaurant just
had the back door propped open versus mouse droppings in food-preparation
areas.
4. Public education. Don't forget the public education component. Our Web site has
an FAQ that we worked on for weeks to make sure people could learn about food
safety. We also wrote detailed explanations and provided examples of each type
of violation.

