CAR and the Environment
NICAR National Conference, Newark, NJ March 9-12, 2006
Matthew Waite Staff Writer
St. Petersburg Times
waite@sptimes.com

Five tips for using CAR on the Environment Beat
Data, Data Everywhere – The common tongue of the environment beat is data. No
beat is blessed with more types of data in more quantities, because so much of the
enviroment beat is grounded in science. When you’re talking to sources, always pop in a
question about what kind of data they keep. What kind of reports do they generate? What
do they have to report to other agencies? How do they manage data? These questions will
lead you to some data, and point you toward other information.

But Not a Drop To Drink – One thing that shocked me about the environment beat
was the amount of bad data that’s out there. For instance, the Corps of Engineers
maintains a permit database that lacks information about … permits. Thousands of
records lack basic information. Other agencies had map data that was so flawed that it put
information as much as a mile away from where they should have been. Always ask
questions about the data. Ask how it came in. Ask how or if they do quality control. Look
for auditing agency reports (i.e. GAO or state auditors) about data practices at agencies.
The Corps of Engineers has been criticized repeatedly for poor record keeping.

Don’t Be Afraid to Get the Answer Yourself – Sometimes, government data
won’t answer your question, so you have a choice: Give up, or figure it out yourself. As
journalists, we shouldn’t be afraid to get the answer ourselves. Testing, sampling,
independent data analysis – if you don’t, no one will. There are three common paths: hire
your own experts, find help at a local university, or roll up your sleeves and really do it
all yourself. If you go the DIY path, find out if your company has a tuition
reimbursement program and enroll in classes to learn about what you’re trying to do.

Think Systematically – Very little on the environment beat is regulated just once.
For example, to destroy a wetland in Florida, a local planning commission, a regional
water management district and no fewer than three federal agencies are involved. All of
them keep different records, and one might have something the other doesn’t. Keeping a
mental map of who does what and for what reasons can give you insights into how the
system works.

Think Organization – The curse of the environment beat is the volume of data
you’ll collect. The challenge is how to organize it all and make it accessible after you’ve
collected it all. CAR can help you again. Some tools that worked for us weren’t your
typical solutions. We put databases on the intranet and made them searchable. We created
a private wiki to store text data and make dozens of interviews searchable. AskSam, a
free form database program, turned thousands of PDF files and e-mail messages into a
fully searchable document database.

