Gadgets and Hardware for CAR
NICAR National Conference, Newark, NJ March 9-12, 2006
Matthew Waite Staff Writer
St. Petersburg Times
waite@sptimes.com

Some gadget buying tips
1. Check compatibility
A gadget you can’t use is a paperweight. Before you buy, know if it will work with the
software you intend to use it with. For instance, not all GPS units play well with GIS
software. Sometimes, a gadget maker breeds a parade of helper software produced by
rabid users who embrace the product. Sometimes, there isn’t a helper application to be
found. Don’t get caught with a device that forces you to work harder than you have to.

2. Check with your co-workers
Before you go buy a gadget, check around the office. First, someone might already own
one. Second, if you’re going to use it for work, it’s better to know if it will play well with
what you use in house. The worst cussing streak I’ve ever heard from a newspaper
employee was when a reporter brought in analog video to a newsroom expecting digital.
Avoid having to do loads of conversions by asking around before you buy. Knowing
what you have in house, from software to hardware, will prevent problems down the
road. For instance, most video cameras use FireWire to connect to a computer. Most
Macs have FireWire built in. Most PCs don’t. The time to find out if you have FireWire,
or what formats are common in your newsroom, is before you buy.

3. Check with your colleagues
Three or four times a year, a discussion starts up on NICAR-L about which this or that to
buy. As an IRE member, you now have access to the archives of the NICAR-L e-mail
list. Check them. And if you aren’t already, sign up for the NICAR-L e-mail list and ask
around. Lots of NICARians are gadget freaks by nature, so there are bound to be
opinions. Also, do some searching online. Various online media sites do gadget surveys.
Which leads me to my next tip …

4. Check online
One of the internet’s greatest contributions to mankind is a heaping load of unvarnished
opinions about stuff. Gadgets draw some of the most, er, energetic set of opinions out
there. So, you’d be wise to check them. I bought a digital camera without doing this, and
later found every complaint I had about it on various digital camera sites – poor
performance at low light, trouble focusing at shorter ranges, etc. I could have saved
myself a lot of money by checking with digital camera junkies before I bought. The net
has given a forum to every kind of gadget junkie you can imagine. Tap them.

