Integrating CAR into existing courses
By Jeff South  VA Commonwealth University  School of Mass Comm
Why should you incorporate computer-assisted reporting
into other journalism and communications courses?

1. Pervasive need for CAR skills – All journalists should know how to do online

research and basic data analysis; PR and advertising professionals also need
these skills. They are important for accuracy, depth, speed and efficiency.
Newsrooms have moved away from an expert-centered CAR model.

2. Emergence of CAR in everyday reporting (the “computer-assisted paragraph”)
3. CAR as a reflection of critical thinking, numerical literacy and computer literacy
4. Difficulty of squeezing CAR courses into the existing curriculum; the zero-sum
game of accreditation; university bureaucracy and politics

5. Students’ “checkoff mentality” – They tend to kiss off stand-alone skills courses
with an "OK, done that" attitude.

6. Repeated reinforcement; continuous-loop learning
How can you integrate CAR into existing courses?

1. Treat CAR as a routine method of gathering, organizing and understanding
information.

Think of computerized information as you would human sources and paper documents.
Show parallels between interviewing people and “interviewing” data.
Evaluate Internet documents or data as you would human and paper sources.

2. Use CAR to add context, localize stories, find background and find sources.
3. Deconstruct stories and look for underlying data and CAR opportunities. Ask

reporters how they did their stories. Use "real" guest speakers and "virtual" guest
speakers (via phone conference, Skype or Google Talk).

4. Discuss the best ways to tell the story (graphics, tables, Web-searchable
databases and online presentation, all of which may involve CAR).

5. Emphasize precision journalism. CAR helps you be precise.
Have students read Phil Meyer's seminal book, Precision Journalism.

6. Explain CAR concepts and what software can do even if you don’t teach hands-on

skills. There are some CAR tools that students don’t need to know – they just need
to know about.

7. “Offload” software skills. Require students to learn basic computer skills before they
enroll in your courses – so that you can emphasize how to apply these skills to
journalism.

Some universities have Web-based tutorials and assessments, such as KnowledgeNet.com.

8. In introductory courses, cover how to search Lexis-Nexis; how to find authoritative
documents on the Internet; and basic spreadsheet skills (entering data, sorting,
totaling, simple calculations).

9. In upper-level courses, cover advanced spreadsheet skills (functions, pivot tables);
database managers (grouping, joins); and possibly GIS and SPSS.
Bottom line: Have a plan for when each CAR skill is introduced and reinforced.

10. Have students do real stories or graphics with real data (census, campaign finance,
crime, etc.).

How many legislators from our alma mater?

Imprecision Journalism

Precision Journalism

Last year, VCU reported 31
violent crimes, more than
any other school in
Virginia.

Last year, VCU recorded
1.2 violent crimes for every
1,000 students. Only
Norfolk State and Hampton
universities had higher
rates of violent crime.

VCU was one of the few
schools in the nation to
record a murder on
campus last year.

VCU was one of 11
schools in the nation to
record a murder on
campus last year.

Imprecision Journalism

Precision Journalism

Many legislators attended
the University of Virginia.

Twenty-five legislators –
about 1 of every 6 –
attended U.Va.

Delegate Steve Landes is
among the few legislators
who attended VCU.

Landes is one of two
legislators who attended
VCU. Ferrum College, with
just 1,000 students, has
more alumni in the
General Assembly than
does VCU.

How safe is our campus?

Prepared for the 2006 CAR Conference ♦ March 9-12, 2006 ♦ Newark

