Visual Investigations and CAR
NICAR National Conference, Newark, NJ March 9-12, 2006
Matthew Waite Staff Writer
St. Petersburg Times
waite@sptimes.com

Satellite Imagery for Visual Investigations
Satellite imagery analysis is a daunting, technically difficult challenge, but it can provide
answers to questions no one else can answer. If you are serious about doing your own
imagery analysis, your best bet is to take university classes first. Here are three other tips:

Know what you are after
It sounds strange, but knowing what you are asking and what you are seeking from
imagery is far more important than with most data. Unlike databases, rerunning an
imagery analysis can take hours, if not days or weeks. And there are more issues to
consider than just file formats and megabytes. When considering using imagery, you
have to ask yourself: When was the image taken? Is what I am looking for seasonal? Or
temporal? In other words, if you are looking at crop patterns, images from the winter
won’t help you. Or if you are looking at areas influenced by tides, are they in or out? The
time to handle those issues is before you start the analysis.

Know your imagery
Imagery is complex data, so understanding it is vitally important to getting the most
accurate information. Is your image passive data – like a picture – or active data, like
radar or laser generated imagery. Passive data is the most common, and is a series of
bands – from as few as three up to several hundred bands. Each band is a slice of the
electromagnetic spectrum, from simple red, blue and green visible light to very narrow
slices of infrared radiation. Each pixel is a digital measurement of electromagnetic
radiation returning to the sensor – a combination of three bands. To understand your data,
you have to know what each slice of electromagnetic energy is sensitive to, and what
each combination of slices can tell you.

Know if you got it right
No analysis of remotely sensed data is ever 100 percent accurate. A critical, nonnegotiable part of any analysis of imagery is an accuracy assessment. There are several
methods for performing an accuracy assessment. The most common, and easiest to grasp,
is a simple set of random points created in your analysis area. You then have to assign
values to those points, based on site visits when possible and ancillary data when
trespassing is a problem. You then compare your random points to the analysis. The
result is a simple measure of how accurate your analysis was. You can then adjust your
analysis accordingly to reflect your accuracy. And, like polls, you should disclose the
results of your accuracy assessment.

