CAR for covering natural disasters
CAR TIPSHEET

NEWARK 2006

John Maines
Assistant News Editor/CAR
South Florida Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale)
954-356-4737
jmaines@sun-sentinel.com
Hurricane Wilma struck South Florida on Monday, Oct. 24, 2005. Despite being only a
Category 1/Category 2 storm, it was the most destructive to hit the Fort Lauderdale area
since Hurricane King in 1950. In South Florida more than 7,000 people were left
homeless, 35 were killed, thousand of buildings were damaged or destroyed, and three
million people were left without electricity, with most outages lasting between one and
three weeks. The sixth largest metropolitan area in the United States was literally blacked
out.
This tipsheet covers some of the South Florida Sun-Sentinel’s CAR efforts during the first
few days after the storm. Some things worked, others didn’t. Some we’ll do better next
time now that we’ve had experience with CAR in the Dark.
DAMAGE MAPS: THE MORE THE BETTER
Air Worldwide: Boston-based Air Worldwide Corp. performs risk analysis and disaster
modeling around the world. The company begins posting possible scenarios up to 48
hours before a hurricane’s landfall, and damage estimates for both hurricanes and
earthquakes within hours after the strike. They’ll also provide ZIP Code-level damage
estimate maps, for free, in exchange for credit. Sign up for Air Worldwide alerts at
(www.air-worldwide.com)
Satellite Recon: Space Imaging (www.spaceimaging.com) and DigitalGlobe
(www.digitalglobe.com) are commercial companies that use satellites to take highresolution images of disaster damage. Visit their websites or call the PR staff to get on
their mailing list for the latest disaster damage photos. They’re free.
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Mapping and Analysis Center
(http://www.gismaps.fema.gov) is a great resource for data maps. Maps you’ll find there
include counties in the declared disaster areas, flood maps, maps showing the population
living in shelters, and wind speed maps. Check the site a few times each day. These maps
are PDFs and tend to disappear from the Web site. Grab them while you can. Check the
state emergency management web site as well.

Power Outage Maps: Are the rich neighborhoods getting power restored before the poor
ones? Each day during our prolonged power outage, Florida Power & Light posted PDFs
showing the extent of the blackout. This was done in the form of points on the map, which
each point representing a blown transformer. There were thousands. We attempted to
convert these PDFs into a web-based “movie” that could reveal patterns in the restoration
process. We only got fair results from this process and hope for better luck next time.

EXPECT SURPRISES -- AND SLOW GOING
Water and Power: Like many newspapers, the Sun-Sentinel has done “The Big One”
story. Ours was about the coastal flooding that would occur if a hurricane with the power of
Hurricane Katrina hit South Florida. But we overlooked something we all take for granted:
Running water and electricity. When Wilma’s winds uprooted trees, the root systems tore
out water mains and left cities without running water for a few days. The power problem
was worse: After the storm, Florida Power & Light announced that outages would last from
two to four weeks. As it turned out, the problems could be traced to rotted power poles and
aging power transmission equipment.
“Red-Tagged” Homes/Primitive CAR: After Hurricane Wilma struck, Sun-Sentinel
reporters had to badger county officials relentlessly to get them to provide a spreadsheet
of homes that had been destroyed or so severely damaged that they were unsafe. This
process is called red-tagging. The officials argued that they were so busy “putting out fires”
that they had no time to assemble a list. Eventually they relented, giving us a very
incomplete list that left out entire cities. We conducted our own survey of officials in more
than 30 cities, and eventually the tally topped 5,000 structures – mostly condos and mobile
homes. It took days to build a simple spreadsheet. But that allowed us to map out the
locations with the most severe damage.
Three Little Pigs: South Florida is a condominium haven. Some of these condos were
poorly built and are not well maintained, resulting in what one official called the “Three
Little Pigs” syndrome. While one building might withstand a hurricane with little damage,
another identical one next door would be destroyed. Watch for this pattern after a storm –
what do the building permits show about maintenance patterns?
Check Mobile Homes: Mobile home destruction was widespread after Wilma. But after
the hurricanes that struck Florida in both 2004 and 2005, manufactured homes built since
1994 – under new codes – sustained very little damage. Mobile homes are a form of
affordable housing, precious these days, and losing them can change the demographics of
a community.
Portable Tax Rolls: The Sun-Sentinel keeps county tax rolls on CDs, and has extra
copies that our CAR staff can take with them if they evacuate the area. In the event of
widespread damage, the tax rolls are critical tools for quickly estimating losses. In Florida,
the Parcel ID on each property identifies it by township, range and section, giving us the
potential to make rough property loss estimates for every square mile of the county.
-30-

