Resources for analyzing criminal sentencing trends
2006 IRE CAR Conference, Newark, N.J.
CAR for Justice panel

Janet Roberts, The New York Times
janetroberts@nytimes.com

Courts and Sentencing Statistics from the Bureau of Justice Statistics
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/stssent.htm
Any reporter who plans to write about sentencing trends should start with a spin through this page. If you
see a data collection that interests you, check the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data to see if it is
available for download.

National Archive of Criminal Justice Data

http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/
NACJD is one of the special topics archives at the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan. It is the repository for numerous data sets collected by the
U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics and is a good starting point when seeking criminal justice data.

National Corrections Reporting Program
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/ncrp/
This program tracks almost all prisoner admissions and releases. It is an inmate-level data set that includes
basic demographics (age, gender, race, Hispanic origin), offense codes and sentencing information. The
records include the admitting or releasing state and the sentencing county. Typically, 38 states and the
federal prisons participate in the program, accounting for an estimated 90 percent of all prisoners. Annual
files are available from 1983 through 2001. The 2002 file should be available soon.
The NCRP is not a complete census of the prison population. Rather, it is a look at prisoners’ flow in and out
of the prison system, year by year. The data set is most valuable for national-level analysis and is most
reliable from the late 1980s onward. The BJS advises caution in using the NCRP for state-by-state
comparisons, because of variations in the way states report. If you plan to use this dataset, careful study of
the codebook is essential, with particular attention to the explanatory notes, which outline differences in
state reporting practices for each variable. For time-series analysis, beware of changes in the file layout from
year to year, changes in coding of the variables, and states that drop out and reappear from year to year. I’d
advise you to find an expert at the BJS to help you find the potential land mines.
The New York Times used this data in reporting for the series “No Way Out”, about the growing population
of prisoners serving life without parole. For reprints of the series, go to: http://www.tomtorok.com/nytlifers/.

National Judicial Reporting Program
http://webapp.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/NACJD-SERIES/00077.xml
This is a survey program covering 300 counties. Conducted every two years, the survey collects
demographic information on felons, conviction offenses, sentence types, sentence lengths, and time from
arrest to conviction and sentencing. NACJD has data available for download from 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992,
1994, 1996, 1998, 2000 and 2002.

Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities
http://webapp.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/NACJD-STUDY/02598.xml
Conducted by the Census Bureau every five to seven years, this survey is the most detailed information
available about U.S. prisoners. Survey topics include offense and sentencing information, criminal history,
family background and personal characteristics, prior drug and alcohol use, gun possession and use, gang
membership and prison activities, programs and services. The NACJD has the 1997 survey. A new survey
was conducted in 2003 and that data should be released soon.

State Departments of Correction and Administrative Offices of the Courts
Check to see what prisoner-level data and court data are available from these agencies. They can offer a
more nuanced look at sentencing and offense types than the national data sets.

