Tracking sex offenders:
How to find the ones who have dropped off the radar screen
Paul D’Ambrosio
Investigations Editor
Asbury Park (NJ) Press
pmd@app.com
732-643-4261

Since the passage of Megan’s Law in New Jersey in 1994, every state has adopted similar
measures that are supposed to alert citizens when a registered sex offender moves into a
neighborhood. But how effective are the notification programs? By some national
estimates, police don’t know the whereabouts of one out of every five freed offenders.
And even the best programs have loopholes caused by a lack of manpower and built-in
legal delays.
In New Jersey, dozens to hundreds of offenders have dropped off the radar screen. One
convicted rapist, freed after serving 10 years in New Jersey’s sex offender treatment
prison for three sexual assaults, managed to stay off the Internet notification site for more
than eight months. How did he do it? Simply by moving every few weeks. One of the
kinks in New Jersey’s registry law is that offenders are not classified until they find a
stable place to live. That can take weeks or months. Meanwhile, a resident would have no
idea that a convicted rapist or child molester is his new next-door neighbor.
Here is how you can find the missing offenders in your state:
1) Pull down a list of all offenders on your state’s Internet Registry. You may
have to use a screen scraper to extract information from the thousands of pages on
your state’s Web site.
2) Order a copy of your Department of Corrections inmate database. Make sure
the data includes inmates who have been released, their sentences and offenses.
3) Join the two tables in Access. This will take some finesse because you will have
to ensure the format of the names in both tables are equal, e.g.: last name to last
name, first name to first name, DOB to DOB. If the names are a hopeless out-oforder mess and your Megan’s Law list is small, you might have some luck by
matching on the DOBs. If your list is short, you can eyeball the names to see if
they match up.
4) Filter for the worst of the worst offenders. Your ultimate goal is to find a story
worth writing. Look for inmates who have received lengthy sentences (usually 10
to 20 years) for sex crimes and have been recently released (within the last year or
two).
5) Start reporting. Return to the Megan’s Law Website to ensure the offender had
not been listed during your search. If your state has a civil commitment program
for incorrigible offenders, you might have to work with county prosecutors off-

Deleted:

the-record to confirm a released inmate is in a psychiatric hospital and not on the
street. Once you have narrowed the list to your satisfaction, try to track the
offender through interviews, court records, property records, telephone records
and commercial vendors such as AutoTrackXP or Accurint. You can also search
the national registry to see if he has moved: http://www.nsopr.gov/

Working off this list, reporter James W. Prado Roberts found the compelling case of
Christopher Perry, a serial rapist, who avoided community notification for eight months
by moving around the state. Here is the top of the story:
By JAMES W. PRADO ROBERTS
STAFF WRITER
For three years, Christopher Perry terrorized a Monmouth County apartment complex. He raped three women, ages 56
to 81, and attempted to sexually assault a 23-year-old woman before he was captured.
At his sentencing, a judge deemed Perry a “clear danger to society.”
Perry’s own lawyer said his client’s pre-sentencing report “almost put chills through me.”
In 1994, at age 27, Perry was sent to the Adult Diagnostic and Treatment Center, in Woodbridge, the state’s prison for
compulsive and repetitive sex offenders. For his crimes at Twinbrook Village in Ocean Township, Perry received a
prison sentence of 10 to 20 years.
In May 2005, he was released.
But because of a series of delays and loopholes in New Jersey’s vaunted Megan’s Law sex offender notification
system, the communities where Perry resided never were told that a serial rapist lived among them.
All Perry — a convicted drug dealer hampered by a fractured education — had to do to beat New Jersey’s community
notification system was to change his address.
Perry said he avoided public notification for eight months after being released from prison because of “God’s
blessings.”
His name was never placed on the state’s Megan’s Law Web site.
Unlike other states, New Jersey does not begin the months-long process of determining the scope of public notice for a
convicted sex offender until he leaves prison. Some other states decide this when offenders are sentenced, or before
they are released.
“It’s very frustrating, and it’s a big problem,” said Maureen Kanka, mother of 7-year-old Megan, who was raped and
killed in 1994 in Hamilton by a convicted sex offender who lived across the street. Kanka’s campaign for a sex
offender registry led to Megan’s Law, which requires communities to be notified of the whereabouts of convicted sex
offenders deemed most likely to commit another offense.
“When this legislation was created, this was not supposed to happen,” Kanka said. “God forbid that as a state we do
something that makes sense.”

Read the series on the Web at:
http://app.gns.gannettonline.com/apps/pbcs.dll/section?Category=SPECIAL07

