How to Talk Like a Nerd
IRE San Jose Conferenca
Oet. 6-9,1994
By Ronald Campbell
The Orange County Reglster
7141664-5030
emall: rcampbell@ocrl.treedrn.com
Mom than any other type of jwrnaliwn, wrnputeraclisted rsporting ham I
language all its own.About ha! the word$ exlst merely to Impress d h .The
remaining wwdm am vikl. Herob a brief revlow of whmt you rnwt know M o m yw
buy, bomw or steal a computer. The purpose of thb handout la to take you from
wifdorn to apprwrtlca computer joclgy in fhrs, maybe BIX
paw; K the ti& part b
too basic, keep readlng It will get more mmpllcated.

-

I.Hardwan
O t h m at thlm w n f m w will help you d a # s what you need. Lab get the
term$ straight flret.
CPU: Aka, 'central p m i n g u n f or 'the had' or 'the beat f h d of lntd
ehareholdem." This I8the thlng that telk the wmputer what to do; think al it as a
thy traffic light. The fader It ghm dlrsetiom, the fester the computer will do ibjob.
CPU speed Is eDcpressed In megahertz, A 25megahertz machine k a Maserati next
to a IGmegah#h machine, but a Madd T by mparlsan wlth a 56 u 66megahertz computer.
RAM: Random acce88 memory, Thb Ir the area whom the computer doe8
bwork The l a w r the M r . With modem programs you ohould have at lead 8
mgabyte8, with ro#nto expand. A megabyte, by the way, Ir a mllllon bytea; a byte
can hold one dlgk or character.
Hard d M : The arm when your program and data a n mtod tll needed.
Again, the bigger the better. W :mu want to play wtth government dd9beseg,you'll
want at least 3W megabytes. A gigabyb (1,000)b wen better.
CD=ROM:Compact Dlsc Read Only Memory. One dlsc can $tore
hundreds of megabytea d dab. If you buy a CD-ROM reader, the s p d ir crttiwl.
And here 16 where they play a trlck on you: the smeller the number, the M r . Wtth
CD-ROM b t b Issue b how many nan-ndm
it C a b to trander information
fmm the CD to your RAM: 300 nanowconda 'sa preUly good cllp.

-

How to Talk Ilks a Nwd
IRE San Jose Conference
Pnge 2
8-Tnok t a p driva: A plot by the devil to d r k nportm Insane. Nim-tmck
tape Is a 19608 tectrndogy, but gum6 who continues to use It frequently? That6
right, the U.S. gwwmment. If you can talk your editors into getting you a aelfbading tape drive, by all means, do eo. If your edttors won1 wring for a w t f W l n g
drtve, your alternative8 are to buy a manual loadlng machine or to c#rtrsct wlth a .
computer Mnrlce shop that will load data tarn tape to your'hrd drlve.
Tmpa-baokup: A d o h for copying the content8 of y w r hard drtw onto a
cassette or other storage medium. Thb is vital if you are creriws about computerewristd reporting. All oomphm c m h ut lome point, pmdlctabb only by the
Inexorableworkings of Murphy's Law.
Modmm: A Wphon8 fw canputsn. An amazing amount of infermution Is
avaltabie free ofcharge on other camputens. You need a madem to get It. Modem
weed Is rated In btb per second (or bp8, or sometime8 "baud) the higher the better. Standard modem now run at 14,400 bps. That's what They mean when
T h y WY "14-dd-4:

-

II. 8dtwwo
Every computer cornea with a pbca of whvaru known as the op#alw
system. it seCB the rule8 that all the dher wfWm fdkws. Every tlme you fetch
wrno data fran tha hard d m , mpy a fib or print wmthlng, y w 6re using the
operating system. in ancient tlmes, four or aa years ggo, pkneerfng CAR
wpeciali8ta 8truggkd to mastw MS-DOS, the Mic&
Dhk Opsratlng System.
Lucky you. Graphic-user interfaces (aka QUI, pmnounced "gooey") are replacing
most, thwgh not dl, dths word f d u m a d DOS. The best-known GUI h
Windows, originally a DOS adbut won to become a DOS replacement. OS-2
fa perhapa the best PC GUI right ow. The mother of all GUls is the M a d m
system. Thew OUls ail permit multi4arking, which means they can do two or
thrw jobs at the same the.

.

Appliudion rahn:Finally wn're @ing somowhere. Thare are a few
kinds of applications that every CAR junkle needs.
Databrru are the hsavy IIRsm of the CAR world. They q a n b hugs
gobs of information for easy analysk. Databa~,tables can contain hundreds of
thoumndm, even mlillom of pkm of data. A dataprognm can 'mkte"
dtfferenttables to each dher to find common elements. This ability Is extremely
uwful to reportern seddng hidden wnn-rw.
A typical datajob might
involve calwiating l o a d n i a l rates by race for every census tract in a cwnty, then
comparing thmt list with the mdai demographb for thow track The most widely
used datababe progrems among reporters are FoxPro and Paradax.

How to Talk L i b a Nerd

IRE San Jose Conference
Page 3
S p r u d s h u h are easisr to use and easier to learn than dutabasea, a d b r
certaln functions playing wtth numbers, drawlng charts they are vastly superior.
Their chidlimit Is capacity; my rprsadheet can handle a mere 16,384 rocordm
(don't laugh this really Ian1much), SpreadsheeEe make etatEstical analysk a
b m m , wen for the mmthematfcally challenged. A rpmdshwt would b@ the bglcal
choice if you wanted to, my, track the growth in a t e government spendlng for
prisons, parks and achooh over a IO-year perlod. The moat widely u8ed
s p m d s ~among
,
reporters and normal people alike, are Exoel, Lotus 1-29and
Quattm Pro.
8-Tnok Expnrr ie a program designed by reporters for the most boring d
all CAR chww unloading 9-tmk tape fmm a tap drtw to your hard dirk. tt's
qulrky but v(ta1.
Communiaationt 8oWarm run8 your modem. Them an many branda, all
doing essentially the same job. The best soRwam will not make your modem work
any faster. But yw! might want to nplmce the soltwan that came with your modern
tf the new product is easier to use.
Mapping .oRwarm probably doeant &long on tho "mumt-ham" list yd.
But reporters who have mapping capability swear by it. For example, euppoee you
got a llst of condemned propttleq arranged by amsessorb parcel number. Y w can
d r h around town for a few hours, loddng for the praperties: or you can vl& the
wutthww and check the mmmwrb maps; or you can bod ttm addremas into
your mapplng program and, vdta! The most widely used mapplng programs are
Atloa Pro and Maplnfo. Spreadrheas are lxglnnlng b oflor mapping 88 a mld8UgM
to charting; tf thle practlce takes hdd, mapping will become dlrt cheap In the neod

-

-

-

-

-

ysar.

8tutWkrl softwarn starPB where epreadsheets and databaws leave on.
Ststistical packages permit ekborate ~ t a b u ~ k ofnhugs
s record sets. The
W-known products are SAS and SPSS.
Ill. On4inm inbrmdon
This is the catchali phrase for data available right this minute from other
computers. There are t h m ways to get It.
One way I8 to UM) your modem b cali t h other computer, if tt has a bulhtln
h r d (or BBS),a placewhwe the public can go. To do thlr, you need the phons
number. You also need to know a few facts about the computer you're calling I$
data b b , stop btb and parity. Don't de8pak: Most computers we 8 data bib, 1 stop
bit and no partty, conveniently abbreviated &
-no.
I If you don't know the settlngs on
the other end, try those, Y w also will ktosnmuniwtlng using a "pmbW' (or rulm
of the road) named Mwnethlng 1
1
hKermit, Xmodem or Zmodern. If you don't knan
whim one the other computer uws, try them all.

-

How to Talk Like a Nerd
IRE San Jose Conference
Page 4
Onlnm smrvicms take a lot of the grief out of calling BBS's. But they ad.

To use an on-line service you mu6t subscribe. Many computers come with a free
trial subscription to one of the major swvias, such sr Compusenm, Prodigy or
America On-Llne.
.
Untll a year or so ago, dhl-up BBSk ware a very #g deal. They a n kst
going the way of DOS and other dinoeaurs. Their replacement la (drumroll, plea-)
tha Intarnot (aka 7he Net", "information 8upMhighwa)r or 'lnfobahn"). The
Internet isn't a place; It's a worldwide netwlark wnnectlng thohands d computers,
plus a set of wrttten preccdurss that ailow those computer8 to talk to each other,
plus a growing body d unwritten but sacred rules (known collectively as
"Netiquetb') that usually pnvent electronk gunfh from b W n g out.
The hype sumundlng the Internet Is a6tonlshlng and very nearly coned.
The resources wailable am staggering, For example, the SwrlUe5 and Exchange
Commission allow8 public access via Internet to EDGAR, a collection of corporete
fillngs; it is a goldmine for anyone wriowly interested In bwinesa reporUng.
To use the Internet you need a grtrwry, a computer hooked Into the
Internet. All the m a p on-line services have, or !man will odd, Inbrnet gatwqs. In
addttlan, mod universtties and a gtawlng number of businessc#i (Including a
handful of madla cornpanim) have Infsrnet gutuways.
There are several essential senkm mailable on the Internet.
The tint and moat popular I8 mkdronio mall ( a h smail). Ewry ekctronlc
mall user has an e-mail a d d m . This cansM of thnre parts: the user name, the
mmputsr name and the type oflnutttution wrvsd by that computer. Loo&at my 6
mall a d d m for a moment: rcampbell@ocrl.freedom.com. 'rcampbelr Is me, of
~ U ~ I The
E . @ dgn shows that my mail p a to a computer named 'ocrl .freedom."
(some computers have only one name), and the "cornapart indicates that the
institution is a company. Other addnssss might end with 'edu" (for unhmnlties),
"gw"(government) or 'net" (network),
Lkk.nnm am a combination of email and bulletin boardr, Once you
wbscrlbe to a listeerver, you will get a copy of every rneseage posted to the Ilst.
Y w can cnntrtMs as mll. There are ~
v Ils&rvsn
d
for Joumallds;of particuhr
I n t d are the two brand new lkervers operated by IRE, IRE-L and NICAR-L.
Another valuable Internet servia Is the gophar. This scnrlcs, Inventedat
the Univeruii of M i n m o h (home of the Golden Gophers), combines the bed
features of a guidebook and a very fast chauffeur. The gopher albwm you b
window-shop for Infmatlon, then 'go fet' whatever Interests you in a matter of
#conds. The traditional gopher is arranged in a trellke structure; K y w flrst pick

How to Talk Like a Nerd
IRE San Jose Conference
Page 5
North American gophers, the gopher then will ask you fora country, and later for a
a t e or prwlnce; a few Layers down,you mlght encounter a list of all the g o p w In
a particular atate. Thls Is useful if you have a vague Idea of where to flnd the
Information you're seeking. If you don't know what you're IwMngfor, Gopher
Jewels can help; thlr Ir a dllldrvdoplng gopher arranged by
Another way to get Informationquickly le through the World Wklm Wmb
(known ar the Web w sometimes W3). It Is graphiwl, mom I n t u than
~ ~the
gopher.
Through the f lk Tnnrhr Prbbool (Invariably rh#tsnad to FTP), you can
search out bng flles on other computers and Instantly copy them to ywr own.
Beats the hell out of on-line charges.
Flnally, lest ww forget, the Internet boasts Arahlo, Vomnkr and J u q h d .
DonY ask me who thought of those names; Archie k a mean8 of copying program
whlle Veronica Is a way to search out topics. Your asslQnmentfor next year b to
find out what Jughead d m preferably on company U r n .

tom.

-

W.Datnhmulr

Spend m e tlme hying data, and sooner or later a bureaucrat will tell you
that the dab you writ b in an o h u r n formot that y w cant mad. M Y W h It.
Although eaitwate engineers have developed hundreds of data formats, ccome of
them harder to dodphw than the Dead Sea Scrolb, mod of thoma lbrmak can be
tramiated Into a few basic formab that your programs can W. H e m a rundawn
uf the
common data famob.
ASCII (American Standard Code for InformalionExchange, pronounced
"as+.ksy') Is & In almcd svwy personal wrnputw. That makss ASCII a uwful
way station between the bureaucrab computer and yours. ASCII comes In two
forma, dellmbd and columnar. That sounds mplleasd but Imnt. For awmpls,
wppose you buy voter registration records on tape.
In canrnadsllmftedfarm m s wtw recurd might read:
"Clinton, Wllllam Jeffersonm,"1600 PennsylvaniaAve, W ,"D"
In columnar tam that mama record warld red:
Clinton, William Jeff1600 Pennsytvanla Ave. NW
D
That's It. Any databsse, spreadah& or wordgrrrcs#rlng pmgnm can Imput an
ASCII flle.
EBCDIC (pronounced ob-suhdlck) In the language of IBM mainframes.
Some mainframers will download their files to an ASCII format; if they my they
wnl, dont wony. PC programs such an %Track Expmss mdly translate EBCDIC
to ASCII as well as to file formats for several popular PC fomwts.

How to Talk Uks a Nerd

IRE San Jow Conference
P o p6
DW, DB, WKa (or2 or I), XL8, WP1 (or2), m d TXT am the flle formob
m p c t t w l y for FoxPro (and Its clam cousin, dBaee), Paradax, Loftre 1-2-3, Excel,
Quattro Pro end Microsolt Word.They have b#;ans induatr)rstandards. If you

have a databaw program other than Foxpro, for example, chancrre a n it wlll reed a
DBFfile. T h e k u o n h s n k t h ~ t h d ~ y o u b u y ~ n o t h m b b s p r c r c k d. y

the right format for your soflware, tf you can buy it in one of several standad

fomwk, your dhvenprobably will read it.

