NICAR in Newark
Sat. March 11, 2006
CAR for Covering Education
By Rose Ciotta, Education Editor
The Philadelphia Inquirer
rciotta@phillynews.com
215-854-5024
Getting Page One Stories Out of Test Scores:
1)Consider the test score release a first step. Look at results in different ways i.e.
which schools improved the most, the least; compare cohorts i.e.how did this year’s
fourth graders do compared to their results in third grade
For stories on questionable scores in Camden and state’s investigation
http://go.philly.com/camdenscores
2)Use regression as a tip off: Your story doesn’t have to use the word “regression,” but
if you look at test scores in relation to other factors there may be a story there.
Start with poverty, spending.
Enlist an expert to run the regression or to duplicate what was done by you or someone
on your staff.
3)Compared to similar schools: In its Report Card on the Schools, The Inquirer
published charts ranking schools by quintiles according to how they perform compared to
all schools in the state and similar schools based on percentage of poor students in the
school. (N.J. provides a poverty index. Pa. provides percentage receiving free and
reduced lunch.)
Here’s how it’s done: Divide all test-taking schools into five equal groups based on the
poverty indicator. Using a combined proficient and advanced proficient, calculate how
well a school performed compared with schools with similar levels of poverty. Results
are reported in quintiles: the top quintile represents the schools in the top 20%.
http://go.philly.com./reportcard

4)Going Deeper: Data now allows deeper stories on gaps in performance by gender, race
Look for the hidden story: how do minority students perform in high achieving suburban
districts?
http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/news/front/7484400.htm
Other Data From School Sources:
Violence: Get the data directly from the school on a regular basis. It will allow you to be
ready for stories like this when a youngster is found in school with drugs or alcohol.

Drugs go to school with the youngest
Phila. cases like the 7-year-old's are not so rare.
Martha Woodall and Mitch Lipka INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

March 2, 2006

All-boys' high school off to a rocky start
Change brought chaos to FitzSimons High
Martha Woodall INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

Feb. 26, 2006

Payroll: Look for a state file on “certificated staff.” It’s of the prior school year but the
data should include all professional staff in the state. For more up-to-date payroll, get a
new file from the school district.
Collecting Your Own:
Why do it? Data from states or federal may be dated or not answer your questions
Data can be used throughout the year to launch or enrich stories:
--Teacher shortages in math and science and minorities
http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/living/special_packages/school_report_card/1102366
3.htm
--Status of pre-school and kindergarten programs:

Pa. lags in access to crucial preschool
Early education is both a key to success and a sound investment, research shows.
Dale Mezzacappa INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

Feb. 19, 2006
--Offering of AP courses:

Catholic schools see a boom in AP courses
Parochial students making the college grade
Martha Woodall INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Oct. 5, 2005

--Students’ post-high school plans:

More choose 2-year colleges
Tech programs and tuition lure students.
Kristen A. Graham and Frank Kummer INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS
Feb. 2, 2006

--Offering of dual enrollment programs with local colleges

Early college not just for elite
Dual enrollment grows to inspire a wider variety of high schoolers
Kristen A. Graham INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

Dec. 23, 2005
Other Sources:
National Center for Education Statistics, with data analysis related to education in the
United States. http://www.nces.ed.gov
Education Commission of the States, a site that tracks state and federal policies
affecting public education. http://www.ecs.org

