Foreclosing on the American Dream
The Charlotte Observer, Jan. 15-18, 2006
http://www.charlotte.com/mld/charlotte/news/special_packages/foreclosure/
Reporters Lisa Hammersly Munn, Binyamin Appelbaum, Ted Mellnik

How this story started. Home loan failures in our home county quadrupled since 1999.
A 2003 story found rapidly rising mortgage fraud, and a 2005 series described broad
growth in high-interest mortgages – both linked to foreclosure.
What is foreclosure? A lender, who holds a mortgage or deed of trust, requires sale of
real property to recover money due when the borrower fails to pay. Foreclosure is a
process. The borrower often has a time to pay the amount due.
Identifying foreclosures
•

Court records. Foreclosure filings were available from court records. Unfortunately,
there was no compiled data available from the courts on foreclosures that went
through the entire process. Register of deeds website provides images of documents.
References to property usually are legal description or deed book & page, not
address.

•

County property records. County property appraisers are interested in foreclosures
because they need to ignore them when setting market values for similar or nearby
properties. Some sale records in the county property database were tagged as
foreclosures.
To find other foreclosure saless, we looked at sales involving a trustee deed. This
means a trustee, not the property owner, is selling. (Trustee deeds are used in Alaska,
Arizona, California, Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Texas, Virginia and West Virginia.) We selected trustee deed sales where a
lender was involved.

•

Vendor records. Information on foreclosures and property sales is compiled by data
vendors like AutoTrack and DataQuick.
Factors in foreclosures
For details on the factors at work in foreclosures, we used LexisNexis, court and property
records to compile detailed information on a 10 percent sample of foreclosures. Info
available includes lender, loan amount, term, FHA or other government program, interest
rates for high-rate loans, adjustable rates, deed type.
Based on our sample:
•

25% - FHA loans. Federal Housing Administration loans were the biggest factor
driving local foreclosures. FHA is charged with promoting home ownership and
strengthening communities. FHA foreclosures damaged communities the most
because they tended to be concentrated & push down home values in newly built
neighborhoods . That hurts all homeowners – including those who pay on time. This
raises questions about FHA’s ability to prevent bad loans and to sanction lenders who
make them.

•

24% - High rate lenders. Lenders say they charge high rates to those more likely to
default. Critics say that can be a self-fulfilling prediction: High rates and fees cost

•

•

thousands in additional interest payments, and often the interest rate escalates, driving
costs even higher. Borrowers may have been qualified for only the initial rate. See our
series on high rate lending at
http://www.charlotte.com/mld/charlotte/business/special_packages/lending/
23% - Refinance loans. Loans that turn home equity into cash are popular. But some
homeowners borrow more than they can afford. This most often involves older
homeowners in older neighborhoods. They have a lot of equity, but may not have the
income to keep up with debt repayment.
1% Mortgage fraud loans. For the basics of how mortgage fraud can work and who
gets hurt, see the story at
http://www.charlotte.com/mld/charlotte/news/special_packages/foreclosure/13620959.htm

Visualizing foreclosures
Foreclosures can be shown as dots on a
map. You can geocode foreclosure
addresses. Or you can or get coordinates
for your dots from the centroids of parcels
in an ArcView shape file.
The density of the dots also can be
summarized using ArcView’s Spatial
Analyst extension or the software
CrimeStat. The second image at right,
created with CrimeStat, shows
foreclosures per square mile for cells in a
grid.
Maps can be a powerful reporting tool
and a popular addition to stories.
Neighborhood patterns aren’t readily
apparent in lists, and everyone’s
interested in issues that can impact the
value of their home. We created
interactive maps to help reporters and
readers explore this info.
If you’re doing a story
Find out how your local foreclosure process works.
Organize, so you don’t look up same info again.
Appraisers. Mortgage brokers. There is little or nothing about their actions in public
records. Check for complaints. Look closely at loan and closing documents from
someone who bought & then lost a home.

