Proxy Power
What a vital SEC filing tells you about public companies
The corporate proxy statement, filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, is a powerful tool for reporters examining
publicly traded companies and their officials.
A proxy is essentially a voter’s pamphlet for shareholders.
Companies use it to solicit votes on mergers, the election of
directors and appointment of an auditor.
Yet it offers much more, especially details on how much the
company’s top officers get paid.
In SEC lingo, the proxy statement is a DEF 14A or PRE 14A. A
DEF 14A is the final statement approved by the Securities and
Exchange Commission under Schedule 14A of SEC regulations. A PRE
14A is a preliminary filing that has not been endorsed by the
SEC and may not contain final information.
Through the SEC Web site and others such as 10K Wizard, it’s
possible (sometimes for a fee) to download years of pay and
related information into spreadsheets. Analysis of this material
would help you gain a sense of a company’s ethics and attitude
toward corporate governance.
The nuts and bolts of proxies, and their uses, include:
Names of executives and directors and backgrounds
Proxies give biographical information about company
officials, including ages, professional backgrounds and
sometimes educational histories.
It’s an ideal place to check up on officials who may be
embellishing their achievements. While checking into a company
official once, I noticed that the corporate proxy said he had a
law degree from ``LaSalle University.’’ As I remembered it, the
university spelled the name ``La Salle,’’ with a space. When I
asked the official about it, he said the degree was from a
Louisiana correspondence school with a similar name as the
Philadelphia university. The information was fodder in a piece
that questioned the company’s prospects.
Executive pay
Compensation for at least the top four officers of the
company are disclosed for the last three years. Search in the
document for ``Summary Compensation Table’’ and related tables.
Besides salaries and bonuses, you’ll get detail on awards of
stock options and restricted stock (shares that typically can’t
be sold for a set period of time) and how much executives made
by exercising stock options.

2
Pay information is a great springboard for measuring how
executive pay stacks up against company performance. If you look
up executives at Blockbuster, the biggest video rental chain,
for instance, you’ll notice that CEO John Antioco got a $51.6
million pay package in 2004, including a 17 percent raise in
base pay and a $5 million bonus. How come? This is a company
that’s flirting with bankruptcy.
Director compensation
Proxies tell what directors get paid as well. Speaking of
struggling Blockbuster, why did compensation for company
directors double from $50,000 a year to $100,000 in 2004?
Stock holdings of executives and directors
Proxies include a list of the top executives’ stock
holdings, information useful in showing which officials have the
most at stake in the performance of their company.
Related-party deals
A company’s proxy will disclose transactions between a
company and its executives or directors. Enron’s off-books
dealings with former chief financial officer Andrew Fastow were
first disclosed in the company’s proxy.
The Chicago Tribune recently reported that at least 22 of
the 30 companies that make up the Dow Jones industrial average
had related-party dealings in 2004. Five years ago, 18 companies
reported at least one transaction.
Employment contracts
You can find out about key perks executives have won from
their companies. According to the proxy of Morgan Stanley, the
banking house, the firm gives its two top officials private use
of the company jet at a cost of almost $1 million a year.
Names of largest shareholders
By listing top shareholders, proxies help reporters find key
people who might speak when a company is underperforming or
worse. A big critic of Blockbuster performance is mega-investor
Carl Icahn, whose holdings are disclosed in the company proxy.

3
Meetings attended
In addition to the backgrounds of directors, proxies tell
what key board committees they serve on and disclose the
attendance records of board members.
Auditors and fees
Auditor fees are skyrocketing because of the new SarbanesOxley corporate governance law, and you can find details of such
payments in proxy statements.
Shareholder proposals
Proxies contain details of proposals by shareholders to
halt rising executive pay, forbid the company from doing
business with certain countries and impose other changes. Using
this detail in proxies, Bloomberg News did a story in 2002 on
questionable tactics companies used to thwart corporate
governance reforms that shareholders had approved.

David Dietz
Senior Writer
Bloomberg Markets Magazine
345 California Street Suite 3500
San Francisco, CA 94104
(415) 743-3551
(415) 819-4662-cell
(415) 733-7625-fax
ddietz1@bloomberg.net
NICAR Conference, March 2006, Newark

