WORKER SAFETY AND C.A.R.
2006 NICAR conference
Newark, NJ
March 9-12
More than 20 people have died this year in coal mine accidents, making it a compelling
story. The first accident this year occurred Jan. 2 at the Sago Mine in West Virginia, where 12
miners died and one was critically wounded. A week later, a Kentucky coal miner was killed when
a 14 by 20-foot boulder fell on him while he was working on the roof of a mine.
If you are feeling brave, go to the Mine Safety and Health Administration website:
http://www.msha.gov/
The Department of Labor, which oversees MSHA, has posted lots of information and data
on this website and its press officers will tell you to download the data and have fun. But watch
out. It’s a continually updating database that they never really intended to be used the way
journalists are using it. The spokesman won’t say what they thought it would be used for, but
that’s another story.
Most journalists use the Data Retrieval System at: http://www.msha.gov/drs/drshome.htm
to download and analyze data on accidents and violations going back at least 10 years.
What you can do:
1. On deadline, you can look up a mine when an accident has occurred. You can see who
owns the mine, who operates it, what prior accidents and violations have occurred there
and the mine’s status going back to 1995 in some cases.
2. For a weekender or bigger project, you can download data on accidents and violations for
your area or state, or the nation.
Pitfalls:
1. Because it’s not a static table (it is allegedly updated once a week), it’s a snapshot in
time. What you download on Tuesday, may change on Thursday. Or it may not.
2. The details on the website are sketchy. No record layout exists nor is there a code
translation table. If you analyze the proposed fine field, the spokesman will complain that
you should have used the “current penalty” column. The difference can be significant.
Use whichever makes sense for your story, but be sure to state why and what the
differences are. (Note: current penalty is the amount after any negotiations, it can include
interest charged and the number may not have been set by MSHA directly). If it’s
different than the proposed amount, you have no way of knowing what changed.
3. Not every violation is in the database and they won’t explain why.
4. Good luck getting someone inside MSHA to comment on the record about what you find
in your analysis.

Linda J.Johnson, C.A.R. Coordinator
Lexington Herald-Leader
(859) 231-3338
Ljohnson1@herald-leader.com
http://www.kentucky.com

