Property, mortgages and foreclosures
NICAR 2006 – Newark
John McCormick and David Jackson
Chicago Tribune
mccormickj@tribune.com and dyjackson@tribune.com
Paper and electronic records from property transactions, mortgages, property taxes
and foreclosures can often provide essential information for spot news stories or
months-long projects. As part of the Tribune’s five-day “The New Street Hustle”
series in November 2005 we looked at how cases of mortgage fraud intersect with race
and poverty. By using Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data and foreclosure data, we
were also able to look at mortgage rejection rates and troubled lending practices in
the neighborhoods we studied.

A few tips:
•

•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•

At least in Chicago, we found that looking at cases of mortgage fraud at the
census tract level was best. ZIP codes were too large and census blocks or block
groups were too small, with not enough cases of fraud per census block group to
show a trend.
In most jurisdictions, including Illinois, mortgage fraud is not identified as a
crime per se. The cases are typically charged under forgery, theft or mail fraud
statutes.
If you are looking at mortgage fraud, you must make sure your universe of
properties only includes those that might be capable of having mortgages. Because
there are many units of apartment and public housing in some of the neighborhoods
we examined, we came up with a measure that reflected cases of mortgage fraud per
1,000 units of owner-occupied housing (from the 2000 census).
Look at as many demographic measures as possible. We found that census tracts
where mortgage swindles had occurred had higher poverty rates, a lower percentage
of homeowners versus renters, more foreclosed homes and higher mortgage rejection
rates.
If you plan to work with HMDA data, buy IRE’s Beat Book, “Home Mortgage Lending:
How to detect disparities” by Jo Craven McGinty. It is a quick read and does a
great job of explaining how to work with Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.
If you want to work with HMDA data, consider buying it from IRE. It is extremely
affordable and can be tailored to your market to help keep file sizes manageable.
HMDA records can get huge. NICAR lists 33 million records in the 2004 file alone.
Get to know the people in your county’s recorder, assessor and treasurer’s
offices. They don’t get interviewed often, but often know where the abuses are
happening and how to access paper and electronic property records.
Some other places to look for information related to property: building permits
and inspections, fire code violations, property tax appeals and criminal, civil
and bankruptcy cases.
Property records and mapping go together like peanut butter and jelly. If you
don’t have ArcView GIS or some other mapping software, try to convince your
editors for how valuable it would be for many stories. If that does not work, try
to find a nearby academic who might be willing to help.
As you start mapping property information, make sure to check with local
government offices for electronic parcel maps that often are already available.
If searching for addresses or property records on LexisNexis or other services
that use Boolean search strings, keep this example in mind: John Public, who once
lived at 1234 Main Street. Consider searching for “(John w/2 Public) and (1234
w/2 Main)” That translates to show me any records where the word “John” appears
within two words of “Public” (this helps account for middle names or initials)
and the sequence “1234” appears within two words of “Main.”

Some additional thoughts on mortgage fraud and helpful resources:
Researchers and advocacy groups have extensively examined predatory lending patterns
and their reports are often worth reviewing. Some of their work is summarized below.
Reporters often make the mistake of confusing criminal mortgage fraud with predatory
lending.
While there is some overlap between them, predatory lending and criminal mortgage
fraud are separate animals: Predatory lending is an institutionalized practice of
banks and lending firms that victimizes homeowners, while criminal mortgage fraud
victimizes both homeowners and lending firms. Criminal mortgage fraud represents a
much smaller universe, but each case can be devastating.
The Tribune found some overlap between these two types of abuses: we documented that
CitiFinancial and a predecessor firm engaged in a pattern of abusive predatory
lending while, at the same time, collusion and negligence by Chicago branch managers
spawned an outbreak of mortgage frauds. The two were linked by a profiteering,
"close the loan at any cost" attitude.
With that in mind, we learned a great deal from academic and government studies of
predatory lending. Some excellent reports are easy to find on the Internet:
•

"A Study of Mortgage Foreclosures in Monroe County [Pa.] and the Commonwealth's
Response," Aug. 3, 2004. Conducted by the Pennsylvania Department of Banking,
this is an extensive quantitative analysis of one county's growing number of
foreclosures. The researchers compiled databases from the U.S. Census,
foreclosure filings, property sale and mortgage data, state Homeowners Emergency
Mortgage Assistance Program reports, as well as Attorney General lawsuits.
Researchers also conducted 75 one-on-one interviews.

•

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Center for Community Capitalism.
This academic department has conducted numerous creative and illuminating
computer analyses to examine abusive mortgage lending practices.

•

The Woodstock Institute, Chicago. Researchers Dan Immergluck and Geoff Smith
conducted several studies on foreclosures, property values and sub-prime loans in
the Chicago area.

•

"Preserving Homeownership," May 2004. This comprehensive primer was prepared for
the Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago by prominent mortgage researchers
William Apgar of Harvard University and independent consultant Mark Duda. It has
helpful chapters on racial disparities, national trends and the complex,
secondary home loan market.

•

"The Detection, Investigation and Deterrence of Mortgage Loan Fraud Involving
Third Parties," Oct. 2003. This white paper by the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council offers a clear explanation of criminal fraud patterns.

•

"Preying on Neighborhoods," Oct. 2004. This study by the National Training and
Information Center, working with the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, tracks
foreclosures over time.

•

"FBI Financial Crimes Report to the Public," May 2005. This has a clearly written
chapter on mortgage fraud.

•

Dreams Foreclosed, June 2005. Written by the National Consumer Law Center, this
is a survey of "bailout" and "rescue" scams drawn from press reports and consumer
complaints across the United States.

