2006 CAR for Broadcast: Using Health Care Data
Nancy Amons WSMV Nashville
615-353-2284 namons@wsmv.com
Tennessee’s budget was in ruins because of the escalating cost of its TennCare program. The
eight-billion dollar program, Tennessee’s version of Medicaid, consumed more than one-quarter
of the state budget and was growing out of control. Nationwide, elected officials are facing
similar problems in their state Medicaid programs. With so much money at stake, health-care
spending is a worthy topic.
Tipsters told us anecdotes about waste and mismanagement in the program – tips that we decided
to pursue using data from TennCare itself. The databases, it turned out, were not as difficult to
obtain and analyze as I had feared.
First, as with any story, find out how the data is kept. I expected to learn that the information
would be difficult to extract and the datasets would be huge. Fortunately, I learned that a
government contractor hired to manage costs within the program had already sliced out what I
needed. They were able to deliver it to me within a few weeks on a CD in spreadsheet and
database formats, at no cost. So, in pursuing a similar story, ask, to whom do you provide this
data, on what format, and how can I get a copy of it?
Our first request was for data that would help us identify which doctors and pain clinics were
writing prescriptions for the pain pills such as Oxycontin that ended up being sold on the street.
Law enforcement officers knew who the troublesome clinics were; they busted people on
TennCare who went to these clinics to get drugs either for recreational use, or to sell for pure
profit.
TennCare’s pharmacy benefits management contractor had recently started creating reports that
summarized drug prescriptions by provider. That was our starting point. The raw data showed
the doctors’ names and a summary of how many of which types of prescriptions were filled by
TennCare:

I totaled all the prescriptions and calculated who had written the most schedule drug
prescriptions. The top name was someone familiar to law enforcement: Dr. Ralph Hobbs. They
were aware that the clinic where he worked was packed with TennCare enrollees who would
drive for hours from all over the state. One of Hobbs’ patients had also been caught on hidden
camera selling his pills to undercover sheriff’s deputies. That Dr. Hobbs ranked number one was
no surprise. He was writing an average of 350 schedule drug prescriptions per week.

The numbers alone, of course, are not enough to accuse a doctor of over-prescribing, but they
allowed us to ask a lot of questions but about the doctor and about the system. We examined
Hobb’s prior conviction for black-market drug dealing. We looked deeper into whether
TennCare adequately monitored the doctors in the program and their prescribing habits. His
ranking number one also helped justify our decision to have a station employee, wearing a
hidden microphone, strike up conversations with patients in his parking lot. They suggested
ways to increase the high from the pain pills.
During our investigation, a number of families told us about their loved ones dying from
accidental overdoses of prescription drugs. We decided to review autopsy records and find out if
OD’s were increasing (they were), and to see if we could find a connection to certain doctors
who had written the prescriptions. Contact your state medical examiner or coroner and ask
them to carve out data for you for cases that involved an accidental overdose. The ME in
Tennessee was happy to provide the data at no charge because it was an issue that concerned
him. His staff created an Excel spreadsheet for us.

The database did not have people’s names; however, the state ID number is the number of the
autopsy report, which we were able to request and read. That gave us a list of potential cases to
profile and families to contact for interviews. We concluded by looking at several years’ worth
of data that deaths from prescription drugs had risen 30%. We also mapped the counties that had
had the most overdose deaths, and calculated the number of deaths per population. We concluded
that accidental drug overdoses occurred most frequently in very rural areas (where it happened
there were a high percentage of TennCare enrollees), and that the deaths were most common
among females, whites, and the middle-aged.
During our year-long investigation into the abuse of prescription drugs paid for by TennCare, we
kept hearing about the “Pain Train.” That’s what enrollees called the van services that drove
them to the pain clinics at no charge. We learned that transportation vendors, contracted with
TennCare, would drive enrollees on trips that would take two-hours one way. The taxpayers, we
heard, were footing the bill. I requested the detailed billings from the transportation companies.
The trip reports had identifying information, such as name and address, stripped out. It came on
an Excel spreadsheet on a CD. The managed care organization under contract to TennCare
pulled the data from its billing database for us at TennCare’s request.

We were surprised at the great distances the van companies traveled; but one of the most
interesting aspects of the story came from the “bid trip” field. We found that trips were not being
put out to bid, contradicting the state’s written policy. We found Moody’s transportation, the
most expensive vendor, was assigned more trips than his competitors, which in some cases,
charged half as much. One official explained she wanted to keep regular customers with the
same drivers. That’s nice, but that added millions of dollars to the state’s 50-million dollar

transportation costs. The Medicaid transportation business is ripe for investigation, probably in
every state.
Tips for pursuing medical CAR stories in your newsroom:
Don’t assume the data will be difficult to get and difficult to use. Especially when outside
contractors are paid to help manage costs, data is sliced and diced and shared on PC’s more
and more often.
Don’t assume that privacy concerns will prevent you from getting the data you want. For stories
about abuse of prescriptions, and waste in the transportation business, you don’t always need to
know who the patients are. Find the trends.
Find people along the data stream who are interested in your project (such as the medical
examiner who was also concerned about overdose deaths.) Having an advocate who wants to
help you with your project is 60% of the battle.
Talk to advocacy groups for ideas of what to investigate in the Medicaid program in your state.
Mental illness associations, kidney disease organizations, faith-based community health clinics –
the front-line patient advocates know the problems in the system and can often provide a lot of
help.
If your Medicaid program has been sued in federal court by patients’ rights advocates, read the
testimony of state officials in court for a roadmap to what data and reports might be available.

