‘Killers Among Heroes’ In National Cemeteries
Doug Stanley, CAR Specialist
The Tampa Tribune
dstanley@tamptatrib.com
(813) 259-7364

2006 NICAR National Conference
Newark
“Revealing Stories from
Veterans Data”

It once took an act of treason or mutiny to keep a military veteran from being buried in a national
cemetery. The rules changed after Army veteran Timothy McVeigh was sentenced to death in
1997 for bombing a federal building in Oklahoma City.
Wanting to ensure that McVeigh would not be buried in a national cemetery, Congress hurriedly
passed legislation prohibiting military funerals for veterans convicted of capital crimes and
sentenced to death or life in prison without the possibility of parole.
A parole loophole became apparent in August 2005 after the sentencing of Dennis Rader, the
notorious “BTK” killer. Though he received 10 consecutive life terms for the murders of 10
people in Kansas, Rader didn’t get a death sentence and is technically eligible for parole in 2180.
The chances Rader will ever be free are nil. Not willing to take any chances, however, Congress
passed legislation prohibiting veterans who commit capital crimes from being buried in national
cemeteries.
In the weeks before Congress was expected to close the parole loophole, we wondered – with a
large national cemetery and a sizable veteran population in our area – whether veterans who
became killers in civilian life were buried in Florida National Cemetery.

Dead men don’t tell tales
There are 70,000 men and women interred at Florida National Cemetery, and none of them were
talking. If we were to figure out if any of them had become killers in civilian life, we would have
to interview data, not people. But what data? To complicate matters further, time was short. The
task seemed daunting.
Answering the question proved to be much simpler than expected thanks to data we had on hand,
data scraped from the Web, military records and yellowed newspaper clippings in our own
library. The two most significant pieces of the puzzle were a Florida prison system database and a
database of Florida National Cemetery records.
The prison data, circa 2000, was from a long-ago project. (Moral: Hoard data. You never know
when you might use it again). Because we were attempting only to determine whether murderers
were buried in Florida National – not produce a census-like headcount – the age of the data didn’t
matter. Our initial discussions with Veterans Administration officials made clear they wouldn’t
supply the data we were requesting within our time constraints, so we ended up using Wget,
www.gnu.org/software/wget/, to scrape a database of veterans buried at Florida National.

Records tell dead men’s tales
The cemetery records and prison records were dumped into Access and joined on the common
firstname, lastname and DOB fields. The resulting matches were vetted against a variety of
sources, including military records, commercial databases and the Tribune’s own archives. The

military records, obtained under FOIA from the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis,
were important in confirming matches. Content of the records varies widely, but you’ll generally
find information about branch of service, dates of duty, rank and awards. TIP: Don’t file your
requests for records with the FOIA officer unless you’re prepared to wait weeks or months for
a response. Instead, fax your request to (314) 801-0605 to the attention of Scott Levins, assistant
director for military records. To expedite fulfillment of your request, include as much identifying
information as you have, including branch of service, Social Security number and dates of birth
and death. We filed numerous requests this way and never had to wait more than three days for
records.

As with most database stories, this one wouldn’t have been possible without CAR -- but
nor would it have been readable without further reporting. Yellowed news clippings in
our own library provided the two main subjects of the story: both former Marine Corps
corporals who each had been convicted of first-degree murder, died the same day, and
are interred at Florida National Cemetery.

