Ohio Public Records Audit
Tom Gaumer
Cleveland Plain Dealer
Tgaumer@plaind.com
216-999-4751

2006 IRE CAR Conference
Newark, N.J.
Using CAR for FOI

In the fall of 2003, a subcommittee of the Ohio Newspaper Association
decided it wanted to see if public records are readily available in Ohio at the local
level to anyone, not just reporters. Tom O’Hara and Tom Gaumer of The Plain Dealer
were put in charge.
Originally, the group was going to use a wide variety of organizations such as
the League of Women Voters to conduct the audit. After talking to other states,
however, we tried to keep it to journalists as much as possible, figuring we had more
control over them than outside groups.
The Columbus Dispatch has a very good Internet presence and that newspaper
and its web skills were invaluable to the project. At first, an Internet page had general
information about audits; then it listed the auditors. That page was password
protected, but the password went to any member of the Associated Press who needed
the information.
That fall and winter, we found auditors for each of Ohio’s 88 counties. The
Associated Press assisted in this effort and we used a couple radio stations and some
members of the Society of Professional Journalists on college campuses. We also
picked the records we would seek, which turned out to be very difficult, because we
wanted all counties to be the same and we needed records that were just as available
in Cleveland as they were in the smallest town in southeast Ohio.
We traveled around the state in March to train every auditor in what to ask for,
what to say, how to act, etc. We picked Wednesday, April 21, as the day everyone
would ask for records. Then the computer became even more useful.
The Columbus Dispatch made yet another web site available for all the
auditors to type in their results. Everything was standard for every county and the
Dispatch folks set up the web site so that the auditors saw only their own counties.
We asked auditors to fill out that form within five days and then the Dispatch web
folks made the results into a Microsoft Access database which they sent to David
Knox of the Akron Beacon-Journal.
Before we got all this on a computer, we worried that we’d have to type in all
the results by hand.
Knox made dozens of phone calls around the state to make sure the same
standards were being applied everywhere. We threw out one county after the reporter
told Knox that she was seeking records in offices where she was easily recognized.

Knox used Access to do a variety of cross tabs. We also used ArcView to map
the results.
Knox tabulated all the results in tables such as the one below. He made it very
specific to each county so that a reporter in a small county could just see how his or
her county did.
The Dispatch folks put all of Knox’s work and some additional information on
that original web site. The Associated Press told members to look there for results by
counties, maps and even logos that papers all over the state could use. Knox also
created a Word file telling how each county did for folks who could not read the
Access database.
The whole package was published throughout the state on Sunday, June 13,
with a few papers doing stories before than and a few the following Monday. But it
was such a widespread effort that it forced state officials to take notice.

5/12/2004 final results

Preliminary public records
audit results
Overall

Coun
t
Granted
246
Granted next day
13
Granted conditionally/partially
84
Denied by procedure
78
Denied-personnel
50
unavailable/too busy
Denied-not a public record
20
Total:
491
n/a
37

% of
total
50.1%
2.6%
17.1%
15.9%
10.2%
4.1%
100%

State law in Ohio says public records will be made available “promptly.” That
only happened 52.7% of the time, counting the next day as promptly.
You can read the stories about the public records audit at:
www.ohionews.org/pdf/ocogspring2004se.pdf

or
www.cleveland.com/publicrecords

