Image Mapper facts and tips
1. Where to try it or buy it
You can download a demo version at www.alta4.com, along with a manual that is
reasonably easy to use. Make sure to pull down the English version. (The program
comes from a German company.)
American vendor:
Joe Lewis
Decision Support Services, Inc.
888-840-6100
joe@dsslink.com

2. What’s good and bad about Image Mapper
The good….
• It’s cheap. It’ll run you around $600.
• It’s simple. Once you get the hang of it, you’ll have only a half-dozen steps to
turning your Arcview maps into Web-viewable maps.
• It’s cool. In your browser, you can click on any polygon or point in a map
and get a pop-up window showing data sitting behind it.
• It’s flexible. You can include whatever columns of information you want in
the pop-ups and exclude what the viewer doesn’t need to see.
• It’s easy on the viewer. The legends, layouts and zooming features are
visually clear and easily understood.

The bad….
• It’s not always swift. It can run real slow if you have maps with a thousand
or more polygons, like tax parcel maps. The fewer the polygons, the quicker
it runs.
• It’s finicky. It demands exactitude like few programs and doesn’t always
follow the garbage-in, garbage-out rule. Sometimes it can be good stuff in
and garbage out. At times, you have to tinker and tinker to get it right.
• It’s very static. It’s virtually impossible to modify maps once created. You
have go to back to Arcview or Image Mapper and recreate your Web map
every time you need to make changes.
• It may not like all browser or screen settings. For the end user, maps can
sometimes sit in odd places on the screen and might not work well with
frames versus non-frame settings.

• Tech support. Sometimes there. Sometimes non-existent. Expect to be on
your own.
3. Tips for use
•
•

•
•
•
•

Decide as much as possible how you want your map to look and what you
want in the pop-ups before you start up Image Mapper.
You must set your pop-up column headers in Arcview before using Image
Mapper. Right click your layer name in Arcview. Go to properties, then
fields, then give alias names to any fields you want to appear in the Image
Mapper pop-up window.
Under the properties tab in Image Mapper uncheck any Arcview layers you
don’t want to appear in the pop-up. Then in the layer you do want, make
sure to uncheck any fields you don’t want to appear in the pop-ups.
Make sure to get rid of Image Mapper’s mumbo jumbo in the Map Layout
tab and insert your description of the map.
When Image Mapper asks if you want to browse your results, say no. Go to
the folder where you put the files and click the Index file to start your
browser and view your map.
Get yourself a good amount of server space to store the Image Mapper files
you create. Each polygon or point gets produced as a separate HTML file,
which can gobble up space.

Dave Sheingold
The Record
Hackensack, N.J.
201-646-4313
Sheingold@northjersey.com

