Excel for beginners: Geek glossary
by Danielle Cervantes

The San Diego Union-Tribune

danielle.cervantes@uniontrib.com

References & Cell Addresses
A reference or cell address identifies a cell or a range of cells on a worksheet and tells Excel where to
look for the values or data you want to use in your formula. Addresses are made up of a column letter
and a row number. No two cell addresses are the same. Example: B1 or H23

Worksheets & Workbooks
A worksheet is the individual workspace you use for your tabulations. These are separated by tabs at the
bottom of the screen. A group of worksheets makes up a workbook, or entire file, you’re working from.

Functions
Functions are preset formulas that perform calculations by using arguments arranged in particular order
or structure. These include sum, average, median, and conditional statements. Arguments can include
numbers, text, TRUE/FALSE values, and/or cell references. Arguments can also be constants, formulas, or
other functions, which is known as nesting.
The structure of a function begins with the function name, followed by an opening parenthesis, the
argument and a closing parenthesis. If the function starts a formula, type an equal sign (=) before the
function name. Example: =SUM, =AVERAGE, =IF

Formulas

A formula is an equation that performs operations on data. Formulas perform math like a calculator,
they compare data, and they are used to edit and join text. Example: =SUM(A1+B1)

Sum

To add a series of values, you can either use a math operator like the plus sign, or you can use a colon to
state a range of addresses. Example: =SUM(A1+B1+C1) … or … =SUM(A1:C1)

Frequencies: Averages, Medians & Modes
To calculate the average, or mean, for a series of values, include the range of addresses you need to
average. The same process works for finding a median or mode. Median is the value at which half the
numbers are higher and half are lower. The mode is the most common number in the series.

Example: =AVERAGE(A1:A100) or MEDIAN (A1:A100)

Percent of Total
You will use this formula to calculate how much each value represents of the total. To do this, you will
need to make sure you have assigned an absolute reference in the formula so that Excel goes to the same
cell for each calculation in the series. This tool requires a dollar sign ($) between the column letter and
row number. Example: (B1/B$9) followed by (B2/B$9)

Percentage Change
These calculations allow you to see how much values have changed
incrementally.
The basic formula for calculating percentage change, regardless of Excel, is
(New-Old)/Old (a good mnemonic to remember is “NOO!”). Apply that
structure to an Excel formula, and you’re on your way. Example: =(B1-A1)/A1

Sorting

This tool allows you to rank a series of words or values in a column in either ascending or descending
order. You’ll use this for comparing salaries, budget items, census tract data, alphabetizing, etc. Example:

See right.

