Managing and editing the CAR story
NICAR in Newark – March 2006
Doug Haddix, projects editor
The Columbus Dispatch
(614) 461-5082; dhaddix@dispatch.com

CAR stories test and challenge editors in ways that other news stories may not.
Throughout the process, CAR stories require different strategies:
Know the data. The supervising editor needs to be familiar with key data, particularly its
limitations. Ask a lot of questions: Is this the only data that measures this? When will it be
updated? What’s not tracked by this system? Has the reporter talked with experts who regularly
use it (e.g. professors)?
Plug into the analysis. If you have hands-on CAR skills, sit with the reporter and look
through the databases, spreadsheets or mapping projects together. You may see something the
reporter has missed. Ask the writer to walk you through the key findings and what produced
them. If you lack hands-on CAR skills, find another editor or someone else in your newsroom to
help. Reporters need a safety net on all stories, particularly those using CAR.
Kick the reporter out of the newsroom. CAR reporters sometimes fall in love with the
data, the maps, the SPSS cross tabs. Remind them that the key findings are just the beginning.
Test those findings on the street. Find people whose lives reflect the findings. Use those cool
maps as a reporting device – show them to sources affected and you’ll get better comments. The
on-scene reporting often results in other leads to chase, other data to analyze.
Help the reporter with organization. It’s easy to get lost in the swamp of a complex
CAR story. You need to help keep the reporter focused and organized, especially if more than
one writer is involved. We use a network folder to share data, key reports, timelines, a phone list,
graphic requests, maps, interview notes and other electronic items. Reporters and editors use a
variety of systems to avoid sinking into CAR quicksand. Your job is to make sure that some
system – any effective system – is in place.
Draft a flexible story budget. Will this be a Sunday story? A Sunday story and two
sidebars? A three-day series? What’s it worth? Now’s the time to involve photographers and
graphic artists. They will help you think visually early in the process. Your story budget should
list elements that could work well on the Web. Once you have a story budget, meet with upper
management to get buy-in. Remember, though, that it’s flexible and certainly will change as
reporting continues. Having a battle plan in writing gives everyone a better chance of success.
Include deadlines and a back-out schedule for publication.

Work on graphics and maps early. This will force you and the reporter to prosecute the
data and key findings early. It will help the reporter know what key stats should go into the story
and what’s best for graphics. Sometimes the graphics and maps help during interviews. We may
show a graphic or map to a source, but do not allow them to keep a copy. Processing the graphics
and maps early helps avoid a train wreck at the end.
Find a photo partner. Ideally, one photographer should be assigned to the story or
project for continuity. Make sure the reporter is working closely with the photographer;
otherwise, you’ll have a disconnect between visuals and the story. The writer can look through a
photographer’s take to fill in gaps in color, scene-setting or other description in the story.
Insist on an early draft. You need to ensure that a complicated CAR story makes sense
and connects with readers. Talk with the writer about structure, approach and how best to use the
findings. Don’t let numbers get in the way of a good story.
Wear different hats as needed. Reporters, photographers, graphic artists and others
involved in the story/package/series need your time and attention. You need to be ready for
different roles: taskmaster, cheerleader, referee, problem-solver.
Be careful with editing and fact-checking. CAR stories have more potential landmines
than other news stories. Build in time to quadruple-check the key findings and stats. Pay close
attention to graphics, cutlines, maps, headlines, and other design elements to make sure
everything is accurate and in the proper context. Make sure reporters have time to scour page
proofs on bigger stories.
Prepare for fallout and follow-ups. CAR stories, by their very nature of shedding new
light on a topic, often tick off a government office, private company, nonprofit agency or other
subject. Be ready for phone calls, e-mails and/or legal threats. Similarly, be ready to follow up
the findings, capture public reaction and track any reform efforts.

