Toll roads:
Finding and using the data
Prepared for NICAR National Conference
Newark, N.J. March 9-12, 2006
Paul Overberg
USA TODAY
poverberg@usatoday.com
703-854-5427
The prospect of toll roads spreading across the landscape poses interesting questions about how we
pay for mobility. A state-by-state debate is just beginning. It will run for years. We’re about to see
more experimentation in U.S. highway design, operation and finance than any time since the1920s.
The debate will be angry at times. Americans love to just get on the road and go. Good highways
open to all are considered an entitlement. That’s why almost all U.S. highways are designed, built and
maintained by state governments with well-guarded funding – dedicated federal and state gasoline
taxes. Toll roads are few, and those are mostly built and run by public authorities. Most were begun
before the 1956 law that guaranteed 90% federal financing for the Interstate system – and barred tolls
on new Interstates.
But that monolithic model is breaking down under cost and congestion pressures. The idea of
congestion pricing – almost unthinkable five years ago – is being used on toll roads in several states.
Also winning favor: privatization of design, financing, operation and sometimes even ownership.
Whatever you think of it, the government-dominant model obscures lots of data on cost and
performance. Toll roads expose that data because investors demand it:
-- Where the financing comes from. Toll roads, whether run by government authorities or
corporations, have to raise money by selling bonds or stock. Investors won’t cough up the money
unless they clearly understand the risks involved. Hence a prospectus – a legal document outlining in
great detail what’s known about the toll proposal: costs, traffic prospects, potential competition,
environmental issues and state requirements. Standard & Poor’s, Fitch’s and Moody’s rate bonds, and
many investment banks rate stocks. A useful independent source of trends coverage is Public Works
Finance, a Westfield, N.J., newsletter edited by Bill Reinhardt. Abstracts appear free on its web site
(www.pwfinance.net). Another good source is the Federal Highway Administration’s Public-Private
Partnerships site (http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ppp/index.htm). The “case studies” section is especially
helpful in describing real examples of the bewildering possible combinations of
design/build/finance/operate.
-- Where the operating funds come from. How many vehicles? What kind? What toll rates? What
discounts?
-- How efficient is the toll road operator? How many customers pay tolls electronically (which are
cheaper to handle)? How many misreads per million vehicles? What are customer service costs for
typical transactions, such as issuing a transponder? How many customer service transactions does the
toll road operator handle through its web site? What’s the average customer phone wait time? What
are enforcement plans and costs?
-- How efficiently is the road itself being used? Traffic engineers talk about levels of service and
rate conditions on an A-F scale. A contract to run a state’s toll road would specify acceptable levels
and how often they must be measured. Toll road operators have a stronger incentive than state
highway agencies to keep traffic moving – congestion cuts profits.

-- Who is the traffic? Because a toll road operator has contact information for each transponder
user, it can do demographic research based on home addresses and registered vehicles.
-- Where is the traffic coming from? Without electronic toll transponders, most local and state
planners have no idea. The old way – recruiting a panel for an origin-destination survey – is
expensive, crude and takes months. Transponders allow real-time analysis linking home addresses and
entry and exit points and times on the toll route.
Resources
-- For basic lists of toll roads and their characteristics, the Federal Highway Administration
publishes an annual Web report with lots of details, but only on highways that receive federal aid
(http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/tollpage.htm). It also includes contact info on scores of agencies
operating toll roads, bridges and tunnels.
-- Peter Samuel of Frederick, Md., publishes a free (at least for now) and savvy Web newsletter
called TOLLROADSNews (www.tollsroadsnews.com). He has good contacts and can clearly explain
everything from electronic tolling technology to hybrid financing. Samuel favors toll roads if the
details make sense. He has done some work for the Reason Foundation, a California-based libertarian
think tank that has been advocating toll roads for years. Most recently, he wrote a January 2006
Reason Foundation overview on whether states should privatize operations of their toll roads
(http://reason.org/ps334.pdf). But his newsletter is straightforward and his opinions clearly labeled.
-- The Reason Foundation’s focus on toll roads stems from the interests of founder Robert Poole,
who still runs its transportation section. Its various studies and opinion articles are influential and get
cited frequently, so it’s a good idea to read up (http://reason.org/transportation/index.shtml).
-- The industry is http://www.ibtta.org/, the International Bridge and Tunnel Toll Association.
Among other resources, it offers a comprehensive glossary of terms, a collection of studies and reports
(http://www.ibtta.org/Information/content.cfm?ItemNumber=541&navItemNumber=1237) and a
collection of links to toll rates for highways around the world. It also publishes a pretty good thriceyearly journal, Tollways. Watch the current issue’s table of contents at
http://www.ibtta.org/tollways/currentissue.cfm?navItemNumber=907. For copies: 202-659-4620.
-- The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officers runs a website called
www.innovativefinance.org/. This clearinghouse offers lots of background on many experiments in
financing roads, bridges and tunnels.
-- The Transportation Research Board, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, just finished a
major study on the feasibility of fuel taxes for financing highways
(http://www.trb.org/publications/sr/sr285.pdf). Summary: Fuel taxes probably can still provide the
lion’s share of highway funds for the foreseeable future, but there’s growing resistance to tax hikes,
growing diversion to transit projects and growing “bypass:” fuel efficiency and hybrid vehicles. The
panel concluded that states should experiment more aggressively with toll roads and even broader user
charges across the entire road network. Also helpful background: proceedings of the board’s 2003
conference called “International Perspectives in Road Pricing,”
http://gulliver.trb.org/conferences/RoadPricing/.

