Latest in scraping from Denmark
By Nils Mulvad, executive director of Dicar, nils.mulvad@dicar.dk
Tip sheet for panel on scraping the web, Thursday the 9th of March 2006 in Newark
The software
Dicar uses specialized software for scraping – Robosuite from Kapowtech. See www.kapowtech.com. It can
be downloaded and used for free for a month. It’s rather expensive. We have one licence specialized for data
clipping.

Stories
We have used the tool for stories on houses for sale on poisoned grounds. Houses for sale we scrape every
week from a Danish site with overview of houses – www.boligsiden.dk.
We collect other material on houses (the value, the new owner, the price, if it’s sold by force). All this is
combined into a specialized searchable tool for journalists on houses, which has lead to many stories.
We collect some of the data on beneficiaries of agricultural subsidies from EU in the same way (Spain and
Scotland). Data from Spain was in heavy pdf-files, which we scraped. These data is now published on
www.farmsubsidy.org
We collect a list of all court-cases from all court-houses in Denmark (around 90) on a weekly basis to get a
database-overview of this. We began on this after a minister and her husband had several court-cases because
they couldn’t pay their bills. She was minister of family issues and she resigned after these stories.
We collect data from different phone books (for instance all state authorities). These data are being used as a
tool for journalists on advanced people search, especially to find former employees in an authority.
We collect all results from elections, published on the web. We then validate the data and finally we make
them accessible on the web. Here we have created a search tool which allows you to make all kinds of new
grouping and sorting of the data.
We have clipped data from different rental agencies for Holiday homes to show different prizing of the same
house in different countries. Thereby you can find the house with the biggest price difference.
We have found the political candidates from one party with activities on ultra right-wing web-sites by
making a long specialized search-string for Google and run that on every candidate by using a robot.

Lawyer: resume on legal situation
The legal situation on scraping is unclear. We have asked a specialized lawyer to make a status on the
situation. Actually there are three unsolved question:
- potential violation of database copyright protection when clipping all or most of the data (EUdirective on copyright protection)
- unclear rules for using and republishing the data (EU-directive on the use of public information)
- lack of clear rules for running robots and by that taking the power from the data-server
We are slowly beginning to raise the two first questions in the debate in Denmark on changing the law.

Legal: Changing database protection
We’re now using a concrete case to raise the question on database protection. Dicar has asked the authority
for accept of scraping data on transferring of pigs from farms to factories, and still haven’t got an answer on
this after four month. Dicar is now publishing information on this problem and has sent a description of the
case to the Commission on changing the FOI in Denmark.
I have also asked the Danish Ministry of Culture to change copyright protection of databases. I ask to get it
clear by law, that the paragraphs on copyright on databases could not hinder the press and others to use data,
which are published on the web by authorities.
We open up for the possibility that we can accept that the authorities can set up some rules by which we can
access the public databases, when it is necessary of technical or practical reasons.

