Farming subsidies is key to
investigate fraud in EU
By Nils Mulvad, executive director for DICAR – Danish International Center
for Analytical Reporting, nils.mulvad@dicar.dk
Handout for a panel on the CAR Conference, March 9th-12th 2006 in Newark. Panel-title:
The latest in international CAR

1. Follow the money
EU farming subsidies count for 43 percent of total EU-financials. It is therefore a main
target for fraud and misuse in all countries. To investigate we need concrete data in several
countries. Data on beneficiaries of subsidies must be cross-checked in different countries.
They will be checked with information on size of farmlands, business-information, special
data-analyze of all data, etc.

2. Export subsidies – a modern form of imperialism
Export subsidies are typically used for farm products – meet, sucker, milk - sold in foreign
countries. Farmers in these countries then can't compete and many must stop. Later these
empty buildings and farmlands will be bought by rich farmers from EU. This we have seen
in Poland. When these countries as Poland become members of EU, the big farmers get
even more subsidies and it become more and more difficult for ordinary farmers in Poland
to exist. Also here the main rule is to follow the money. Which companies get what for
which kind of products and on what markets? What is the concrete result of this in that
concrete market?

3. The rich farmers take it all
We also see this money go to the rich farmers and the leading elite - it means ministers, rich
businessmen, and the royal families. In fact analyzing the data shows us how the whole
farming industry is becoming very centralised these years. The subsidizing system makes it
difficult to run an ordinary sized farm. The key to that story is also the data.

4. A new battle for FOI
The situation in EU is for a big change in access-regulation. New directives on access to
environmental information, new traditions at authorities, the European Initiative on
Openness and the Ombudsman changes the situation for getting the data. Normally you
would take a small case as an introduction to these new possibilities to try it out and set the
standards, but this big case on getting the data on agricultural subsidies turns out to be a
really good starting point. Everything makes it so clear that there should be openness. It is
difficult to think this could be lost in a long term. We document the work and put it out for
free. FOI-request are been prepared or has been raised in UK, Denmark, Ireland, Sweden,
Finland, The Netherlands, Poland, Greece, Belgium, Latvia, France, Germany and against
the Commission. Others will follow. The interest is huge. With this project we’re part in the

process of breaking the closeness in several countries and publishing data in a multilingual
database.
Some countries put out data without FOI-cases beforehand. This is happening in Estonia,
Spain, Portugal, Slovenia and Slovakia.

5. Another way to cooperate
We can see different groups working on this project. Not only journalist. We see
environmentalists, supporters of the Third World and liberalist. We see NGO’s, think tanks
and politicians. First it is a joint project of UK-based EU Transparency and Dicar. We
coordinate this together. EU Transparency has the overall responsibility for coordination
and the web-site. Dicar coordinate and support the work for access and build the
multilingual database. We have then formed a group of journalists and others working for
getting the data out and published. In The Netherlands it’s the Evert Vermeer Stichting,
which has done the practically work. Every journalist working in the project has totally free
hands in making their stories. And the only purpose binding us together is the aim to get the
information and publish it.

6. Financing from OSF, Hewlett and ESF
It is expensive to run such a project. It is funded by Open Society Foundation, Hewlett
Foundation and European Social Fund. Concrete national investigations are funded by
national papers or others like Evert Vermeer Stichting. This is a way I think we’ll see more
often in Europe for big investigative projects. I had my doubts on this way to organise it,
but until now it has worked really well. I’m really happy to be part of this.

7. Facts - the raw data - is the way to document fraud and misuse
Dicar build the multi-lingual database in mySQL. It opened 1st of December 2005. It is
important to make queries and presentation in a journalistic way – keeping the search form
as part of the result and making rank-lists. Until now we have got data or promises for data
in UK, Belgium, Estonia, Denmark, Sweden, The Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, Slovenia
and Slovakia. This is 10 out of 25 EU-countries. The open access to the database makes it
possible for other journalists to investigate fraud and get other exact data for stories. There
are so many stories hidden in this.

8. Links
Status for getting the data in each country:
www.dicar.dk/Files/konferencer/Hand288.doc
Here is tactical advises on access to CAP data.
www.dicar.dk/Files/konferencer/Hand285.doc
A general advice on tactics in getting access can be found here:
www.dicar.dk/Files/konferencer/Hand227.doc
The site for the project in The Netherlands is placed here:
www.eucoherence.org
This will be the web-site for the project, when it opens next month
www.farmsubsidy.org
The US-project for publishing data on subsidies is located here:
www.ewg.org

