Investigating
Workplace Safety
Why you?
Because someone has to.

Seth Borenstein
Associated Press
sborenstein@ap.org
202-776-9454

1

A caveat
This presentation is based on
investigations done while at
Knight Ridder Newspapers in
January 2006 along with Linda J.
Johnson and Lee Mueller of the
Lexington Herald-Leader.

Story links
Original story:

http://tinyurl.com/a3xmg
Follow up statistics dispute story:

http://tinyurl.com/ck4bs
FOIA-tip generated story:

http://tinyurl.com/z92w4

2

What happened
●

●

Sago mine disaster
January 2, 2006.
12 miners killed; one
seriously injured.

The specifics....
●

Miners were trapped.
The emergency
survival equipment
didn't work and didn't
last according to the
sole survivor.

3

The coverage
●

First, there was the
screw-up when
officials and the
media reported that
the miners had
survived.

This created an opportunity for
investigation
●
●

●

The first story was the dead/alive screw-up
The next story that many reporters did was the
bad safety record of the mine company.
After that, media then turned its attention to the
industry as a whole and federal regulations and
enforcement of them. At Knight Ridder, we
jumped directly into investigating this angle,
skipping the investigation of Sago's safety
record and that of its owner.

4

The result....
Enforcement of mine safety seen
slipping under Bush
By Seth Borenstein, Linda J. Johnson and Lee Mueller
Knight Ridder Newspapers

WASHINGTON - Since the Bush administration took office in 2001, it has been more lenient
toward mining companies facing serious safety violations, issuing fewer and smaller major fines
and collecting less than half of the money that violators owed, a Knight Ridder Newspapers
investigation has found.
At one point last year, the Mine Safety and Health Administration fined a coal company a scant
$440 for a "significant and substantial" violation that ended in the death of a Kentucky man. The
firm, International Coal Group Inc., is the same company that owns the Sago mine in West
Virginia, where 12 workers died earlier this week.
The $440 fine remains unpaid.
Relaxed mine safety enforcement is widespread, according to a Knight Ridder analysis of federal
records and interviews with former and current federal safety officials, even though deaths and
injuries from mining accidents have hovered near record low levels in the past few years.

The analysis shows:
-The number of major fines over $10,000 has dropped by nearly 10 percent
since 2001. The dollar amount of those penalties, when adjusted for inflation,
has plummeted 43 percent to a median of $27,584.
-Less than half of the fines levied between 2001 and 2003 - about $3 million have been paid.
-The budget and staff for the enforcement office also have declined, forcing
the agency to make do with about 100 fewer coal mine enforcement personnel.
-In serious criminal cases, the number of guilty pleas and convictions fell 54.8
percent since 2001. In the first four years of the Bush administration, the
federal government has averaged 3.5 criminal convictions a year; in the four
years before that the average was 7.75 per year.

5

How we did that
●

●

First, we went to the MSHA website where you
can download “high dollar citations” of more
than $10,000 and downloaded them all.
The site:

http://www.msha.gov/drs/AS
P/OtherReports.asp

But nothing is easy
●

●

●

At the last moment we found that the database
we downloaded had about 9 percent duplicates.
It was not usable.
MSHA public affairs still wouldn't return calls
and e-mails.
Luckily, Linda got hold of the data experts and
they agreed that the duplicates should be
dumped. In essence, we cleaned up their
database.

6

Then we looked at budget figures
●

●

●

An excel spreadsheet available upon request. It
was all taken from DOL records.
In 2001, the mine safety agency had 1,181 coal mine
enforcement workers. This year, the agency had
about 1,080 workers. And the president has
proposed a further cut to 1,043 in the current fiscal
budget.
Lesson: Always, always look at the Enforcement
budget and staffing levels. They are key support.

Then they complained.
●

MSHA said the data we got from their website
was incorrect. They posted a response on their
website on a federal holiday. They took it off
when data people at MSHA complained that we
had it right. Then they put it back on. It is at:

http://www.msha.gov/SagoMine/MSH
APenalties.asp
●

They said we used averages when we used
medians. We asked them to correct it. They
didn't.

7

We asked where they got their data
●

●

●

They gave it to us. There were 221 large fines
that weren't in the public database that they
used. They wouldn't explain where they came
from.
They compared 2005 to 2001. We compared
the last five years of the Clinton administration
to the first five years of the Bush administration.
We re-analyzed their data and found essentially
the same thing. We sent it to independent stats
experts, including IRE's Jeff Porter.

And the end result....
WASHINGTON - Federal mine safety officials on Wednesday disputed a Knight Ridder
analysis showing a dramatic reduction in the dollar amount of large fines for mine safety
violations during the Bush administration, saying in an Internet posting that those fines
are actually up.
Mine Safety and Health Administration spokesman Dirk Fillpot said that Knight Ridder
made "assumptions that were incorrect" in its Jan. 6 analysis.
But when Knight Ridder conducted a new analysis in the manner suggested by Fillpot
using MSHA's newest database, it showed the same dramatic drop.
The newest data show a 43 percent reduction in proposed median major fines from the
last five years of the Clinton administration when compared with the first five years of
the Bush administration. That's the same percentage reduction found in Knight Ridder's
original analysis, using a smaller, online database of MSHA violations.

8

And who was right?

But four statistical experts who looked at the databases and analyses said
Knight Ridder's findings were accurate and that MSHA's assessment
didn't contradict the newspaper's findings of smaller fines during the Bush
administration.
"It's really wrong for them (MSHA) to say you're incorrect," said John
Grego, a professor of statistics at the University of South Carolina in
Columbia. "There's no question that the average/median proposed penalty
has gone down."

And FOIA pays off in strange ways

I FOIA'd all sorts of documents (which I have yet
to get, but it could be because I moved on and it
was supposed to go to my KR editor). But a
disgruntled MSHA official saw my FOIA
accidentally left on a copy machine and became a
good inside source. Leading me to this story...

9

Proposed rule on air masks in coal mines
killed in 2001, resurrected 2006
By Seth Borenstein
Knight Ridder Newspapers

WASHINGTON - Federal mine safety officials, who four years ago axed a
requirement to stock coal mines with spare emergency air masks to protect
miners from poisonous gases, now say workers are in "grave danger'' without
those breathing devices.
Following back-to-back mining accidents in West Virginia that killed 14 men
last month, the Bush administration is reviving a rule that would require the
added supplies of the masks and the training to use them.
Without those requirements, which were killed eight months into President
Bush's first term in 2001, bureaucrats at the Mine Safety and Health
Administration (MSHA) now warn that coal miners "face serious physical injury
and death,'' according to a draft of the proposed regulation obtained by Knight
Ridder.

The take-home lessons
●
●

Always look at enforcement statistics
Look at fines levied (and change them to
current dollars)

●

Look at fines collected

●

Look at appeals of fines

●

Look at the number of inspections

●

Look at the number of inspectors

●

Look at overall enforcement budget

10

It's worked on other stories
●
●

A 2003 story on EPA pollution enforcement
A story this past weekend on U.S. Food and
Drug Administration oversight (or lack thereof)
of the cadaver tissue industry.

Inspections decline in tissue industry
SETH BORENSTEIN
Associated Press

WASHINGTON - A piece of fruit coming into the United States is more likely
to get government attention than a ligament or heart valve taken from a cadaver
and destined for transplant.
While demand for donor tissue is booming, government inspections have fallen.
In 2001, the Food and Drug Administration inspected 1 in 3 registered tissue
companies; now it is 1 in 8. Over the same period, the tissue enforcement staff
has shrunk from 252 to 227.
Meanwhile, the list of companies or individuals handling tissue has quintupled in
that time frame from 406 to 2,030.

11

Other workplace story ideas
●

●

Workplace fatalities were declining, but they are
now back on the rise. Bureau of Labor Statistics
reports: A total of 5,703 fatal work injuries were
recorded in the United States in 2004, an increase of
2 percent from the revised total of 5,575 fatal work
injuries reported for 2003. The rate at which fatal
work injuries occurred in 2004 was 4.1 per 100,000
workers, up slightly from a rate of 4.0 per 100,000
workers in 2002 and 2003.
http://stats.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfch0003.pdf

And it's even worse for Hispanic
workers

All US fatality rates 2000-2004:
4.3, 4.3, 4.0, 4.0,4.1
Hispanic fatality rates 2000-2004:
5.6, 6.0,5.0, 4.5, 4.9

12

Dangerous jobs
2004 jobs with the highest fatality rate per 100,000
workers per year (national average is 4.1)
Logging worker: 92.4
Aircraft pilot and flight engineers: 92.4
Fishers and related fishing workers: 86.4
Iron/steel workers: 47.0
Trash workers: 43.2
Farmers and ranchers: 37.5
Roofers: 34.9
Electric power line installers: 30.0

And it doesn't pay to drive

Driver/sales workers and truck drivers: 27.6 (905
workplace deaths)
Taxi drivers and chauffeurs: 24.2

13

But it really doesn't pay to head into
space
●

My own calculations
are that the rate for
US astronauts and
payload specialists is
142.26 fatalities per
100,000 per year

14

