Maud Beelman, Projects Editor
The Dallas Morning News
mbeelman@dallasnews.com
http://www.dallasnews.com

2006 IRE National Conference
Fort Worth
“Editors’ Track: Conceiving,
managing the investigation”

Structure the investigative process. Divide it into sections. The length of each is up to
you and your reporters, but the phases are typically the same. The first phase is research
and planning, a preliminary look at the subject of investigation. Start drafting a project
outline here and talk about your methodology. File your FOIAs, request the data you
know you need at this point. Have early meetings with photographers, graphic artists and
Web colleagues to discuss various ways to best tell the story. The more time spent at the
front end, the fewer problems at the back end. The second and third phases are for
reporting, retooling the project outline, drafting story outlines and writing. The final
phase is for editing, fact-checking, final decisions on layout/presentation and, if
necessary, pre-pub legal review.
Meet regularly. Doing so at the same time on the same day of every week makes them
easier to remember and lets the meetings serve as mini-deadlines, allowing reporters and
editors to assess progress, compare notes, share ideas, sources and leads.
Take notes during those meetings. Often during these meetings, reporters will give the
best or essence of what they’re learning or doing – the latest great piece of information
they’ve uncovered – and that is not always reflected when the copy is turned in. They talk
“in the moment” at these meetings, and you can capture color or details that might be lost
as the reporter labors under the long write.
Interview your reporters. Some reporters think best by talking out their findings,
problems or strategy. Write yourself a memo later as to what the reporter said, so you can
help jog memories, as needed.
Outline the project and, later, the stories. Outlines are valuable not only for showing
you what you have, but for revealing holes in the project planning, methodology or story.
There is no one way to do an outline, except to say that it is not a notebook or a brain
dump. It’s simply a document that outlines what you think the project/story will be about.
Later, it can be refined to update with what you know. And, even later, it can be an
outline of the actual story that makes writing easier. Everyone has their own way of doing
them; the format is not what's important. The focusing of your mind on what you are
reporting and writing is. (For those who argue that this imposes rigidity on what is
inherently a creative process, I would argue that this creates a pasture in which creativity
can run free.)
Build timelines/chronologies. They often show you connections or holes you did not
realize existed.

Build your foundation with data and documents, and use humans to bring your story
to life. If your foundation is data analysis, do that in the earliest possible stages of the
project. The last thing you want to be doing near the end of a project is trying to get
anecdotal reporting to match up with data.
Write memos. They also help reveal holes in information or logic that you might not
notice until too late to fix. If you have many reporters working on a project, encourage
them to write memos to share across the team – writing them in “publishable” format,
with quotes, names, titles, etc., exactly as they would appear in print, saves time at the
end. Team investigations are like compounded interest – when individual knowledge is
shared and leveraged, the overall effort is strengthened.
Encourage reporters to write as they go. The best of the best do it, and there’s a reason
why. First, in long investigations, it makes the final writing easier. Second, it allows you
to write “in the moment.” If you don’t start writing until the end of a yearlong
investigation, not only are you overwhelmed with information, but you risk having lost
the spontaneity of your material.
Encourage reporters to re-read their notes periodically throughout the reporting and
writing process. Information that they obtained at the start of the investigation often
means something very different from the perspective of greater knowledge and
understanding.
Create benchmarks for your investigation. Determine how you will judge the project’s
successful progression, or lack thereof. How will you know when you have enough? How
will you know if you should bail out?
The 25-word rule. With apologies to Steve Lovelady, who I believe coined this rule, if
your reporters can’t summarize their story in 25 words or less, they’ve got more
reporting/thinking to do.
Confront early. I know this is heresy, but information or perspectives may emerge from
confrontation interviews that you did not know/had not considered. Doing these “final”
interviews before the last minute gives you time to consider, analyze and incorporate
what you heard. It can strengthen your report and buttress you against allegations of onesidedness or malice.
Make your methodology clear to the reader. Include a box, or letter from the editor, or
both, explaining exactly what you did, how and why. Consider explaining in even more
detail on the Web, or posting the database(s) that served as the analytical foundation. This
is the best way to protect yourself from those who might try to discredit your work.
Contain chaos but allow failure. Use all the organizational tools at your disposal to
keep the project and the reporters on track, but allow people to take chances even if
there’s a risk of failure. Let them go down those informational rabbit holes, just follow
closely behind.

