Maud Beelman, Projects Editor
The Dallas Morning News
mbeelman@dallasnews.com
http://www.dallasnews.com

2006 IRE National Conference
Fort Worth
“Women journalists doing
international investigations”

No finger pointing: Understand the local customs and mores. That’s as important as
knowing the history and the players. Don’t, as I did, end up under house arrest in Iran
because you were thoughtless in how you interacted with locals, especially men.
Find a sherpa: Especially if you’re new to an area or a subject, or both, it helps to find a
wise one to introduce you to and guide you through a community. Sherpas can be fixers,
but often they are much more – wise elders of the group or place you want to explore.
Be a woman: Women are generally not threatening, especially in war zones. Soldiers
often like talking to women because we remind them of either their sister or mother or
wife or lover. Often, as a woman, you can get away with asking or doing things your
male colleagues cannot. If teaming up on a good cop/bad cop routine, consider playing
the bad cop. It’s usually not expected.
But be tough: In some cultures, women are expected to be meek and mild. While
remaining respectful, you have to make clear that you are a force to be reckoned with and
that your questions cannot be ignored and your path cannot be blocked. That strength can
be disarming.
Find the wise woman: Too often, we seek men as our sources because men still
dominate most positions of leadership worldwide. But often the women of a
community/country have as good, or better, finger on the pulse of a nation/subject. To my
surprise in the macho Balkans, women were often the true power brokers.
Find a peer: If you’re heading somewhere you’ve never reported from before, or if
you’re trying to organize a cross-border investigation from your home base and you don’t
have a correspondent there, identify the leading local journalist in your target country(ies)
and suggest a joint reporting project. The advantage for everyone of a cross-border
investigation is that you gain more information by connecting the dots – say of a U.S.
company’s criminal or abusive behavior abroad – than you would get alone or from the
purview of only one country. To identify journalists in other countries with whom you
might consider working, you can check:
•
•
•

Major U.S. journalism fellowship programs, such as the ones at Harvard, Stanford
and Michigan, for their international fellows. These are typically experienced,
award-winning journalists who have gone through much vetting to get this far.
Annual awards programs that allow international entries to see who has won for
what kind of work.
The Courage in Journalism award winners from the International Women’s Media
Foundation at http://www.iwmf.org/

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The European Journalism Centre, based in Maastricht, Netherlands, which serves
as a networking mechanism for journalists from western and eastern Europe at
http://www.ejc.nl/
The International Federation of Journalists, based in Brussels, Belgium, an
umbrella group for more than 100 national journalist associations around the
world, at http://www.ifj.org/
The Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism, founded by women, at
http://www.pcij.org/
The Southeast Asian Press Alliance, an umbrella group for several journalism
organizations in the region, at http://www.seapa.org/
The South Asian Journalists Association, at http://www.saja.org/
The International Research and Exchanges Board for independent media
worldwide, at http://www.irex.org/media/
The Media Institute of Southern Africa, which supports independent media on the
continent, at http://www.misa.org/
The International Journalists’ Network, run by the Washington-based
International Center for Journalists, at http://www.ijnet.org/
The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, an elite network of the
world’s leading investigative reporters, coordinated by ICIJ and the Center for
Public Integrity, at http://www.icij.org
The International Directory of Investigative Journalists, maintained by IRE, at
http://bolles.ire.org/dij/
Newspapers/media outlets in the target country(ies). More and more are online
and many have English-language versions. You can track someone’s reporting
history and coverage area, get contact information and start a dialogue that could
lead to future collaboration.

See also IRE Tipsheet #1037: Multinational investigations: Challenges in doing
investigative reporting across borders, 2003 Global Investigative Journalism Conference,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

