Maud Beelman, Projects Editor
The Dallas Morning News
mbeelman@dallasnews.com
http://www.dallasnews.com

2006 IRE National Conference
Fort Worth
“Investigating the business
of war”

Research resources:
www.sigir.mil
Office of the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction (SIGIR), the successor to
the Coalition Provisional Authority Inspector General (CPA-IG), was created by
Congress to provide oversight of the Iraq Relief and Reconstruction Fund and serves as
the government’s watchdog for fraud, waste, and abuse of Iraq reconstruction money. It
posts online its quarterly reports to Congress, which contain appendices that include a list
of contracts the office oversees. Currently, the office has oversight only for
reconstruction contracts, not military operations contracts. SIGIR has studied Iraqi
reconstruction from the perspectives of management, contracting and programs/projects.
Its report on human capital management, published in January 2006, shows how an
inadequate organization for reconstruction was at the core of all other problems. The
report on contracting is due out in mid-July, and the one on project management is
expected to be released in September. SIGIR encourages people not to file FOIAs before
checking its site or with the office. To reach SIGIR’s spokespersons directly, e-mail
publicaffairs@sigir.mil.

www.icij.org
The International Consortium of Investigative journalists, part of the Center for Public
Integrity, produced two in-depth reports on the business of war and military outsourcing.
In October 2002, it published an 11-part online series, “Making a Killing: The Business
of War,” http://www.publicintegrity.org/bow/ on private military companies, arms
smugglers and other war profiteers. The series, published as a book in early 2003, has a
good primer on government outsourcing and contracting. In October 2003, the group
published “Windfalls of War,” on post-war contractors in Iraq and Afghanistan,
http://www.publicintegrity.org/wow/. Reports on that subject continued through
November 2004. Both reports provide background, potential sources and resources, as
well as historical context and perspective.

http://www.defenselink.mil
The U.S. Defense Department provides a daily list of contracts over $5 million that it
awards, which reporters can search to see if local companies are involved abroad. You
can also sign-up for a daily e-mail that lists DoD contracts awarded.

See also IRE Tipsheet #1905: Business of War: contracts, private armies and
gunrunning, from the 2003 IRE National Conference in Washington, D.C.

