2006 IRE National Conference, Fort Worth Texas: Hospitals and other medical investigations.
Subject: Investigating the health care – or lack thereof – provided for female prisoners at the Carswell Federal
Medical Center near Fort Worth Texas, the only full-service prison hospital in the country for mentally and
chronically ill women convicted of a federal crime.

Since 1999, I have written a series of stories examining egregious medical and other abuses – including rape, coverups and an allegation of murder – that have occurred at this prison-hospital since it was first opened in 1996.
The series cover the women’s lives and medical histories both in and out of prison, the torturous trail of
contradictory documents and misleading statements about the cases released by the prison to the women or their
families and several of the families’ gutsy struggles to save the prisoner’s life and find out the truth about her
medical care or circumstances surrounding her death.
Sufficient evidence was found over the years from prison documents, medical records released by the families,
interviews with the women, their lawyers, former Carswell doctors, judges and outside physicians, among others, to
back up the families’ and outside observers’ charges of gross medical abandonment of these prisoners, and in at least
one case, strong evidence of a cover-up of a death that may have occurred from the use of a choke-hold that killed.
Other findings confirm the hospital’s wide-spread use of shackles on sick and dying women, even when they are in a
coma; that women in wheelchairs are assigned to a fifth floor ward with elevators that are consistently out of
service; the fact that women who die at an outside hospital are not counted in Carswell’s official death toll; and the
prison’s willful disregard of the Bureau of Prison’s rules that require prisoners who threaten suicide to be put on 24hour watch and that autopsies be performed on every women who dies at a prison facility.
Advice: Prepare for lots of stonewalling when dealing with the Bureau of Prisons. Use every other means available
to get documents because the BOP doesn’t release much and when it does, it is usually too late for your deadline.
And be prepared for lots of mail from inmates once it is known that you are working on a prison story. Prisoners
have plenty of time to write. Vet your prison contacts well; there are lots of manipulative folks behind bars.
Remember that the warden of a prison is like the captain of a ship: all powerful. When you get permission to
interview an inmate inside a prison, don’t take any side trips. This reporter was banned from going inside Carswell
in 2000 after stopping for about two minutes on my way out from an approved interview to speak to several women
who were taking a smoke break. By the time I got to my office, my editor had been called by the warden and was
told I could not come back because I had spoken to women not on my approved list. The ban is still in effect.
Since then, I have had to interview women for the stories through letters and phone calls, or through their families.
Many women in prison, however, are estranged from families, so getting their stories honestly and without fear of
retribution against them is difficult because the prison can read their letters both outgoing and incoming, and listen
in on their phone calls. Often attorneys will arrange a telephone interview in their office or forward an inmate’s mail
to me since the prison is forbidden from reading or listening in on communications between a lawyer and her client.
That, of course, doesn’t always mean they follow that rule, so always be cautious even when you think your source
is safe. Several of the women who spoke to me for my first story were transferred from Carswell to other prisons
after the story ran, in spite of the fact that they were still ill and in need of care for chronic illnesses. Others have
been sent to the Security Housing Unit, aka the SHU or solitary confinement after speaking to me or sending me
materials that were used in the story. Documents used were the women’s medical records, letters to and from the
prison warden and the head of the bureau to senators and family members, letters from Carswell medical workers to
the families, letters from outside doctors to the families, pathologists’ reports, outside hospital records, taped records
of emergency calls, autopsy reports, and letters from the women to their families. FOI requests were made to the
Bureau of Prisons early on in my investigation, but the response time always exceeded the law’s limits and usually
requests for the information were denied based on privacy issues with the inmates even when the bureau had written
permission from the inmates or their families to release the information to me. Most of the documents I used were
copies sent to me by inmates, the families or their attorneys. I was able to find some of the information I needed on

the Bureau’s web site, but it is general and very limited. Today, after many years of reporting on this prison, a call
for reform has been taken up by a retired Texas appellate court judge who is representing a very ill and medically
neglected inmate at Carswell. He was so outraged after reading my stories that he has compiled them, along with his
client’s charges, to present to colleagues in Washington in an effort to open a congressional investigation of the
prison. One of the stories was used in a presentation to the U.S. Sentencing Commission by Margaret Love, a retired
justice department attorney who is now head of the American Bar Association’s Correction and Sentencing
Committee, on behalf of the ABA’s lobbying efforts to broaden the criteria for compassionate release.
Also, my story about a brutal rape at the prison several years ago that ultimately resulted in the conviction of a guard
who is now serving 12 years in prison, was used by the prison reform group Stop Prison Rape to help convince
congress to pass the first prison rape reform act in congressional history.

Resources, reports and contacts:
www.bop.gov – the Bureau of Prisons home page. This has limited information, but it does provide inmate locater
info (if you have the full name of the prisoner or her/his number) and the location of each prison in the federal
system, its phone number and its contact person. It also links to the bureau’s electronic reading room where you can
find the BOP rules and regulations, staff manuals, news releases, congressional committee reports and court
orders/opinions that are directly related to the bureau.
For Freedom of Information requests, contact the Office of General Counsel, Room 841, Federal Bureau of Prisons,
320 First St. Washington DC 20534.
Mike Truman, public affairs, BOP, 202-514-2000
Carswell Federal Medical Center, 817-782-4000; contact person Deborah Denham: crw/execassistant@bop.gov2
Federal CURE, Inc. PO Box 15667, Plantation Fla. 33318, www.fedcure.org. or email: information@FedCURE.org
Stop Prison Rape, 332-384-1400, media contact: Andrea Cavanaugh, 213-384-1400 ext. 106, acavanaugh@spr.org
The California Coalition for Women Prisoners, 415-255-7036 ext 4, info@womenprisoners.org.
GAO Report: Women in Prison, published in December 1999: GAO/GGD-00-22
Amnesty International “Not Part of My Sentence” – a violation of the human rights of women in custody in the
United States, published around 1999 and found on Amnesty’s web site.
IRE’s story resource web site.
Other areas regarding prisons and health that need investigation are the federal prisons for men and women who are
not sent to Carswell or any of the men’s prison hospitals, the local jails in your community, the state jails and the
federal men’s prison hospitals. Heath care in the entire prison system in this country is a subject that has had little
exposure in the media and even less oversight by the regulators.

