Visual Investigations
2006 IRE Annual Conference - Dallas/Ft. Worth
Jaimi Dowdell, St. Louis Post-Dispatch
jdowdell@post-dispatch.com

How can visualizing information be helpful to an investigation?
Think of the power a photo can have to move people. Without any words or explanation a good
picture can quickly and accurately convey more information and impact than words alone. Or think of how
easy it is to scan the sports page and look at the Major League Baseball standings. Without any instruction
we’re trained to see that the first team listed in the graph is the team in first place. That small box packs
enough information to summarize what’s going on in the sport. Take this concept – the ability to summarize
and convey information in new ways – and now think about how it can help inform both investigations and
daily reporting.
Sometimes things that might otherwise be unclear or hidden become apparent when you actually
look at the information. Whether it’s charts and graphs created in Excel, a map of how boards of directors
are connected or a sketched out timeline, actually seeing the information can be insightful. The key is to
think about things differently – see patterns, uncover new angles and find sources you wouldn’t have
otherwise considered. For story ideas go to www.ire.org/extraextra and search for “mapping,” “social
network analysis,” “graphics,” etc.
Some ways you can bring a visual edge to your investigations:
• Charts (pie, line, fever, bar, scatter plot, timelines, histogram, etc.) – This is a basic step you can
take. Before you get into heavy data analysis or intense reporting with any data, actually look at it.
This will help you get a quick overview of what you might actually want to focus on and give you a
better idea of what’s going on. I’ve found this especially helpful for beat reporters who might get a
smaller chunk of data that they need to analyze for a daily story.
• Sparklines – a new twist on the traditional idea of charts and graphs. Edward Tufte has developed
sparklines which are simple, small, word-sized graphs that are dense with information. Recently,
reporters have been successful using the software R to produce series of sparklines that quickly
allow them to see where they might want to focus their investigation.
• Maps – We’re used to looking at maps that just display geography. Geographic Information
Systems allow us to look at information spatially. Think of a map displaying population density by
county. This is just a simple example. Reporters have used mapping software find out things such
as: sex offenders living near schools, disappearing wetlands, where homes are being robbed
versus where the thieves live, areas not reached by tornado software, crime hotspots, etc. With
mapping software journalists can conduct more sophisticated analysis that can really ramp up
stories.
• Social network analysis - Social network analysis software allows you to visualize data and
relationships in ways that go beyond columns and rows. Just as mapping software allows reporters
to see spatial data in new and different ways, social network analysis software allows you to map
relationships. A good deal of reporting revolves around analyzing relationships--social network
analysis can help you take this one step further

