INVESTIGATE YOUR LOCAL STOCKBROKERS
^^^^^^^^^^
Report from the IRE conference in Fort Worth, Texas, June 2006

OVERVIEW
The Dallas Morning News studied a database of brokers’ regulatory histories and
discovered deep flaws in the NASD’s system of reporting violations. The paper
profiled a local broker who had filed for bankruptcy to avoid paying a widow
the $225,000 arbitration award she had won against him (he’s now paying her)
and had failed to disclose three hot-check convictions and two current tax
liens as required by regulators (they’re now on his official record). The News
also identified the firms in town whose brokers had the most black marks on
their records.

Read the four-part series at www.dallasnews.com/brokers
or ask for it by e-mail from pfoutch@dallasnews.com
TEN TIPS FOR YOUR OWN BROKERS PROJECT
1. Get friendly with your state securities regulator. On the whole, Texas has
a bad reputation for regulating industries. But the securities commissioner
actually does her job well. She thinks the NASD doesn’t do enough to get
regulatory information to investors and weed out bad brokers. Try yours out.
2. Ask him or her to send you the “state data download” from the NASD,
containing everyone registered to sell securities in your state and their
regulatory histories. They’ll probably send it to you gladly. It’s only been
two or three years since state securities boards forced the NASD to make such
downloads available to the states. The NASD would never give you this data.
Texas -- and presumably your state -- has to because of public records laws.
3. In technical terms, your request could say, “Please send me the latest
state data download from the NASD for all the brokers registered to sell
securities in (your state). I understand you’re able to request these once a
month from the NASD. I understand the database will include but not be limited
to these tables: Customer complaints, terminations, judgments and liens, bond
forfeitures, regulatory actions, civil judicial actions, personal bankruptcies,
criminal disclosures, test scores, active registrations, prior registrations,
office of employment history, residential history, identifying information, and
the composite table, which links the brokers’ names to their CRD numbers. I
don’t want the Social Security numbers in the composite table, so please delete
those. If the composite table is too big to open in Excel, you might have to
open it in Microsoft Access to delete the SSNs.” Texas charged us $35.
4. The tables contain not just brokers who live in your state but also those
who live elsewhere but are registered in your state because they have customers
there. If you just want people in your state or in your metro area, you have to
narrow down the Office of Employment History table. Find the records where the
address end date is null (indicating they’re still at that address). Then
narrow it down by the state or city names. Unfortunately this will require some
cleanup because the addresses are typed by the brokerage firms’ compliance
officers. Sometimes they don’t put the state and city names in properly. Once
you have a new table narrowed down to the brokers you want to study …
5. Analyze individual brokers. Ask Access to tell you how many times
individuals’ CRD numbers appear in the various tables. Each table is linked by
the brokers’ CRD numbers. You can find which brokers in your area have the most
investor complaints on their records, for example; who has the most complaints
in the last three years; who has been the subject of the most regulatory
actions; who has been charged with the most financial-related crimes; etc. (Be
careful: If a broker is listed as working at more than one office, their number

will appear twice in your modified list, and this analysis will double the
number of disclosures they have in each category. It would be very bad to say a
broker has four customer complaints against them when really they have two.)
6. Analyze firms. Find out how many times the firm name from the narrowed-down
Office of Employment History table appears in the other tables. (This doesn’t
require cleanup, because the firm name here is a pulldown for the compliance
officers, they don’t type it.) You can find out which firms have hired the
brokers who’ve been terminated the most from other jobs, for example. By taking
each table’s results into Excel, you can total up, as we did, the number of
disclosures carried by brokers at each firm, then divide by the number of
brokers, to find the firms in your area whose brokers have the highest rate of
regulatory items on their records. (Most of the events happened when they
worked at previous firms. That was our firms’ main complaint about the study.)
7. Do a case study. Most disgruntled investors can’t talk to you, because they
settled their case and agreed not to talk about it as part of the settlement.
The only investors who can talk are those who got nothing (not a great option,
because it means arbitrators decided they didn’t have a case); those who are
still in arbitration (their lawyers may or may not want them to talk while the
case is ongoing); and those who received an award in arbitration, rather than a
settlement. This last option is the best option, because these people are under
no restrictions and arbitrators decided they had a good gripe. (The customer
complaint table shows the monetary amount and whether it was a settlement or an
award.) How we found our main broker to focus on was, we looked for a broker
who had multiple investor complaints on his record, where the last one resulted
in an arbitration award. His last disgruntled customer (the widow) talked to
us, and we were able to write that if only she had checked out his record, she
would have known about these earlier complaints against him.
8. Get more info from your state. The state data download contains only the
NASD-approved disclosures. It doesn’t contain items that the NASD “archives,”
such as customer complaints that were settled for less than $10,000 and are
more than two years old; bankruptcies that are more than 10 years old; etc. (So
if you go to www.nasd.com and do a BrokerCheck search on a broker, the number
of items on BrokerCheck will match what you’ve got.) But the states -- at least
Texas does -- will give you all the archived information as well. So if you’re
profiling a broker, call the state and ask for his full history. You might find
more investor complaints.
9. Avoid pitfalls. You’re dealing with people’s livelihoods. If you get the
data wrong, they’ll sue your pants off. Even if you get the data right, they
might sue you anyway. We were threatened with three lawsuits; the main broker
we profiled lost an account worth $100,000 in personal annual income to him. So
bulletproof yourself:
-- Convene a panel of experts to show the data to. Let them find flaws in it,
so when you talk to the brokers you’ve got answers to their objections.
Securities lawyers and retired regulators are the best bets.
-- Give the data upfront to the brokers and/or brokerage firms. Tell them what
you’ve got on them, so they have a chance to tell you if it’s wrong.
-- Talk with the person at your state securities board who deals most closely
with the data to make sure you understand what it means. Also consult the Form
U-4 at www.nasd.com to understand what questions are being answered. NASD
spokeswoman Nancy Condon also was helpful.
10. Go to the Web. We posted our Excel files that showed every single
brokerage firm in town and the number of regulatory disclosures their brokers
had in each category. We also posted a searchable database that showed the
number of black marks on individuals’ records in each category (90 percent of
brokers have no black marks at all) and we provided links for readers to go
find the details of the events at www.nasd.com or by phone from the state
securities board. The searchable database got thousands of hits, and the state
board got hundreds of calls and e-mails seeking information.

