Writing the Investigation
Long-Form Journalism in the Age of Distraction
IRE National Conference, June 16, 2006
Richard Galant, Associate Editor, Newsday
rgalant@newsday.com
(631) 843-3274

Grab readers – and don’t let them go
In an age when people are easily distracted by the web, blackberries and cell phones –
when the life cycle of a news story might be as little as three hours – getting readers’
attention for longer, more complex investigative stories is a greater challenge than it has
ever been. Fortunately, writers have many tools to grab readers.
Report, report, report
You can almost guarantee the success of your investigative story before you write a word
of it. The secret is to report it as deeply as you possibly can. You might be able to touch
on all the key elements of a story in a half-hour interview with a source. But if you get
that person for an hour and a half – or go back a day or two later for a follow-up
interview – you’ve greatly increased the chance that you’ll get below the surface, really
understand how the system works, get the revealing anecdote, or even get the source to
admit that the story he or she first told you isn’t true. Having that depth of reporting
means you’ll be able to write a story with a rich layer of detail that brings the story alive
for readers. Conversely, “good writing” will never make up for an incomplete or
inadequate reporting.
Every story is different
When you’re done reporting, you have a crucial decision to make. What kind of story
structure tells it best? Nothing beats a hard news approach when there’s an injustice or
abuse that’s shocking, glaring, obvious on its face. A more subtle “shades of gray”
situation might call for a softer, anecdotal lede. Perhaps the most powerful tool writers
have is the ability to tell a story, in narrative form, but that works best when you have
compelling characters and a dramatic sequence of events. The key is not to try to warp
the material into a narrative when it isn’t really there…or into a hard-news approach
when you don’t have the goods to back it up.
One theme indivisible
Let your reporting help you decide on the key theme of the story, and stick to it. Think of
it as the skeleton on which everything else will hang…or the classical music theme that
will serve as the basis for all the variations. Everything in the story – the data, the
interviews, the documents, the examples and anecdotes – will in some way relate to the

theme, either by supporting it, expanding on it, explaining the limitations of it or reacting
to it.
Go with your best stuff first
Since we want to ensure that people will read and stay with the story, it’s essential to
capture their attention with the strongest, most vivid and arresting material first. You
can’t take their attention for granted and assume they’ll find the great quote in the 18th
paragraph. But don’t make the mistake of loading the top with every good quote,
anecdote and statistic you’ve got – leaving nothing for the rest of the story.
Narrative does not mean chronology
Just because you’re writing a narrative doesn’t mean you have to begin at the beginning.
Flashbacks, dramatic sequences out of strict chronological order can make a narrative
more compelling and can be woven together with the right kind of transitions to make the
whole story stronger. Dele Olojede’s haunting story of a woman’s struggle in Rwanda 10
years after the genocide (“Her Son, Her Sorrow,” May, 2004) is one example.
http://www.newsday.com/news/nationworld/world/ny-rwanda-day1,0,7016176.story
The rocky road
Avoid large, uniform sections – chunks of exposition, or of data, or extended interview
segements – if possible. To keep readers interested, create a “rocky road” mix of
anecdotes, key findings, data and quotes.
Suspense
If you can keep some dramatic tension, getting readers to wonder how the story turns out,
you can keep them reading through a 2,000-word story --- or a 300-page book, for that
matter. Don’t give it all away at the beginning. Sometimes it isn’t a matter of holding
back on what happened…as long as you don’t reveal how it happened.
The End
Bring it back home at the end of the story. Explain what ultimately happened to the
people you wrote about at the top. The last few grafs of a story can be the most powerful
and can leave readers with a lasting impression.

