``Policing the police’’ panel
The health of any police department or police agency is directly related to the
quality of the people that it hires. Many scandals that have rocked police departments
from Miami to Dallas to New Orleans are rooted in the hiring of officers with dubious
backgrounds and criminal histories.
If you want to determine how healthy your department is, examine the people it hires:
1. Find out what you can about the hiring process. How does it work? How
do people apply? What documents are created? Cultivate the folks in
personnel, particularly the people who conduct background investigations. In
Dallas, for example, every recruit completes a personal history statement and
an employment application. Background investigators also complete a preemployment background investigators report on each recruit.
2. Problems sometimes are not so much with hiring policies but with
exceptions made to them or how they are interpreted. Too often, warning
signs are ignored in order to fill academy classes. Ask for a copy of the
department’s hiring policies. Ask for any documents involving exceptions to
those rules. If your department has been on a hiring binge, it will likely be
the case that the folks in personnel will be under huge pressure to overlook
potential problems and to hire borderline candidates.
3. Police officers can be your best resource to find out about officers with
questionable pasts. In my experience, good police officers don’t want to
work with problem officers and are glad tell you about it. In our project on
the department’s hiring practices, police officers tipped us off to many of the
folks we wrote about.
4. Request a computerized roster from your Police Department with names
and dates of birth. If possible, merge that with your state’s convictions
database. You may be surprised at what you find. Such a check should be
considered a starting point and it requires double-checking that information
with other records to verify that it’s the same person.
5. Take a look at the academy training process. Find out how officers are
doing on the state certification test. If there’s a high failure rate, it could
indicate a problem. For example, the department had created a recycling
program in which recruits who failed were given remedial training and put in
another class. The department has since eliminated the recycle program and
changed its passing requirement.
6. Sometimes sources will help you around open records requests. Make
friends with your personnel department people because might give you
records without an open records request. This will be critical in states such as
California where police officer personnel records are impossible to obtain.
Some Texas cities operate under the Local Government Code, which has also
some restrictions on what’s public record.

7. If you’re looking at a particular officer, contact your state licensing
agency for its records. In Texas, the Texas Commission on Law
Enforcement Officer Standards and Education keeps a personal status report
and you review their employment history and any law enforcement training
they’ve had.
8. Look for ways to expedite the open records process. When doing open
records request, sometimes it will move it along faster if you state that you
are not requesting information that is not public such as an officer’s social
security number, etc. We started doing this because Dallas officials were
seeking Attorney General's opinions on each and every request.
9. Check to see if your department has an Internal Affairs "resume’’ for
each officer. If it does, that’s one way you can quickly determine what kind
of discipline an officer has. Dallas does not require that you file an open
records request for this, and other cities will likely have different procedures.
10. Be sure to get requests for Internal Affairs in early and quickly. Since
obtaining internal affairs documents can take a while, it’s imperative that it
will be done fast. They often are a gold mine of information that can show
how the hiring of a problem officer resulted in the department having
disciplinary problems with that person.
Contact information:
Tanya Eiserer
The Dallas Morning News
Office 214-977-2079
Cell 817-228-3514

