Stretching your resources to do investigations
2006 IRE Annual Conference
Fort Worth, Texas
Dee J. Hall
reporter
Wisconsin State Journal
dhall@madison.com
(608) 252-6132 (After Sept. 1)

Although I began my career at a much-larger newspaper, for the past 15 years,
I’ve been reporting for the Wisconsin State Journal in Madison, circulation about 90,000.
I said good-bye to big expense accounts and trips to far-flung locations. But I’ve
discovered a lot of good stories can be done in my home state. How do I do it?
1. Have 2-3 things going at any one time. By having several projects in the works, you
avoid eating up too much time and drawing the concern and scrutiny of copy-hungry
editors.
2. Make frequent use of open-records requests. Force public officials to gather needed
documents, which form the core of most stories. While copying costs can get expensive,
I've never paid more than $300 for a set of documents and searching. Usually you can
negotiate the prices down. Make it a habit to request a fee waiver, if allowed by your
state’s open records law.
3. Use whistleblowers. Whistleblowers and insiders often have many of the documents
you need -- saving time and money on searching and open-records requests.
4. Generate tips by writing hard-hitting stories. Once sources figure out you’re the
type of reporter who will pursue hard-to-get stories, you’ll have more tips than you can
handle – and sources willing to gather a lot of the information for you.
5. Focus on stories you can do close to home to avoid travel costs. To give stories a
broader perspective, interview local or national experts who have a handle on the
problem outside of your area.
6. Use free help from experts. Professionals and experts often will work for free for a
news organization if it's part of a legitimate investigation. Experts get free P.R. and you
get free expertise.
7. Find free sources for court documents. Getting court records is often a pricey
proposition -- $1.25 a page in Wisconsin. I usually ask the prosecutor, defense attorney or
other people associated with the case to fax or send them to me electronically. If they're
seeking publicity for their causes, they're often happy to comply.
8. Use local and national public-interest groups. Such groups often study problems of
interest to your audience and can even put you in touch with “real people” in your area.
By studying an issue, such groups often do some of the reporting for you.

