Sexier Than You Think: Investigating Electric Utilities by Nigel Jaquiss of Willamette
Week, Portland, OR presented at the national IRE conference in Dallas June 16, 2006.
Electric utilities generate enormous cash flow, are fundamental to the economy, often
pollute the environment, are politically active and most importantly from a reporter’s
perspective, possess monopolies. Most reporters shun them but they are fertile territory
for investigative stories.
1. Motivated sources: Customer advocates are tremendous repositories of information
and story ideas. Nearly every state has both consumer and industrial user groups.
Start with the National Association of State Utility Consumer Advocates
www.nasuca.org/. Each state typically has at least one association of industrial users.
Find yours at www.elcon.org. Also useful: former executives (check proxy statements
for departures), utilities with adjacent territories
2. The documents and the numbers: The federal Energy Information Agency tracks
most useful numbers by state. www.eia.doe.gov/fuelelectric.html. The Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission www.ferc.gov is a treasure trove. Start with the “Form 1”
Each state has a some form of Public Utility Commission, which handles rate cases
and audits, among many other useful sources of documents. Go to www.naruc.org for
links. Three other agencies that also can provide a lot of information: The Securities
and Exchange Commission: www.sec.gov. Pay particular attention to litigation,
related party transactions and regulatory issues in the 10-K. For pollution issues, the
Environmental Protection Agency: www.epa.gov and for nuclear reactors,
www.nrc.gov. A few other useful sites for general industry news:
www.energycentral.com and www.worldenergynews.com
3. The conflicts: The perennial story in utility coverage is the conflict between
customers’ desire for lower rates and shareholders’ and management’s’ opposing
desire. That conflict plays out in rate cases, when utilities present utility commissions
what amount to budgets and consumers argue for lower rates. Such filings and
subsequent audits of costs and actual earnings provide a money trail. Beyond that
perennial battle, another enduring conflict in electricity is public ownership vs.
investor ownership. Each side has a trade association that provides useful info. The
American Public Power Association www.appanet.org for the public utilities; and the
Edison Electric Institute www.eei.org for investor owned utilities.
4. The big story? Perhaps the biggest future source of stories about electric utilities will
be the effects of the recent repeal of the Public Utility Holding Company Act.
PUHCA resulted from corporate raiders in the early 20th century using utilities’ cash
flow to finance speculative investments. Repeal re-opened the ownership of utilities
to just about anybody. Mergers, leveraged buyouts and tax-driven deals be probably
result. Examples: Texas Pacific’s attempt to buy PGE; Warren Buffet’s purchase of
PacifiCorp; KKR’s investment in Dayton Power & Light and failed attempt in
Arizona.

