GIS AND TORNADO SIRENS
2006 IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE IN FORT WORTH
Sarah Okeson
Journal Star Peoria, Ill.
sokeson@pjstar.com 309-686-3251

On May 10, 2003, a tornado with winds up to 200 mph hit South Pekin, a small village
near Peoria, capping a week in which more than 300 tornadoes were reported across the
Midwest. The Journal Star has mapping software, and I decided to use it to look at how
prepared Peoria County was for a tornado. Here are some of the tools and sources I used
in doing the story.

GPS Device
I wanted to look at how much of the county was within range of tornado sirens. I
soon learned that sirens aren’t like houses with specific address. They’re often in fields or
parks so it’s more accurate to plot their latitude and longitude. Some counties and
municipalities know what latitude and longitude their sirens are at, so all you need to do
is get the information and plot it in ArcGIS. Unfortunately, Peoria County didn’t have
that information. I bought a GPS device so I could find the exact locations myself. People
who hunt and fish frequently use GPS devices. You can buy a simple handheld one for
about $100.
Downloading Waypoints
You’ll need an eTrex cable and another piece of software to import the
coordinates from the GPS device to your computer. I used www.gpsu.co.uk which let me
import the waypoints into my computer as a shapefile that I could use with ArcGIS. Once
I had the locations of the tornado sirens I drew radii around them to show how far away
the sound of the sirens could be heard. I compared the coverage area of the sirens to a
map of the census blocks to see how much of the county’s population was covered by the
sirens. I also mapped the locations of the county’s schools and nursing homes to see if
any of them were outside the range of the sirens.

Tornado Sites
Here are some sources that helped me learn more about tornadoes.
http://www4.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-win/wwcgi.dll?wwevent~storms. With this site, you can
look at what tornadoes or other disasters have hit your state or county, if there were
fatalities and what the property damage was. Alan Moller, who can be reached at
Al.Moller@noaa.gov, is a senior weather forecaster with the National Weather Service in
Fort Worth.
http://www.nssl.noaa.gov/ National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla. Harold
Brooks, a research meteorologist, was very helpful and interesting. He can be reached at
(405) 325-6083.

Newspaper: PJS
Date: Sep 11, 2005
Day of Week: Sunday
Edition: All
Section: CITY
Page: A1
Length (in lines):
Headline: Peoria selected 'stormready' - With 17 tornado sirens, city one of 37 in Illinois
to earn designation
Byline: SARAH OKESON
Captions:
Published: LEFT: Julie Redenius comforts her daughter Linda, 6, on Sept.
14, 1965. The girl broke into tears when she found her mother's
home at 1218 W. Blaine St. flattened by a tornado after walking
home from school. Julie Redenius escaped the house through a
back door but had to dig her way back in the front door to where
two of her sons were trapped in the rubble.
ABOVE: Norwood School students line up outside their tornadowrecked school along West Farmington Road in September 1965.
The students were waiting for buses to take them to three
churches serving as temporary classrooms. A portion of the
school was severely damaged in the Sept. 14, 1965, tornado.
CAPTION: Peoria County sirens
Keywords: weather

[Go To Best Hit]
PEORIA - As New Orleans grapples with the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, Peoria is
nearing the anniversary of the worst tornado to hit this community, and city and county
planners are wondering if they are ready for a repeat.
Almost 40 years ago, on Sept. 14, 1965, an afternoon tornado injured 30 people and
caused an estimated $2.5 million in damage as it left a seven-mile swath through
Norwood, Bellevue and South Peoria.
The city had sirens, but the only advance warning of the tornado was the sound of the
150-plus mph winds. No one pushed the panic button to sound the sirens because the
tornado wasn't spotted before it hit.
In the decades since then, the city and county have spent thousands of dollars installing a
network of sirens - 17 in the city and 63 in the county outside Peoria - and plan to add
more soon.
"We're always playing catchup," said Vicky Turner, the director of Peoria County's
Emergency Services & Disaster Agency. "I know we'll never have the entire county
covered. It's just too much to do."

But the National Weather Service thinks Peoria is adequately prepared for a tornado or
other disaster. The city is one of 37 communities in Illinois and the only city in the TriCounty Area to be considered "storm ready" by the weather service.
In comparison, New Orleans, Bloomington-Normal, Springfield and Rockford weren't
considered "storm ready" by the National Weather Service, although Champaign-Urbana,
Carbondale and Aurora are.
"The National Weather Service is saying that this community is ready for natural
disaster," said Chris Miller, warning
coordination meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Lincoln. "People in that
community can rest assured that the emergency managers are prepared for it."
To be considered storm ready, communities must, among other things, have access to
radar data, be able to alert residents of possible disasters that are coming and be prepared.
Weather forecasters disagree on the effectiveness of tornado sirens. Some say it's a
mistake to rely too much on sirens.
"A siren is like a doorbell," said Miller. "If someone rings the doorbell, all you know is
that someone is at the door. You don't know who they are or what they want."
But Alan Moller, a senior weather forecaster with the National Weather Service in Fort
Worth, Texas, is an advocate for sirens.
"It's best to have a multiple warning system and not depend on just one thing," Moller
said. "I think a lot of people think sirens are passe and low-tech, but I don't think there's
anything wrong with that. Most people killed by tornadoes are outside or in mobile
homes. Sirens reach people who have the greatest vulnerability."
The city's tornado sirens consist of white rotating horns that are mounted on 50-foot
poles. The county's sirens are black cells stacked on top of each other on a pole. The
more cells the siren has, the more powerful it is.
The sirens cover almost every part of the county's cities, marching north up Illinois
Route 29, south on U.S. Route 24 and west on U.S. Route 150.
Planners decide where sirens should go by looking where people are moving and how
close the other sirens are. Depending on the make and size of the siren, it can be heard
anywhere from 0.4 to 2 miles away.
The sirens for the city and county cover census blocks for all but about 5,400 people in
the county, or about 3 percent of Peoria County residents, according to a computer
analysis of the county sirens and 2000 census data.

On the first Tuesday of every month, city ESDA Planner Dwain Deppolder takes to his
car as the city tests its sirens, listening as the warning system wails and trying to spot any
neighborhoods that can't hear them.
In the early 1990s, the city upgraded its sirens, reversing an earlier decision to scrap the
1960s-era system after public outcry. The county has bought new sirens with money
from a public safety sales tax that voters approved in 1996.
Tornadoes are to the Midwest what hurricanes are to Florida and Louisiana, but for about
70 years, from the late 1880s to 1952, government weather forecasters weren't even
allowed to use the word "tornado" in a weather forecast. That meant people often didn't
know about approaching storms in time to take shelter.
The man in charge of weather forecasting in the late 1880s, Gustavus Henrichs, was from
Iowa, and he didn't like the term.
"He believed it was ludicrous to think there were as many as 25 tornadoes in the United
States a year," said Harold Brooks, a research meteorologist with the National Severe
Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla. "He was concerned that if people thought there
were a lot of tornadoes they might not want to move to Iowa. That ban was in place for a
long time."
It was in place on March 18, 1925, when the Tri-State tornado was on the ground for
more than three hours, passing over southeast Missouri, southern Illinois, and southwest
Indiana, killing 695 people and destroying 15,000 homes.
Tornado historians speculate that increased awareness about tornadoes after the Tri-State
tornado contributed to a steady decline in the fatality rate.
In 1948, two men at an Air Force base in Oklahoma issued the first tornado forecast. Four
years later, the U.S. Weather Bureau began the first public severe storm forecasting
service.
The last single tornado to kill 100 or more people in the United States was the Flint,
Mich., tornado of June 8, 1953, that killed 116 people. Fourteen tornadoes have hit Peoria
County since 1950, including the 1965 twister, according to the National Weather
Service. None of the twisters have killed anybody.
As Peoria waits to see if refugees from Hurricane Katrina will arrive here en masse, local
emergency workers are working with the local Red Cross chapter and The Salvation
Army to be ready to house hundreds of people.
Peoria County Administrator Patrick Urich said it's good practice for how the county
could handle a disaster here.

"We've got to make sure we have plans drawn up for all to see," Urich said. "What's
being afforded by this opportunity is to see how this works in action."

