Stretching your resources to do investigations
Investigative Editors & Reporters conference: June 15-18, 2006
Dave Moore, Dallas Business Journal
dmoore@bizjournals.com
214-706-7112
I’ve been at small to mid-size papers since 1989, so I’ve learned how to spread the butter
thin. But all reporters have to learn how to stretch their resources, regardless of how big
the paper is. There is so much information and there are only so many bodies to throw at
it.
In the past four years, I have attempted to address this by searching out, collecting and
using databases and expert sources that often yield conclusions or facts that aren’t
debatable. Databases put meat on the bones of anecdotes and steer writing away from “he
said, she said” stories.
And now the tips:
-- When you’re working on daily copy, think about the stories that could have been, had
you had more time or intel. Keep after it if you think you’ll need it – or even if you don’t.
-- Some topics are so enormous, it’s hard to know where to start. If you can find a
database that addresses the topic, use it to hone in on extremes and what’s “normal.”
-- Keep an eye out for printed spreadsheets or reports. Those are evidence of databases,
and often, if you can get them in usable digital form, they’ll be your exclusively, until
someone else catches on.
-- Not all database stories need to be blockbusters. I once had to write about fire hazards
from droughts and used a sheriff department’s 911-dispatch database to show an uptick in
the number of wildfire calls to illustrate a drought’s impacts. It took me four months to
get that database, though I wanted it for a different purpose. It was worth it.
-- Tired of baseless claims from gadflies and other rumor mongers? Ask them to give you
a lead or a specific fact that can be backed up. Sometimes, your database can help get to
the bottom of some of these things. If it doesn’t deal with dollars (which your databases
hopefully can track), it’s probably not that big a deal anyway.
-- While databases are great, don’t trust them unless you know them to be true. Spot check

data or findings, especially when you find you’ll be making some extreme statements or
claims.
-- Quick access to data can save you when your sources don’t call back, and it can answer

questions that politicians or bureaucrats don’t want to.
-- Always double check your results with an expert, or by visual confirmation if possible.
-- Don’t commit to writing a story until you have the facts nailed down, no matter how
juicy a database or tip appears.
-- Sometimes, a ton of work and research can yield a short story. That’s OK – no need to
kill a forest full of trees to prove you worked 40 hours on a project that didn’t go
anywhere. The sky isn’t falling? Then keep it short.

