The latest in social network analysis
2006 IRE Annual Conference - Dallas/Ft. Worth
Jaimi Dowdell, St. Louis Post-Dispatch
jdowdell@post-dispatch.com
Aaron Kessler, The (Charlottesville, Va.) Daily Progress
akessler@dailyprogress.com

What is social network analysis?
Social network analysis is a method of research using data to analyze relationships between individuals,
organizations, etc. Driving social network analysis is the idea that social networks are fundamentally a part of any
group or community. The people who know each other, and, in turn, know others present a web of power and
knowledge. Theoretically, these connections and relationships speak volumes about our society and the individual
players, or actors, themselves
Why social network analysis?
Social network analysis software allows you to visualize data and relationships in ways that go beyond
columns and rows. Just as mapping software allows reporters to see spatial data in new and different ways, social
network analysis software allows you to map relationships. A good deal of reporting revolves around analyzing
relationships--social network analysis can help you take this one step further.
A couple examples:
There are two main ways reporters have been using social network analysis over the past couple years. The
first is to simply look at the connections, or make a graph of the relationships and the other is for more involved
analysis. Often the graphs and analysis won’t be published but can go a long way to help inform your reporting. Here
are a couple examples:

The Richmond Times Dispatch used social network analysis to look at the power structure or Richmond, Va., to see
which individuals were the major players. See below (Figure 1) for a graphic showing individuals in Richmond
connected to at least three organizations. The circles represent individuals and the squares represent organizations.
All of the stories and an interactive online graphic can be found here:
http://www.timesdispatch.com/servlet/Satellite?pagename=RTD/HTMLPage/RTD_HTMLPage&c=HTMLPage&cid=1
031784382107
1

Figure 1

The St. Louis Post-Dispatch has used social network analysis to help create graphics to support stories about the
Blunt family in Missouri. When Democrats began questioning lobbyist Jewell Patek’s connections to Missouri’s
Governor Matt Blunt the paper decided to run a story about these connections. While the graphic below wasn’t used
to help report the story it was useful to help simplify the information for readers (See Figure 2 below).

2

Figure 2

What can you do with social network analysis?
The real question you might have about social network analysis probably doesn’t involve software. What you’re
probably wondering right now is how you can make all of these nodes and lines work for you and your newsroom.
What if you don’t live in a big city and the most powerful board members in your community belong to the local school
district? One of the wonderful things about social network analysis is that it can be tailored to suit many projects.
Here are some ideas for just about any beat in all types of communities:

3

•

Local government power—which city council members are connected to others outside of government via
business or organizations? How might these relationships affect important decisions being made in your
community?

•

Campaign contributions—which candidates are getting all of the money and from whom? Are there
special interests that the donors are trying to promote? Are there any political action committees in your
community? How is everyone involved?

•

Crime—criminologists have used social network analysis to track the criminals at the heart of many
problems within inner cities. Police can then take that information to target the sources of the problems.

•

Public health—Researchers have used this method to track the spread of HIV and SARS. Reporters could
look at the spread of West Nile and other diseases throughout the nation.

•

Contracts and bids—Who is getting public money for performing services in your community? Who are the
winners and losers in the contract game? Are there any connections between local businesses and
government officials that might have an influence on which companies are awarded contracts? How is the
public being served through this process?

Want to know more?
IRE has compiled a list of resources and examples that can help get you started. The IRE Social Network
Analysis page (www.ire.org/sna) includes links to stories others have done, tipsheets, literature and examples
outside of journalism.
You don’t have to work for a large news organization or be a complete CAR nerd to make social network
analysis work for you. The good news is there’s software available that is reasonably priced and with some effort
fairly simple to navigate. The International Network for Social Network Analysis (http://www.insna.org/) has a link to
all available software. Our experience has been with UCINET from Analytic Technologies. You can get a free trial
download of this software and pricing information at: http://www.analytictech.com/ucinet.htm.
There is also a lot of literature available on the uses and practices of social network analysis. While most of
the published work is academic in nature, it can really help shed light on using this stuff. To really understand the
methods and theories behind social network analysis most people recommend Social Network Analysis: A
Handbook, by John Scott; and Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, by Stanley Wasserman and
Katherine Faust. Scott’s book is a bit simpler and a great place to start, but once you get going you’ll find the
technical explanations from Wasserman and Faust to be a great help. Also, be sure to check out Introduction to
Social Network Methods, a free, online handbook by Robert A. Hanneman
(http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/SOC157/TEXT/TextIndex.html). IRE’s social network analysis page is also a great
source of the latest information on social network analysis and its uses in investigative journalism.

4

