ANATOMY OF A LOBBYING SCANDAL

IRE Annual Conference
Fort Worth, Texas
June 16, 2006
James V. Grimaldi
Investigative Reporter
The Washington Post
202-334-6000
grimaldij@washpost.com

Susan Schmidt
Investigative Reporter
The Washington Post
202-334-6000
schmidts@waspost.com

READ THE STORIES: www.washingtonpost.com/abramoff
Here are some samples of the kinds of documents we used for the investigation of
lobbyist Jack Abramoff.
•

•

LOBBYING. Find lobbying reports at http://sopr.senate.gov/. PDFs with amounts of
money paid to lobbyists, the issues on which they lobbied, sometimes the agencies they
lobbied and who hired them. In addition, the primary place of business in the U.S. and the
interests of foreign governments and foreign companies in those clients when disclosed.
DOJ’s Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) web site is out of date.
Unfortunately, that means it is best to go to Dept of Justice to review and copy the files
there http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fara/. The Center for Public Integrity has taken a
stab at a comprehensive lobbying web site. http://www.publicintegrity.org/lobby/
Includes 2.2 million records from the Senate's Web site from about 200,000 lobbying
forms (and amendments) filed since 2000.
The Center for Responsive Politics maintains a lobbyist database:
http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp but it is not as inclusive or as organized
as Political Moneyline, , http://www.fecinfo.com/. Downside for MoneyLine is that it is
duplicative and includes former lobbyists (such as dead people).
Washington Representatives, which also has a web site, www.lobbyists.info offers
an up-to-date site of registered lobbyists. Lacks historical data. Paid site but offers free,
5-day trials. Often includes bio, personal data.
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS. Other panels will examine political giving. Some
quick sites: www.opensecrets.org, the Web site of the Center for Responsive Politics. It
is free and accurate. CRP codes donations to make them more accessible than they are on
the Federal Election Commission site, www.fec.gov. Another site,

•

•
•
•

•

•

•
•

http://www.fecinfo.com/ requires paid registrations. Organizes material a little
differently than CRP. Generally charges for additional information, but might give free
pass or special deal for smaller news organizations or students. FECinfo also has reliable
lobbying information. Selected state information at The Institute on Money in State
Politics http://www.followthemoney.org/
PRIVATELY FUNDED TRIPS. Congressional rules permit lawmakers to take trips
paid by private companies, nonprofits, universities and other outside groups as long as
legislators limit what they take to what the rules call "reasonable and necessary
expenses." Marketplace, American RadioWorks, and a team of graduate students from
Northwestern's Medill School of Journalism cataloged every privately sponsored trip
taken by members of the House or Senate since 2000.
http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/congtravel/ That database is now in
use on PoliticalMoneyLine. The hard copies of these reports are kept with the House
Resource Center and the Secretary of the Senate. RadioWorks searchable database:
http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/congtravel/data.html
PoliticalMoneyLine – fecinfo.com – also has analyzed privately funded travel from
2000 to 2006 as disclosed by members and senators.
Recently, the Center for Public Integrity took Medill’s database and updated it and added
staff travel. http://www.publicintegrity.org/powertrips/
CONTRACTS. Federal Contracts Database on IRE’s Campaign Finance Information
Center. Search for federal contracts awarded to a particular business: a great place to start
when looking at contracts awarded to companies in your area, or work being performed.
TRADE PRESS AND NEWSLETTERS. Most industries have a trade magazine,
newspaper or newsletter covering them and the regulators that regulate them. Many of
these can be found on Nexis or Factiva sites, or are kept in agency libraries.
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS. Nearly every industry has a trade group or
professional association, often based in Washington and state capitals, to represent the
industry’s interests. Find the group and get their publications. Many are online. The
Encyclopedia of Associations is available in libraries and online, but not free, at
www.galenet.com The American Association of Association Executives has a Web
directory of associations at http://info.asaenet.org/gateway/OnlineAssocSlist.html takes
you to the site of each association (about 6500 of them), but does not provide a blurb with
info about each association like the Encyclopedia of Associations does.
LAWSUITS. Key documents to find a company’s disputes with creditors, employees,
rivals, etc. Can be windows into a company. For our SunCruz story, “Untangling a
Lobbyist's Stake in a Casino Fleet,” found at www.washingtonpost.com/abramoff, we
looked at thousands of documents in bankruptcy and state court. The SunCruz case led to
Abramoff’s unraveling.
COMPANY OFFICIALS. The company’s public affairs officers and public officials.
Outside public affairs officials who represent the company. Use discretion depending on
the angle of the story. If you can’t reach them at work, you can call them at home. Get
company official names from web sites and from SEC (see below). Also, Leadership
Directories, publisher of government “Yellow Books,” public executive listings. The web
site is http://ldi.bvdep.com and lists the executives at every company. It's expensive but
worth it if you can afford it.
FORMER EMPLOYEES AND RIVALS. Employees who have left a firm or have
sued the company you’re investigating often provide inside information. Check lawsuits,
get internal directories, get names off web sites and Google searches.
LABOR UNIONS. Know a lot about a company. Also can have an interest to keep
company secrets. Union officials can put you in touch with employees.

•

•

•

•

REGULATORS. Rule-making, fines, citations, policy agendas -- often everything
important runs through the federal, state and local agencies that regulate industries.
Check rule dockets, warning letters, enforcement actions, file public-record requests for
meetings with officials. e.g., EPA, USDA, OSHA.
http://docket.epa.gov/edkpub/do/EDKStaffCollectionDetailView?objectId=0b0007d4801
19bf6
For example, EPA dockets are found at http://www.epa.gov/epahome/dockets.htm
LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES. Find out which legislative and congressional
committees have jurisdiction over the industry. Look at legislation, appropriation bills,
hearing reports, investigative reports. FOIA lawmaker correspondence with regulatory
agencies.
NON-PROFITS. Abramoff ran a 501c3 charity that he admitted was a fraud. He had
relationships with others. Many lawmakers have close affiliations with tax-exempt
groups. 990 tax forms for tax-exempt, nonprofit organizations are available on Guidestar
at www.guidestar.org (free, registration required). Guidestar’s arrival in many ways
superceded the widely used California AG’s Registry of Charitable Trusts site at
http://caag.state.ca.us/charities/. It is still good at some of the harder-to-find stuff. The
Foundation Center www.fdncenter.org has tax returns and financial info on
charities/trusts. Click on Foundation Finder, http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder.html, which
has details and tax returns on 70,000 private and community foundations, or to the 990
search engine, http://lnp.fdncenter.org/finder_990.html
LAW FIRMS AND LAWYERS. For a nationwide search, try Martindale-Hubbell at
www.martindale.com, useful search engine by publisher of the old Martindale
hardbound books.

Lessons Learned from Pulitzers 2006: About the Craft, About the Organization
Here are excerpts from Poynter Online Editor Bill Mitchell’s email interview with
Post reporters and editors regarding the Pulitzer lessons. Read full version at
http://www.poynter.org/content/content_view.asp?id=10109

What are one or two things that you learned about journalism in the course of your
prize-winning work that you intend to make better use of going forward?

JAMES GRIMALDI:
Obviously on a story like this, you bring your experience from past investigations -and that experience was invaluable on this intricate and complicated story. ... A few
technical/organizational things come to mind that helped sharpen the means for
approaching complex investigations.

One was the use of a wiki page to share information. I've used various systems in the
past -- mainframe computing software, Lotus Notes, Microsoft Word in networked
computers -- but this was the best, most scalable, searchable, flexible and secure software
I've used to store and organize notes, timelines and interviews.
Another is social network analysis, which at the Post includes the use of socialnetworking software called "Analyst's Notebook," used to track connections between
people, companies, agencies and entities. Social network analysis is a hot topic among
some investigative reporters, one that I first learned about from Brant Houston, director
of Investigative Reporters and Editors -- I'm on the IRE board. Five or six years ago,
Brant had his laptop out during an IRE annual conference and he showed me socialnetwork analysis www.ire.org/sna software. It was mind-blowing. It is a powerful tool
often used by journalists -- and counter-terrorism experts -- to track terrorist cells.
There's nothing new about social-network analysis -- reporters have been charting
connections between power players forever. The software is a new and disciplined way of
thinking about social-network analysis and it deeply affected my approach to this story.
When I joined the story in late 2004/early 2005, I had just finished working with Sarah
Cohen and Thomas Edsall on a yearlong look at the Bush Pioneers fundraising network,
as well as Democratic fundraisers. A keystone of that project was a memorable
interactive graphic http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpsrv/politics/pioneers/pioneers_spheres.html that Sarah took the lead on.
Our work on that project heavily influenced my approach to the Abramoff story.
Every story was accompanied by a graphic to illustrate the complicated Abramoff
schemes. While I did not use the fancy software for all these graphics (I dummied most
of them with pencil and paper), social-network analysis was the inspiration. I spent weeks
thinking about how to draft them. [There was] nearly a full-page graphic
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/graphic/2005/10/16/GR2005101600367.html that accompanied our October
story on how Abramoff killed an anti-gambling bill in Congress. (All of the Abramoff
stories can be found at www.washingtonpost.com/abramoff).
JEFF LEEN (AME, Investigations): One or two things I learned about journalism to
take going forward:
Fortune favors the bold. Be very bold in terms of strategy, and very cautious in terms
of tactics. The bold pursuit of big investigative questions led us to exclusive stories about
the SunCruz Casino deal, the eLottery deal, Rep. Bob Ney and the U.S. Family Network.
The reporters' careful, painstaking work brought the stories home.
People always talk about two models for investigative reporting. The "Bob Greene
model" of rolling out individual stories as soon as you can confirm them and the "Barlett
and Steele model" of reporting for a year or so and then splashing out a big, multi-part
series. We used a third model that is somewhere between the two: alternating waves of
shorter individual stories with in-depth investigative projects that took up as many as two
newspaper pages but did not go beyond a single day. The Abramoff story was so complex
it seemed to require this sort of slow unraveling that built carefully throughout the year.

