DIDN’T I JUST SEE THAT?
HOW TO KEEP INVESTIGATIVE REPORTS FRESH
Chris Henao, Investigative Producer, KHOU, Houston, TX.
Work: 713-284-1088/cell: 713-417-2133/e-mail: chenao@khou.com
“Make it your own” – First, good journalism like good writing (fiction or nonfiction) is built on specifics, telling and illustrative details and facts. So in the
process of making something your own you’re obviously drawing from your
community. So: be observant and then specific and clear in your writing and
photography to create a vibrant story about people in your area and their
specific problem. Thus you make a simple story unique and unforgettable, again
whether it’s journalism or even fiction. Finally: Journalism isn’t just gathering
facts but is making observations about those facts and the juxtaposition of those
facts that can reveal unique ironies and injustices that the public will usually
want to know about.
“Work the angles” – If your story is coming from a tip, keep in mind that what
might make the story unique is that is a different angle on an oft told story. It’s
just a matter of perception and presentation. For example: Plenty of stories have
been done on workman’s compensation pay for the injured and the failures of
the system. But in the case of our “Social Insecurity” story, we realized and
focused on the differences of this particular aspect of the comp system,
something we had never seen done before. So it evolved into the narrowly
focused examination of judge’s decisional rates.
“C.S.I. - it” – In other words, the key approach here is “forensics”. And we don’t
mean necessarily forensic crime scene analysis. What we mean is find out and
tell the audience, “How did that work?” “How did they do it?”, especially when
it’s a topic that often is discussed in the media but rarely gets beyond glib
phrases. For example: In the “Skimming” story we actually showed the audience
(without giving enough detail to make copy cats possible) the various ingenious
methods actual criminals were using to steal your credit card information at gas
pumps. We also interviewed a confidential informant who explained how they
rigged these traps for consumers. So in short: Most investigations involve a
system (technological, bureaucratic, etc.) Use your research to take it apart,
study it, and then write a unique story. (In the “Social Insecurity” story we
obtained the rates of approvals and denials for all the judges in Houston as well
as state and national data and used those numbers to confirm what we were
being told anecdotally.)

“Layers” – Go deeper, dig up new information. The path has been carved out
to a point, now take it further using internet, databases, FOIA, etc.
In the ‘Skimming’ story we uncovered the possible connection between terrorist
groups and the money illegally obtained from the theft of credit card data.
“Narratives” – Tell a good strong story from a to b to c that is about certain
people who are either victims, perpetrators, “those ultimately responsible”, etc.
Unique people with a clear story make for unique and memorable journalism no
matter what the topic.
“Extra Time” – Use these ‘refreshed’ story ideas to your advantage. Take the
time gained by not having to start from scratch to work on the ‘new’ projects.

