MANAGING AND JUGGLING:
How to Cover Your Beat and Still Produce Investigative Stories
To dig up investigative stories on a beat, you need to pay attention to what crosses
your desk, get organized so you don’t waste time and become very familiar with the
person who handles open records requests. Here’s how:
1. Pay attention to details. Read the fine print, the footnotes, the qualifiers. Details of
grand jury investigations and massive fraud schemes can come from the small type at
the back of otherwise innocuous reports.
2. Get organized so you can use your time to do the stories you want to do. You don’t
have to be highly organized to group your notes and ideas into manilla folders. When
you’ve got time to make a phone call, it’s within easy reach.
3. Make the most of the time you have. Not sure what to do next? Keep a list of the
people you need to call and their phone numbers, or the records you need to get or
read. You don’t have to reinvent the wheel every time you get a few extra minutes in the
day.
4. Ask for documents routinely. Cellphone records, government plane logs, travel
expenses, campaign contributions – you should look at these every year. Sometimes
you won’t get a story; sometimes you’ll hit pay dirt.
5. Set the highs and lows of what you can expect to get from your investigation. Write a
lead for each one. That can focus your thoughts and keep your mind on the questions
you want to ask and the areas you want to pursue. The end result will likely be inbetween.
6. Keep the big picture in mind. Beat reporters often get so caught up in details that they
don’t step back to analyze the issues. What does this story mean to the general public?
Could it have broader implications?
7. Ask for help. Look on the IRE Web site – www.ire.org – for other reporters who have
done similar stories. Use their tip sheets. Call them for hints. It can save you a lot of
time and effort.
TIPS from Dianna Hunt, assistant government affairs editor, Fort Worth Star-Telegram
DLHUNT@star-telegram.com (817) 390-7084.

