Broadcast Investigations: Beating the Bushes for Stories
Chris Heinbaugh, WFAA-TV, Dallas/Ft Worth,

Cheinbaugh@wfaa.com

Whether for print, radio, online or broadcast…it’s not really any different: If you work a beat, you must find
time to poke around the bushes to discover and report solid investigations, and still feed the daily beast.

Some Ideas to Help:
Know Your Beat: Know what you cover inside out. Sounds logical, but if you’re not down at City Hall or the
cop shop most every day, you won’t quickly learn the intricacies of the beat, get to know the people who
need to come to trust you enough that they’ll start passing along stories to you. If you don’t have a beat, find
one. Adopt it. Claim it.
Organization: You must come up with a form of organization that suits you best. When you file open
records requests, find a way to track them, with follow up dates so you know when deadlines are missed.
Get a calendar or day planner to start putting up follow up dates for people, upcoming events, etc.
Tapes: When you shoot a regular story with great B-Roll, save the raw tape if you can. You never know
when you can use it for a story. I’d saved several warrant round ups that I went along on, and low and
behold, a few years later, I ended up doing an investigation into these, and had lots of great raw video to
use.
Chip Away: Find time to chip away at the investigation. If the story is not competitive, then grab enough bits
and pieces before you ask for more time to grab the big interviews, video, etc. Keep lists of what you need,
unanswered questions, contacts for the story. Keep it all in one paper or computer file for quick access.
Protect Your Story: When we find the beginnings of a good story, in our excitement, we may want to share
it with our colleagues, even our bosses. What happens? Your boss likes it so much, she wants it on that
day! Resist the urge to share. Unless it’s competitive, protect it by giving yourself the time to confirm and do
the digging. Then, when you’re ready to lay it out, you have the reporting to back it up.

Tools and Story Generators:
Here are some places I tend to look for stories. Some are obvious, some not. Most are related to my City
Hall beat, but you can generally find the equivalent within their own beats.
•

Sources: Top of my list. Most of your best ideas, your best tips will come from sources. These are
rarely public information officers. For me, these are top elected office holders or appointed
department heads. They can be neighborhood activists, developers and the gal who takes the calls
in the City Secretary’s office. Develop good sources on your beat. First way to do this is through
your work. Being tough, but being fair. Not burning your sources. Returning calls. Treat everyone
with respect. Your reputation is everything. Make a list of your best sources – and make a point to
call them regularly. You might break it up by story or category, but keep in touch with these people.
So when something does come up, you are the first person they call.

•

Agendas – Read agendas weekly. Not just City Council, but committee agendas, sub committees,
smaller commissions and boards. Especially the smaller obscure ones no one ever looks at. I like
getting mine several days in advance, then if something catches my attention, finding out what the
briefing of agenda Determine schedule for release, get them to release online, Look for the open

meetings postings, and scour through the smaller committees. Also, understand the agendas and
the order the body must consider the items.
•

Calendars: File open records requests for weekly calendars: Mayors, elected officials, City
Manager, key department heads, etc. Scour these for clues, ideas for stories. In addition to
sparking great stories, they’re a big help in breaking news situations when you need to track down
and official fast.

•

Directory: Get a hold of a city employee directory – paper or electronic. It helps you find people
fast. I refer to mine daily. It helps me avoid the PIO’s office, and usually puts me in direct contact
with someone, without having to ask 10 people and risk tipping off a competitor.

•

Email Addresses: Another great way to contact people, especially those that are hard to reach.
Many people now have blackberries, so email may be the best way to reach them, especially when
they’re in meetings.

•

Salary Databases: Again, a great tool for finding information on public servants fast. Salary,
overtime, gender, age, years of employment. Can also spin stories off of this – who makes the
most salary or overtime and why?

•

Budget: Load into a spreadsheet. Get at least five years worth of budget and enter it, usually down
at least to the property. I update it yearly and put the percentage increases into a formula, so I’m
not having to figure it out and enter it at the last minute. It’s a great way to track changes in
department budgets, and then check the line items – which is where you’ll find plenty of great
stories.

•

Taxes/Liens: Find where your IRS and state tax liens are filed. Usually in a court that handles real
estate records. Make sure you understand just what the back taxes are for and if they’ve been
repaid or not. Also look for liens filed against the subject. Checking the suit can reveal a lot about
someone’s business and financial practices.

•

Financial Disclosure Reports: Get copies of these reports to determine who owns what stock,
companies.

•

Background Checks: Create a check sheet of places to routinely check on officials and
candidateCheck for Criminal History, outstanding fines, election voting history, liens, back taxes,
traffic citations, etc.

•

Attendance Records: Get a hold of the agency’s attendance records for elected officials.
• Is there a minimum attendance to retain office or get paid?
• What votes are being missed, where is the time being spent?

•

Expenditures & Perks: Find out what perks your officials have, what spending accounts and
budgets they have to work with. Then file records requests for the expenditure records. Do they
seem out of line? How do they stack up to other officials in that or other agencies?
o Cell Phones
o Travel expenses – Where are they traveling, what are they spending, and on what?
o Computer
o Meals
o Office expense

o

Office Furniture

•

Nuisance Tickets: Does your city ban smoking? Fine you for not picking up poop? Panhandling?
There laws make a big splash when they’re passed, but does the city enforce them?

•

Warrant Round Ups: Follow up on these highly publicized events to see if the courts follow
through. We found people with fines worth thousands of dollars, individuals the marshals had spent
weeks tracking down – basically getting their slates wiped clean for just a little more than a few
hours in jail.

•

Government Purchases:
• Check for office supplies, furniture, purchases.
• Are they in or out of line with other departments, other government agencies?
• Be fair, cheaper isn’t always better. Consider wear and tear and quality. What you get in a
home may not be something that would hold up to heave use in the office.

•

Stolen Property Claims:
o Check the agency who handles all claims of stolen property.
o Find out what’s been stolen?
o What happened with this?
o What was the investigation’s outcome?
o Inside job?
o Any arrests or patterns?
Officials’ Cars:
• Check out the cars of your local officials.
• Whose names are they registered in?
• Check the registrations, license, inspections. Are they up to date?
Injury Lawsuits: Check your municipality for lawsuits.
• Most have risk management departments.
• They attornies should be able to point you to examples of agregious lawsuits.
• Don’t over look suits that point to persistent problems with the agency.

Make your computer and the Internet your Friend:

It never replaces good old fashioned legwork, but developing your online skills can make the time you spend
doing that more efficient.
What I frequently use online:
• Civil Court Records
• Criminal Court Records
• Drivers License Data
• Agendas
• Council Briefings (Power Point Presentations loaded with background and facts)
• Audits
• News Organizations
• Blogs
• Property Appraisal Records

Databases: If data and records are being kept, there is probably a database behind them. Get in the habit
of asking for them. Learn how to request these, and how to challenge those who wish to charge you an arm
and a leg.
o Code Liens
o Unpaid Parking Tickets –Fines
o Parking Tickets
o Library Fines
o Personnel Records
o Payroll Records
o Voter Registration Records
o Campaign Finance Databases (Create your own!)
o Dog licenses
o Check Registers
o …many, many more.
IRE: If you are at this conference, you are likely a member. Utilitze the Resource Library.
• Find tip sheets from earlier conference related directly to your beat.
• Find stories from other stations or newspapers, see if that problem exists in your community.
• Contact other IRE members for advice.
• Attend the conferences – Don’t just stick with broadcast panels. Some of the best advice I’ve
gotten came from print and online reporters. True, their reality is different than ours, but good
reporting is good reporting, regardless of the medium.
Campaign Finance: These are crucial resources for reporters on any government beat. You need to know
who is giving what to candidates, and what are they getting in return.
•
•
•
•

Talk your city secretary or candidates into requesting electronic spread sheet’s.
If they don’t, make your own from the campaign finance reports. …It doesn’t take that long, it’s a
great resource that you will use!
Don’t just ignore who’s giving, but look where it’s being spent. Is it going to family members? Is all
the money being spent in other cities?
Once you’ve built it, keep it up to date! It will come in handy time and time again!

Colleagues: And finally, talk with your colleagues around the country covering a similar beat. Developing
those relationships can not only help you identify great stories, but can help walk you through them!

