IRE TIPSHEET

FORT WORTH 2006

Investigating the Aftermath of Disasters
Sally Kestin
Investigative reporter
South Florida Sun-Sentinel
954-356-4510
skestin@sun-sentinel.com

FEMA: A Legacy of Waste
A 15-month Sun-Sentinel investigation revealed $530 million in fraud and
waste in FEMA disaster aid nationwide.
The story began in Miami in the midst of the 2004 Florida hurricanes.
FEMA awarded $31 million to residents in Miami-Dade even though the county
never experienced hurricane conditions.
FEMA paid funeral expenses for more than 200 Floridians whose deaths
were unrelated to any of the storms and relied on privately contracted inspectors
including criminals with convictions for theft, robbery, embezzlement and fraud.
In examining claims from 20 disasters in other states, the investigation
uncovered the same patterns across the country -- FEMA awarding millions in
areas spared the devastating effects of fires, floods, hurricanes and tornadoes.
FEMA: An Overview
Types of Assistance
• Public assistance: Grants to repair or replace disaster-damaged
buildings and infrastructure. Who’s eligible? State and local
governments, Indian tribes and some non-profits such as hospitals,
private schools and universities, utilities, zoos, libraries and
homeless shelters. Generally 75/25 federal/state cost share.
• Individual assistance (also called Individuals and Households
Program): Grants to people who “as a direct result of a major
disaster have necessary expenses and serious needs . . .[and] are
unable to meet such expenses or needs through other means.’’
Covers uninsured losses (no deductibles). Most of the money goes
to low-income applicants, the underinsured and uninsured. Pays for
temporary housing such as hotels, rental assistance, home repairs
and trailers; medical, dental and funeral expenses as a result of a
disaster; personal property including furniture, clothes, appliances,
computers, tools and uniforms needed for work; money to repair or
replace vehicles damaged in a disaster; and miscellaneous items
determined by each state such as generators, chain saws and
dehumidifiers.
• Hazard Mitigation: Grants available to counties or parishes in a
declared disaster area for projects that will reduce future losses,

such as buying property and converting it to open space, elevating
flood-prone buildings and retrofitting buildings against severe
weather.
What to look for:
• Money, particularly individual assistance, going to areas not
affected or on the fringes of a disaster.
• Inflated public assistance claims, particularly from local and state
agencies for things like overtime, debris removal, beach
renourishment or recreational improvements.
• Questionable FEMA contracts – paying too much for services or
awarding no-bid contracts to entities with political connections.
• Waste and fraud in other disaster assistance: the American Red
Cross, disaster food stamps (usually administered by the state
through the USDA), FEMA trailers.
Sources:
• Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act,
USC 42. This is the federal law that describes FEMA assistance
programs.
• FEMA’s Web site, www.fema.gov. You’ll find useful information in
the Federal Register notices of disaster declarations, FEMA press
releases and frequently asked questions, program descriptions and
disaster archives. You can also find details about the individual
assistance program in “Help After a Disaster: Applicant’s Guide to
the Individual and Households Program.’’
• For hurricanes, check web sites for the National Oceanographic
and Atmospheric Administration, www.noaa.gov, and its Hurricane
Research Division, www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/, to download pdf maps
and Arcview shapefiles showing wind speeds and rainfall amounts.
•
FEMA’s Mapping & Analysis Center,
http://www.gismaps.fema.gov, is a great source for CAR reporters
and graphic artists. Maps show estimated wind speeds and rainfall,
flooded neighborhoods, number of people in shelters, power
outages, damage estimates, etc.
• County and city governments may track the number and location of
damaged residences. Check with disaster coordinators, building
officials and planning departments.
• Local and state emergency management agencies keep daily
reports of disasters, their impact, and emergency responses. Most
also do “after-action reports’’ a few months later analyzing what
worked and what didn’t. You may also obtain FEMA information
there, such as preliminary damage assessments used to justify
disaster declarations.
• NEMIS (National Emergency Management Information System) is
the database used by FEMA to track individual assistance claims.

•

File a FOIA request with FEMA for individual claims by geographic
area. Ask for the data electronically and ask for expedited
processing. Currently, FEMA provides individual claims by ZIP
code but withholds names and addresses, citing the Privacy Act. In
a lawsuit by the Sun-Sentinel, a federal judge has ruled that FEMA
must provide addresses. Another suit by Gannett newspapers has
resulted in a ruling that neither names nor addresses should be
public. Both decisions are on appeal.
The Small Business Administration, www.sba.gov, provides
spreadsheets of businesses, homeowners and renters receiving
low-interest loans through its disaster assistance program. The
SBA releases names and addresses of recipients and the amount
of the loans.

