Tipsheet for investigating the health industry

By David McKie and Susanne Reber
Who are we? David McKie is a producer with the CBC News Investigative Unit.
Susanne Reber is the unit’s executive producer. For more information about the Unit,
please visit: http://www.cbc.ca/investigate/
Susanne and David are also authors of recently published books. Susanne co-authored the
non-fiction book Starlight Tour, the last lonely night of Neil Stonechild, published in
2005 by Random House Canada.
http://www.randomhouse.ca/catalog/display.pperl?isbn=9780679313076. David coauthored Digging Deeper: A Canadian Reporter’s Research Guide, published April 2006
by Oxford University Press http://www.oup.com/ca/isbn/0-19-542127-2

Contact information:

david_mckie@cbc.ca
1-613-288-6523 (office); 1-613-290-7380 (cell)
susanne_reber@cbc.ca
1-416-205-6432 (office); 1-416-709-1017 (cell)

The initial series: Faint Warning (http://www.cbc.ca/news/adr/)
The follow-up series: Prescribed to Death
(http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/seniorsdrugs/)
Place: IRE National Conference, Dallas/FortWorth, Texas
Date: June 15-18, 2006
Panel: Investigating the medical world
- David Armstrong, The Wall Street Journal
- David Evans, Bloomberg
- David McKie, CBC News Investigations
- Susanne Reber, CBC News Investigations
An explanation of the series: Prescribed to Death was an examination of the effect that
certain classes of drugs can have on Canadian seniors.
Outcome: Prescribed to Death continued the national debate on prescription drug use
that had begun with our previous series, Faint Warning. The former federal health
minister Ujjal Dosanjh promised to look into setting up a special office within the
department for seniors, but not before deciding to put the adverse drug reaction database

online, thus replicating what the CBC had done the previous year as part of its awardingwinning Faint Warning series.

Our first steps: We used the Beers list, an American, peer-reviewed list of chemical
ingredients that make up dozens of drugs, including benzodiazapines with brand names
such as Ativan. In order to make the list relevant to a market south of the U.S. border, we
had to “Canadianize” it, meaning we added the classes of drugs that were only sold in the
Canadian market and eliminated the medication sold exclusively to Americans. Once that
was accomplished, we worked with the Ottawa-based pharmaceutical research firm,
Brogan Inc., to determine the number of seniors (citizens 65 years and older) being
prescribed these drugs. Then we went one step further by matching the Canadianized
Beers list with Health Canada’s adverse drug reaction database.
What we found: Through our methodology we were able to determine that about 1.5million seniors – a third of Canada’s senior population – are on drugs that they’re not
supposed to be taking, either because the medication is too dangerous, or because there
are safer alternatives. The CBC also found that one-third of all reported seniors’ deaths
involved people taking at least one of the Beers-list drugs when they died. In a more
startling finding, the CBC discovered that one-in-twenty of these reported seniors deaths
were suspected to have been caused by drugs, which generally should never be prescribed
to seniors.
Ten tips for strategies that helped get these stories

1) Find out what records are kept on any health beat you’re covering. These
records include the Dear Health Care Professional letters that are distributed by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or Health Canada in conjunction with
the pharmaceutical companies when drugs are either pulled off the market or
saddled with more beefed-up warnings about safety concerns. The records also
include databases that track events such as adverse drug reactions and adverse
reactions caused by medical devices.
2) Find out who the players are. In the case of prescription drugs, there are many
individuals who at some point intersect: The players included the regulators such
as the FDA and Health Canada; politicians who sit on committees that oversee the
drug industry; people who work for pharmaceutical companies; patients; lawyers.
3) Don’t be afraid to follow the money. Always remember that health care is big
business. Companies make money selling drugs and keeping the competitors at a
distance. Lobbyists make money to help ensure that those sales stay clear of
regulatory hurdles erected by agencies such as the FDA. Doctors are also part of
the money-making equation, be they plastic surgeons taking a direct cut from the
medical devices that they sell and implant, or doctors who are charging patients
directly for certain procedures not covered by medical insurance.
4) Look for the shades of gray. Avoid the temptation to always hunt down the one
bad buy. What we’ve learned from debacles such as the Vioxx recall is that there

is plenty of blame to spread around: the FDA for not doing enough to ensure that
the proper studies were conducted to ensure the drug’s safety, then failing to
conduct the proper post-marketing surveillance once the drug became a bestseller; Merck for selling a drug that had a questionable track record; doctors for
believing that it was the miracle cure that the company claimed it was in its
advertising campaigns; patients for demanding the medication even over the
initial objection and skepticism of some of their doctors. If stories become too
simplistic, then we ignore the complexities of a regulatory regime and drug
industry that are supposed to ensure patient safety.
5) Use listservs and discussion groups to find real people. What Prescribed to
Death, Faint Warning and Invisible Dangers
(http://www.cbc.ca/investigate/features/hospital/index.html) taught us is to have a
healthy respect for the power of the narrative. Stories don’t resonate as well as
they should without strong characters with compelling stories. Many of those
people are trading heart-breaking stories on listservs that deal with everything
from adverse drug reactions to strategies for handling bad doctors to hospital
infections.
6) Use alerts. One of the best ways to spot trends is to have regular access to stories
of isolated incidents that when strung together become greater than the sum of
their parts
7) Read the regulations. It’s a good idea to find out what laws govern the areas you
are reporting. It’s helpful to know what laws the FDA relies upon to ensure that
the drugs patients consume, the food they eat and the medical devices that have
implanted in their bodies are safe.
8) Keep or have access to a database library. Government departments keep all
kinds of databases for administrative purposes. When the SARS outbreak
occurred in Canada, for instance, we discovered that Health Canada keeps an
infectious diseases database, which we were able to obtain.
9) Find out who’s conducting cutting-edge research. For example, on June 6,
2006, The New York Times led with this paragraph about a story involving drugs
and kids: The use of potent antipsychotic drugs to treat children and adolescents
for problems like aggression and mood swings increased more than fivefold from
1993 to 2002, researchers reported yesterday. Wouldn’t it have been nice to
obtain advanced notice of this type of research well before its publication date?
I’d be interested to know a little bit about the researchers’ methodology.
10) Avoid stories that extol the virtues of miracle drugs or miracle cures. These
stories are inevitable. Many turn out to be false. Think about some of the drugs
that have been pulled off the market over the years, Vioxx being the largest recall
in history. The flu drug Relenza is another example. It was hailed as a
“revolutionary drug” in Canada but described as being of “modest” benefit by the
FDA. In Canada, Relenza was considered to be so vital that Health
Canada assured its speedy passage onto the market. The provinces, which are the
ones who have to pay for drugs once Health Canada approves them, were under
whelmed by the drug’s prowess.

Stark act…..prevents doctors from referring docs to businesses in which they have a
stake….
Federal anti-kickback law…..illegal for vendors to offer docs inducements….criminal
standard….
Medical imaging….mri…cat scans….one of the fastest growing costs…..100-billion
business….many people want in…..vendor who has machines….goes to a doc….who
sends patients…..physician group will rent time on the machine….companies will charge
doc a flat or hourly rate…doc bills the insurance inflated rate…
Go to aggrieved parties such as the local radiologist…..
No risk for docs….
Laboratory testing….biopsies…those samples sent out to labs for
examinations…pathologist will examine….fedex account to send their vile
somewhere…dermatologists….urologists…gastrointerologists…etc…specialists who use
this the most….expertise of a pathologist is key because his interpretation results in a
diagnosis….
Condolabs in Texas and Florida….doctors claim that these are their offices…
Certificate-of-need state…have to file paperwork with state for deals…..
Non-profit hospitals…bonds….detailed perspectives….Baylor medical centre and bond
document as an example….

