Terri Langford
Houston Chronicle
terri.langford@chron.com
713.362.7276
IRE 2006/Fort Worth
Texas Public Records
Bookmarked on your computer:
Texas Public Information Act (PIA) Handbook online,
http://www.oag.state.tx.us/AG_Publications/pdfs/publicinfo_hb2006.pdf
Texas Public Information Act (PIA), short version,
http://www.tsl.state.tx.us/agency/customer/pia.html
Texas Open Records Made Easy, http://www.oag.state.tx.us/AG_Publications/pdfs/2002openrec_easy.pdf
Texas FOI Foundation, http://www.nfoic.org/web/resource/texas/texas.htm.
Sample Texas PIA letter, http://www.foift.org/pialetter.html
Guide to (Texas) Legislative Information, http://www.tlc.state.tx.us/pubslegref/gtli.pdf
Nailed to your desk: The Texas State Directory, 2006, 49th Edition, $30.
What’s a public record in Texas?
Most memos, documents or records created by a taxpayer-supported entity, agency or
department, including:
-an individual’s driving record
-inspection reports of nursing homes, assisted living, day care facilities
-court documents
-first-page info on police reports
-personnel records of most public employees
-e-mails and any written correspondence to and from most public employees
-agendas of public meetings
-calendars kept by public employees
-an agency’s employee phone directory or payroll list
-a list of public information requests made to an agency.
What’s NOT a public record in Texas?
Most things that involve a specific private individual, including:
-most records involving children (with key exceptions)
-the names of most people who receive state aid (again, some exceptions)
-medical records
-information contained in records about a pending investigation,
-college transcripts and performance evaluations of Texas teachers
What records are sometimes open and sometimes not?
-jury lists, sometimes sealed by judges.
-case files in juvenile courts, sometimes sealed. It’s up to the judge whether you can view.
-memos between attorneys and elected officials
-correspondence between elected officials
-records or information involving children who die of abuse
-autopsies -* PIA law says they’re open, but since 1999, more rulings that they are
excepted when part of an ongoing criminal investigation.

Five things you may hear from agencies and officials that are wrong:
1. “I have 10 days to get back to you.” No, you have 10 days to notify me you’re
forwarding my request to the Texas Attorney General’s office because you question
whether the document is public.
NOTE: If an official says he or she plans to forward your request to the AG, ask
them to point to the PIA exemption before they file it. If they can’t point to it, ask
them why they’re forwarding it. You’d be surprised how many can’t point to an
exemption, which means the information is public.
2. “The person who handles this is not here so you’ll have to wait until they get
back.” Once again, the law says “promptly” not when someone gets back from
vacation. Try the general counsel’s office or ask for this person’s supervisor. If the
record is on the premises and is a public record, you have access to it. Try the Rick
Perry/Kay Bailey Hutchison line. “I think if Gov. Rick Perry/Sen. Hutchison called,
you’d be able to put your hands on it pretty quickly.” Say it nicely. Yes, it works.
3. I don’t think that’s public.” or “I don’t have to give it to you.” Unless the agency
can point to something in the statute that says it is not, let’s go with the law, OK?
4. “It requires too much work to produce it for you.” Really? Prove it. Show me an
invoice that includes each task and how much you would charge for that.
5. “You owe us this money for the records even though we didn’t notify you of
the charges first.” Oh, so wrong. They have to give you an estimate beforehand.
Public Records Dos and Don’ts:
1. Before filing a written request, try asking for it first. Be firm, but pleasant. You mom’s
right. Honey does attract more flies than vinegar.
2. If on deadline, don’t make the agency call, your last one. When possible, make the
request for info early in the reporting process. The earlier, the better.
3. Know what you are asking for. Try not to ask for the kitchen sink unless that’s what
you want. But if you want the hot water faucet, ask for the hot water faucet. Spend some
time talking to the agency about what they have, and how the records are maintained.
4. Drop that attitude. Don’t cop a horsey “I don’t talk to flaks” air when dealing with state
agencies. Most (but not all) are PIA request veterans and know the law better than you.
So take off your pack and talk to them. But if you don’t get want you want, don’t be
afraid to go straight to the agency’s general counsel’s office.
5. Always pick the document up even if it turns out you don’t need it.
6. Always follow through and make sure the agencies comply with your request. If
you don’t follow up, agencies get the idea that they can say no and get away with it.
7. Always be willing to negotiate.
8. Always address your request to the agency’s PIA contact. Faxes and e-mails not
directed to an individual may not be considered PIA requests. All letters are considered
request, even if it is not directed to an individual or custodian of records.
9. Remember there’s no “10 day rule.” The law says an agency shall respond promptly.
Promptly means within a reasonable time.
10. Know the law before you make a request. Review the PIA statute, and go to
www.oag.state.tx.us and search prior AG rulings to see if your request
falls under some exception to the PIA statute.

Tape the following to your computer screen: If 10 business days pass and the agency
has NOT notified you that it is submitting your PIA request (for non-confidential info) to the
Attorney General, the agency may NOT deny your request.

Use the PIA every day, every week. Here’s how to get started.
1. Ask for agency employee directories with job titles, salary, date-of-birth and phone
numbers. You’ll be glad you have them during a breaking news situation.
2. Ask agencies/departments/sheriff offices/police departments now what databases
or records are available. Ask for an agency or department’s inventory of records.
3. Be on a first name basis with an agency’s statistics department. They count
everything and they know firsthand the pitfalls of the data you’re looking at.
4. When working on a story, consider everything you think government counts that
might help your story. DWIs, arrests, private contracts, dismissed cases, welfare
recipients, dead children, animal inspection reports at the local zoo, whatever. Start asking
for those records and data.
5. When agency officials make a statement of fact, ask them to back it up with
records or data. When the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission made arresting drunks
in Texas bars a priority, I asked for the arrest data. Seems arresting drunks in bars is a
priority for TABC in rural Texas, not in larger cities. When children reported to the state as
abused died, I asked for data showing how many children with a CPS history died. More
than 1 in 4 children with a CPS history do die. When an agency says they investigated
something, reviewed something, or are keeping tabs of something, make them prove it.
6. Periodically request a log of all PIA requests over a specific period of time. Sure,
you’ll see what your competition is asking for, but better yet you learn a ton about the way
individuals, academics, activists and think tanks look at records. Odds are good they’re
asking for stuff you’re interested in writing about.
Lagniappe #1: Two Texas folks you should get to know better because you will probably
deal with them most often as a reporter:
-Texas Department of Public Safety spokeswoman Tela Mange, 512.424.2080 and
tela.mange@txdps.state.tx.us.
-Texas Department of Family and Protective Services spokesman Patrick Crimmins,
512.438.3112 and cell: 512.787.5090, Patrick.Crimmins@dfps.state.tx.us
Lagniappe #2: Write down this date, December 5-7, 2006.
It’s the Texas Attorney General’s Open Government Conference held at the Renaissance
Austin Hotel. It’s the best registration fee _ other than the one for IRE_ your editor will ever
approve for you.

