IRE TIP SHEET/June 2006
Walking the Graveyards
Caring about victims and the powerless so that we drive closer to the truth
•

Write about problems that make you mad. Cast aside the crusty editor axioms
about putting your emotions in check. Strong feelings can propel you toward the
truth, instead of putting a drag on the process. Most editors realize this. Lobby
hard for stories you care about.

•

Keep your eyes on the prize. Once you’ve delved in, channel your outrage into
methodical questioning and writing while you work toward the real deal: a
credible, persuasive investigation that compels attention and shakes the
foundations.

•

Carry victims in your heart. Visit their gravesites to keep your focus on the high
stakes and human dimensions of your story. Surround yourself with pictures of
victims, symbols of their lives and the evidence behind their plights. Ruminate
over what they mean for your next reporting step. If this victim could speak out,
what would she say? Freight your shoulder bag with your most damning
documents. Spring them during interviews. Place the leaked memo or portrait of
the murder victim on the table during a conversation with lawmakers so your
meeting resonates with them. Your actual findings are more powerful than your
characterization of them.

•

Invest time building trust with victims of violence and their families. That
usually means a protracted series of interviews, starting with an introductory visit
where you explain who you are and what you’re seeking, followed by as many
sessions as necessary. Transparency, compassion and honesty are crucial. They
open communication. Prepare your sources for what’s ahead by keeping them
informed at each stage. Most don't understand how newspapers operate. Gently
inoculate them to what could be the most difficult aspects of the story journey:
such as how and why you have to contact their assailants or abusers and how you
will have to substantiate their stories. Honestly explore possibilities of safety and
legal repercussions for your sources.

•

Don’t be afraid to let your feelings show. It's OK to be human, and it’s that
honest connection that breaks down barriers toward trust. The most important
element we bring to an interview is intent listening – being a witness – to what
people have suffered. Empathy is a natural outgrowth of the process, something to
be harnessed to build relationships, not suppressed.

•

Maintain your resilience and take care of yourself. If you have listened to a
trauma survivor's story or immersed yourself in records, photos or other
documents with traumatic, horrifying or haunting content, find a way to relax
within a day or two. No matter how demanding or engrossing the project, build in
distancing mechanisms every day - planned activities which take you away from
the story. If you have a favorite stress-reduction technique (exercise, yoga, art,
etc), do it. Talk about your feelings with colleagues who understand. Find ways to
recharge yourself outside of work. Stay alert for signs of burnout (sleeping
problems, irritability, depression) and get professional help if necessary.

Contact info:
Ruth Teichroeb
Seattle Post-Intelligencer
ruthteichroeb@seattlepi.com
206-448-8175 (o)
Bruce Shapiro
Dart Center for Journalism and Trauma
bruce.shapiro@dartcenter.org
206 616 3223.
Miles Moffeit
The Denver Post
mmoffeit@denverpost.com
303 820-1415
Paul McEnroe
Minneapolis Star-Tribune
pmcenroe@startribune.com
Scott North
Everett Herald
snorth@herald.com
425-339-3431

