50 CAMPAIGN FINANCE STORIES IN 50 MINUTES
Peter Overby, National Public Radio, poverby@npr.org.
Jonathan D. Salant, Bloomberg News, jsalant@bloomberg.net.
CANDIDATE FUNDRAISING
1. Fundraising prowess. How much money has an incumbent raised
compared with previous years? Has he or she exceeded the amount
raised in the previous election?
2. Has a challenger raised enough to be competitive?
3. Political action committee contributions. Match with committee
assignments.
4. Who's on the incumbent’s finance committee – i.e., who in
Washington is helping the incumbent raise money?
5. The endless campaign. How much money and how many fundraising
events are lawmakers doing in off-years?
6. Using campaign funds to pay the babysitter, the new car,
parking tickets and trips.
7. After Election Day, how are candidates paying off campaign
debt? Are they holding fundraisers before they're sworn in? Are
company PACs who gave to their opponents now trying to make up
for it?
8. Is anyone in the candidate's family being paid as campaign
staff or a consultant [e.g., Rep. John Doolittle’s wife]?
9. Is the lawmaker contributing to other candidates? Is the
lawmaker getting contributions from his or her colleagues?
10. Is the lawmaker hosting fundraisers for colleagues, or
partnering with lobbyists to host fundraisers for colleagues?
11. Who are the lawmaker's biggest campaign donors? What does he
do for them?
12. Does the lawmaker schedule fundraising events focusing on a
particular industry? Is this timed to a specific bill?
13. What kind of fundraisers does the lawmaker throw? Who hosts
them?
14. Who has the lawmaker hired as campaign consultants?
15. How much money does the candidate raise from individual
donors as opposed to PACs?
16. How much money does the candidate raise from the district or
the state as opposed to elsewhere?
17. Is the candidate raising more money than needed to win reelection in preparation for a possible race for higher office?
18. Where are the new committee chairs raising their PAC
donations from? Compare the makeup of their PAC donations in
previous elections.
19. Where are the freshmen raising their PAC money from? Note if
PAC donations from a particular industry have increased now that
the freshman has landed a seat on the congressional committee
that oversees that industry.

20. Check a vote on a major issue. See if there is a correlation
between campaign contributions and a person's vote on the
measure.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
21. Any unusual investments or partnerships? Who are the other
partners?
22. Day trades. Are lawmakers getting IPOs and immediately seling
them?
23. Regular stock trades. Do lawmakers own stock in companies
under the jurisdiction of their committees? Are they buying or
selling when their committees are considering legislation
affecting that industry?
24. Real estate transactions. Did the lawmaker buy or sell a
house? To whom? Randy Cunningham sold his house above market
value to a defense contractor that he secured earmarks for.
25. Privately funded trips. Where are the lawmakers traveling and
who is paying for them? Are the benefactors under the
jurisdiction of their committees?
26. Do lawmakers have or support charities, especially charities
that nobody's heard of before? Who's supporting them?
PERSONAL PACS
27. Does your member have a leadership political action
committee? Why?
28. Who funds that PAC? Are the contributors the same ones who
give to the campaign?
29. What is the money spent on?
30. What is a retiring lawmaker doing with his or her campaign
funds? Are they using them as a PAC?
LEGISLATION
31. Which bills has the lawmaker introduced? Who are the
beneficiaries?
32. Has the lawmaker obtained any earmarks or tax provisions? Who
benefits? Are they in the lawmaker's district? How much have they
given to the lawmaker's campaign?
2008
33. How are the presidential hopefuls wooing local politicos? Two
years before the 2004 campaign, John Edwards' PAC gave the Iowa
Democrats new computers.
34. Are the prospective candidates contributing to the campaigns
of politicians in Iowa, New Hampshire or other early presidential
states?

STATE AND LOCAL
35. How do your state lawmakers pass the evenings during the
legislative session? If your state bans fundraising during the
session, are events spring-loaded to happen just after
adjournment? Are there other ways around the ban?
DONORS
36. Who are the biggest local donors? Who do they support? Why?
37. Who were the biggest soft money donors to the political
parties? What do they spend their money on now?
38. Have any of the donors exceeded the national limits on
overall campaign giving?
39. Who are the biggest local givers to independent 527 groups?
40. Who are the most successful fundraisers? How do they do it?
41. Is the region a magnet for fundraising?
COMPANIES
42. Who do the political action committees of local companies
contribute to? What about the corporate officers? Why?
43. How much do local companies spend on lobbying the state and
federal governments? Who have they hired? What does it get them?
44. Which lawmakers do the local companies care mostly deeply
about? How do they show it?
LOBBYISTS
45. Which lobbyists are your lawmakers friends with?
46. Are there former residents from your area in the D.C.
lobbying game? What about in the fundraising game?
47. Note the corporations reimbursed for travel on a lawmaker's
campaign finance report. That means the lawmaker is being flown
on a corporate jet, usually with a lobbyist on board.
OUTSIDE GROUPS
48. Which groups are spending money in your state or
congressional races?
49. Are there any locally based 527 groups?
50. Are any local residents involved in ideological nonprofit
organizations? While they do not have to disclose their donors,
ask them for their financial backers.

WEB SITES YOU SHOULD KNOW:
www.opensecrets.org. The Center for Responsive Politics.
Searchable database of campaign donations, classified by
industry; also data on lawmakers’ leadership PACs and their
personal financial disclosure reports.
www.fecinfo.com. PoliticalMoneyLine's Web site has some free
data, but you need to pay for most of the best stuff. They rank
political action committee contributions and have a searchable
database of lobbyists and lobby registrations.
www.publicintegrity.org. From the Center for Public Integrity, a
free searchable lobbyist database and a separate database for 527
contributions.
www.followthemoney.org. The Institute on State Politics has
databases of contributions to state candidates.
www.tpj.org. Texans for Public Justice has a list of President
George W. Bush's biggest fund-raisers, sorted by name, company or
economic interest.
sopr.senate.gov. A searchable database of federal Lobbying
Disclosure Act records from the Secretary of the Senate.

