Uncovering Industrial Waste - Snooping on Superfund

Alex Nussbaum, The Record (of Bergen County, NJ)
Nussbaum@northjersey.com/ (201) 646-4786/www.northjersey.com
2006 IRE National Conference
The Record's "Toxic Legacy" series documented the Ford Motor Co.'s dumping of industrial waste in
northern New Jersey, the environmental catastrophe wrought on one rural neighborhood that became a
Superfund site, and Ford and the EPA's failure over 20 years to clean up the mess. The series is at
www.toxiclegacy.com.
So is your local Superfund site being cleaned properly?
Superfund's blind spots. To paraphrase a journalism cliché, "If the EPA tells you everything's clean,
check it out." Superfund sites are messy and complicated. They may involve a variety of chemicals and
pathways through which people can be exposed (soil, surface water, groundwater, vapors.) Scientists are
still learning about how pollutants interact and spread through the environment.
Who's in charge? Most critically, owners and polluters of tainted property are often the ones in charge
of cleanup. "Responsible parties" (RPs) like Ford hire the consultants who test for contamination,
interpret the results and plan the remedies. The government is supposed to police their work, but
agencies may be understaffed, outlawyered and, increasingly, pressured to clear a site for
redevelopment.
Documents and databases to check:
Ä CERCLIS - EPA's online database of proposed and declared Superfund sites.
Ä Preliminary Assessment/Site Inspection - basic site conditions
Ä Hazard Ranking Score - Proposed sites ranked based on contamination, threat to the public, etc.
Ä Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) - cleanup options, including costs.
Ä Records of Decisions (RODs) - final cleanup decision and why it was chosen
Ä Work Plans -how a responsible party plans to carry out a particular study or cleanup activity
Ä Five-Year Reviews - periodic checkups after a cleanup is declared finished
Assess the cleanup. How hard did they look for pollution? How thorough was the job? Ford's initial
searches concentrated on surface dumping and ignored mine shafts where local residents said industrial
waste was dumped. EPA billed the site as 900 acres, but only four patches of industrial waste, none
bigger than a basketball court, were actually removed. Check out contractors and consultants hired by
the RP. Do they have a clean record with state and federal regulators?
Ask the experts. Activist groups, toxicologists at local labs and universities and other agencies can be
good sources to double check the work. Try Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility
(www.peer.org) to reach current and former public employees who may have expertise in your area. If
possible, walk the site yourself. Do official descriptions match facts on the ground? We hiked the local
woods and found mounds of waste Ford had missed.
Are promises kept? Cleanup plans can change quietly. Ford avoided costly groundwater treatment by
promising to monitor the site for 30 years. Within five years, they got EPA to suspend the monitoring.
Where'd the waste come from? Where's it going? Under federal law, generators and transporters
file a Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest for each shipment with state agencies. Manifests are public
records and list the type and amount of waste, who produced and transported it and where it went.
Pollution and the polluting polluters. Useful websites:
Ä Toxic Release Inventory (epa.gov/tri) - chemicals used and emitted by U.S. companies

Ä ToxFAQs (atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html) - government fact sheets on hazardous chemicals
Ä ToxNet (toxnet.nlm.nih.gov) -searchable database of research on various chemicals.
Ä IRIS (epa.gov/iris) - human health effects of hazardous substances
Ä ECHO (epa.gov/echo/index.html) - violations and enforcement history of U.S. facilities
Ä Water Quality Inventories (epa.gov/305b) - state-by-state reports on water quality violations
Ä National Air Toxics Assessment (epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999) - local maps of hazardous air emissions
and associated cancer risks

