IRE, FORT WORTH, JUNE 2006
Investigating Political Corruption at the Highest Levels in Latin America
By Daniel Santoro
[Translated by Erin McCarley]
A few weeks before my trip to the United States, a scandal unfolded in Argentina. For
two months, a group of strangers spied on and intercepted Internet email messages I
exchanged with Judge Daniel Rafecas, who was investigating two Serbian drugtrafficking prisoners in my country. How did I learn that they had invaded my email
account at Clarín — the largest newspaper in Argentina? I learned about it when the
lawyers for the drug traffickers, acting with complete impunity, presented my private
emails to another judge. They did that in order to accuse Judge Daniel Rafecas of
having violated the law for answering a journalist's questions, off the record.
But this was not all. Two weeks later, this group of strangers published on the Internet
some 70 email dialogues I had with Judge Daniel Rafecas, public prosecutors, members
of Congress, public officials, and other of my information sources. The Internet page
ends with my home address, my personal telephone number and a photograph that
shows me dining in a restaurant with my two cousins and my niece with this threat
printed: "Will this be Santoro's last supper?" In addition to MY messages, the strangers
displayed the private messages of a judge from the Supreme Court, a public prosecutor,
and a senator, among others. This massive attack on information provoked fear among
all of us who attempt to investigate corruption in Argentina.
After 26 years of practicing journalism, this threat is, for me, one in a long chain. In
1995 I discovered that the government of former President Carlos Menem had
trafficked six-thousand, five-hundred tons of arms and ammunition to Croatia during
the Balkan War, in spite of the UN embargo… and to Ecuador, who was at war with
Peru. I received death threats then. I was accused in a lawsuit of violating state
secrets, and the lawyer for the arms trafficker offered me $40,000 to drop my
investigation. I preferred to continue as a poor, but honest journalist.
Nevertheless, the threats that I received … and still receive in Argentina … along with
other Argentine investigative journalists, are only child's play compared to the situations
suffered by journalists in Colombia, Mexico or Venezuela. Since democracy was
restored in Argentina, only one journalist has been assassinated, José Luis Cabezas.
During the prior military dictatorship, 100 journalists were disappeared.
The journalists who risk their lives the most are NOT those of us from Argentina.
Rather, they are our colleagues from Colombia, of whom 100 were assassinated in

recent years … or Mexico, where narco-trafficking killed 10, mainly in cities bordering
the United States. But as we speak of the threats that come from drug or arms
traffickers, we should also ask: what is the political context in which corruption is
investigated in Latin American governments?
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and other Latin American countries have central-left
governments. And contrary to what one might hope, the majority of these governments
have a tense relationship with the press, resulting in a climate that is not conducive to
investigative reporting. In my country, we believed that with the arrival of Néstor
Kirchner, a leftist, Peronist leader who lived through the violent decade of the 70s, that
the pressures on the press left over from the Menem government would end. Menem’s
government brought more than 100 libel cases against journalists and bribed them
through a system ironically baptized as “the chain of happiness,” using secret funds
from intelligence services for these ends.
With Kirchner, the Supreme Court of Justice was restored, and until now, there has not
been a single trial against a journalist. However, in the three years of this government,
there has never been a press conference. … A pattern has emerged in which journalists
have been receiving telephone complaints about their reports, and the President’s
spokesperson doesn’t tell journalists the news. … Something similar has happened in
Brazil with Lula, and with Lagos in Chile, and in other countries. But in Argentina,
Kirchner’s government also operates above the media owners. In 2005, it extended by
executive order — not by law — radio broadcasting licenses for 10 more years. … It
delayed key parliamentary elections for three months. And the administration uses its
discretion to manage the government’s advertising in the media.
I want to say with this that the political culture did not advance in these first years of
the new millennium. We had hoped that the governments of the central left would
respect the new role of the media, besides educating, informing and entertaining. We
hoped the media would become a check and balance of power — a “watchdog,” or
guardian of democracy. We hoped that the government would understand that it is
normal for there to be “tension” between governments and the press … and that it is
the role of journalists to plant, within the agenda of public debate, the issues that
interest the readers — and NOT issues that interest the current government or other
sectors of power — above all, the economic powers that run our societies.
It is a problem of the political class, but also of editors. For some conventional editors,
the only publishable investigation is one related to issues that were in the public
discourse agenda for that week.
It is certain that from the hand of this low-level political culture, we face weak
institutions: states and political parties that function poorly. And we all know that
without state and political parties that practice politics with a capital “P,” there is no
democracy. Therefore, it is our duty NOT to generalize… and NOT to practice a

journalism of bell-ringing, of empty accusations that present all politicians, all political
parties, as corrupt.
Self-criticism puts everything in context. And just as I began by discussing the role of
politicians in Latin America … this is also how we generally investigate corruption, as if
it were uniquely the responsibility of politicians and public officials. Corruption is like
the Tango. The dance requires two people moving very close together. Did the
business people change? The ones who bribed the Menemist officials in the seventies,
or the Collor de Mellos a decade later? The answer is no. Recently, an Argentine
magazine interviewed the cook from the government residence. They asked him what
stood out the most in his mind from 30 years of cooking for Argentine presidents. The
answer was that the host (the President) changes every four years (and sometimes
less, during Argentina’s economic crises) … but the guests were always the same
businesspeople… It is our duty to put the magnifying glass above both parts, and to
demand clear and transparent rules of the game for businesses.
In this context, investigative journalism in Latin America is not protected sufficiently.
With exceptions like in Costa Rica where the newspaper La Nación conducted an
investigation in 2004 into the Alcatel and Finlandia kickback scandals, which sent two
ex-presidents to prison, one, the ex-Secretary General of the Organization of American
States (OAS) Miguel Angel Rodríguez.
In Argentina, only one investigative unit of the Clarín newspaper has remained. The
rest were closed. One cannot achieve nor conduct any profound investigations into the
grey areas of Kirchner’s government due to these factors I have mentioned. There are
two public TV programs that call themselves “investigative.” But the majority of their
cases are based on reports using hidden cameras. However, there are many excellent
journalistic books in Argentina.
In Mexico, the newspaper La Reforma closed its investigative unit five years ago.
According to Rossana Fuentes, what remains of investigative journalism requires
“mouth to mouth resuscitation.”
In Brazil, The Brazilian Association for Investigative Journalism (ABRAJI) has established
an important project dedicated to strengthening investigative journalism, but there
haven’t been any big investigations in recent years.
In Peru, Ricardo Uceda and other experienced investigative journalists have left the
major media to do other types of journalism, and there is no profound investigation like
there was in the Fujimori era. The investigative unit of the newspaper El Comercio of
Lima faces two multimillion-dollar lawsuits for libel and defamation from the Bavaria
beer group, and the former owner of Aerocontinente Airlines, who was linked to narcotrafficking.

In other words, we have not yet been able to achieve a trend, a culture of investigative
journalism. However, there are many efforts such as the journalism training workshops
of the Foundation for a New Ibero-American Journalism … whose chair is the Nobel
Prize Winner for Literature, Gabriel García Márquez. Its headquarters are in Colombia,
and its training programs have attracted new generations of journalists.
Also, there are new trends. Rosental Alves, a Brazilian journalist and professor at the
University of Texas, has described how freelance journalists in the United States use
their weblogs to pressure larger media to cover issues they normally would not cover.
This is an important trend in the developed world where 50 percent of the population
has Internet access. In Latin America, only 14 percent are connected to Internet.
But the most fundamental part of journalism is NOT technology. It continues to be the
journalist--his or her skills and decisions to take professional, legal, and even physical
risks in order to confront the powers that doominate Latin America … the powers that
have made it one of the poorest regions of the world.
Ten years after a small, disjointed army of crazy journalists went through the training
workshops at the Fundación in Colombia, many are still conducting investigations inside
the major media … the alternative media … and for books. And as the Nobel Prize
winner and journalist Gabriel García Márquez told us in 2002, “Leave the comfort of
your newspaper offices… And go to the streets of Latin America to find the hidden
histories of Menem, Fujimori or Collor de Melo.”
Daniel Santoro
Diario "Clarín", Buenos Aires, Argentina
Dasantoro@clarin.com
005411-43097244

Sabe más sobre la próxima generación del MSN Messenger. ¡Haz click aquí!

