New Orleans Business Leaders Sour on Nagin's Re-Election Bid
By Josh P. Hamilton and Jonathan D. Salant
April 3 (Bloomberg) -- New Orleans business leaders who
helped bankroll Mayor Ray Nagin's political career before
Hurricane Katrina have given at least $279,600 to his two
strongest opponents in this month's election.
``He gets mired in things that are not productive for the
city,'' said David Voelker, a principal in Frantzen/Voelker
Investments Ltd. ``I don't think he's what the future needs.''
At stake is who will guide New Orleans's recovery from the
worst natural disaster in modern U.S. history and set rebuilding
priorities. Well-financed challenges by Forman and Lieutenant
Governor Mitch Landrieu increase chances that the city, with a
legacy of racial division, will have its first white mayor in
almost 30 years.
Voelker and his companies, with energy, shipping and
restaurant interests, gave $15,000 to challenger Ron Forman in
February. Through 2004, Voelker steered $5,000 to Nagin's reelection drive, according to an analysis of the latest campaign
data at the Louisiana Board of Ethics.
Forman, a former chamber of commerce chairman who heads the
Audubon Nature Institute, raised $1.59 million through March 13.
Landrieu collected $820,000. Neither entered the race until this
year. Nagin, with $1.31 million before the hurricane last August,
listed $500 in post-Katrina donations through March 13. He has
since stepped up fundraising.
The open primary is April 22, with earlier voting for
displaced residents at polling stations throughout Louisiana.
Out-of-state evacuees can mail absentee ballots. If no candidate
wins a majority, the top two go to a May 20 runoff.
Bollinger Defects
The runoff likely will pit either Forman, 58, or Landrieu,
45, against Nagin, 49, political analysts said.
Donald Bollinger, owner of Bollinger Shipyards Inc., gave
$10,000 through last June to Nagin, who appointed him to the
Bring New Orleans Back Commission that crafted recovery
recommendations. In February, nine Bollinger companies gave
Forman the maximum $5,000 each, totaling $45,000.
In all, three of the commission's seven business members who
once funded Nagin now back challengers.
Nagin's campaign declined to comment for this story or
provide the names of business leaders backing him.
Bollinger says his shift reflects faith in Forman, not
disenchantment with Nagin. Tom Oreck, chief executive of Oreck

Corp., the New Orleans-based vacuum cleaner and air-purifier
company, is more critical.
Oreck said he was a frequent Nagin advocate in the business
community before Katrina. Both sat on the Business Council of New
Orleans, a CEOs group. Nagin ran Cox Communications Inc.'s local
cable company before the 2002 election.
Damaged
Since Katrina, ``the perception of Nagin's ability to lead
has been severely damaged, his ability to unify the community is
questionable,'' Oreck said. He and his family gave $21,000 in
personal and business contributions to Forman.
The mayor's critics have cited the botched evacuation before
Katrina and slow recovery since. The city has less than half its
pre-storm population and still is vulnerable to flooding. Entire
neighborhoods remain uninhabitable. Key decisions on rebuilding
haven't been made.
Nagin had to apologize in January after saying New Orleans
should be rebuilt as a ``chocolate city'' -- meaning majority
black, as it was before Katrina -- and that hurricanes showed
``God is mad at America.''
In total, ex-Nagin donors and their relatives, associates or
businesses gave Forman at least $196,250.
Totals
Oreck said Forman is ``results-oriented with a track record
of getting things done,'' citing his success building the
Aquarium of the Americas and making the local zoo a nationally
renowned tourist attraction.
Landrieu is favored by business leaders who put a premium on
political skills. He is brother of U.S. Senator Mary Landrieu and
son of former Mayor Moon Landrieu, the last white mayor, who
desegregated city government in the 1970s.
Landrieu received at least $83,350 from former Nagin backers
such as Judah Hertz, a California-based investor who heads Hertz
Investment Group and owns major downtown properties, including
the Texaco Tower. Hertz and three family members each gave $5,000
to Nagin last April. This year, four Hertz businesses gave
Landrieu $5,000 each.
Landrieu's finance chairman is venture capitalist Gary
Solomon, an ex-Nagin donor on the Bring New Orleans Back panel.
Race Issue
``Mitch recognizes our economic driving forces so he can use

his political skills,'' said Pres Kabacoff, owner of HRI
Properties, whose political action committee gave Nagin $5,500
through April 2005. ``In a city with strong racial and economic
issues, he has understanding of each group, a real asset,'' said
the developer, a Landrieu adviser and $5,000 donor.
While there are 24 candidates, it's a three-person race, and
either Forman or Landrieu will likely reach a runoff against
Nagin, said Silas Lee, a sociology professor at Xavier University
in New Orleans. All three are Democrats.
``The underlying issue is going to be race,'' said Susan
Howell, a University of New Orleans political science professor.
``Nagin has become the symbol for `let's not go back to a white
mayor.''' It's a turnabout from 2002, when 90 percent of whites
and 40 percent of blacks voted for Nagin.
Black registered voters outnumbered whites 2-1 before
Katrina. Now, blacks are a disproportionate number of the
evacuees, and much depends on how many will vote from afar.

GM, Comcast, Pfizer Boost Political Giving, Skirt Federal Ban
By Jonathan D. Salant
Feb. 21 (Bloomberg) -- General Motors Corp., Pfizer Inc. and
Comcast Corp. are among companies pouring record sums into
election campaigns four years after passage of a law that sought
to reduce the impact of corporate money on U.S. politics.
The companies are working around the law, which banned
unlimited contributions to parties, by giving more money through
their political action committees than ever before in the first
year of an election cycle, and writing checks to loosely
regulated independent groups, financial disclosures show. Of the
25 top corporate donors to congressional candidates and the
parties last year, 18 matched or exceeded what they gave in 2001,
when they could still tap their treasuries to donate any amount
to the parties.
Donations by corporate PACs soared by 58 percent to $79
million last year from $50 million in 2001, Federal Election
Commission figures show. Contributions are surging even as
Congress weighs efforts to curb political influence-buying
following the investigation of Republican lobbyist Jack Abramoff.
``Companies get an incredible return on their investment and
feel they can't stop spending the money,'' says Chellie Pingree,
president of Common Cause, a Washington-based group that lobbied
for the ban on unlimited donations. ``They're still looking for
ways to influence the process, and there are still many ways to
do that.''
Companies scored big legislative victories last year, with
the approval of a long-sought measure to shift most major classaction lawsuits from state courts to federal courts, a Central
American Free Trade Agreement and a law making it harder for
individuals to erase their debts by filing for bankruptcy.
`Soft-Money' Ban
The law restricting donations to parties was the most
sweeping overhaul of the campaign-finance system in a quarter
century. It put an end to unrestricted so-called ``soft-money''
contributions from corporate and union treasuries and
individuals. Congress passed the legislation in 2002 after a
seven-year fight by Senators John McCain, an Arizona Republican,
and Russell Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat, to get it enacted;
the measure took effect in 2003.
Representative Christopher Shays, who co-sponsored the
measure in the House of Representatives, says the law reduced the
clout of wealthy donors, who once routinely gave the parties
donations of $100,000 or more. PACs are limited to giving $15,000

a year to each of the political parties.
``We wanted to take out the big dollars and provide smaller
contributions,'' says the Connecticut Republican. ``Our goal was
simple: Make sure corporations and big labor unions and wealthy
individuals couldn't distort the process in their favor.''
Beefing Up PACs
With direct corporate contributions to parties off the
table, many companies are focusing on beefing up their PACs,
which are funded by donations from employees. Some are even
hiring consultants to help them persuade employees to give more.
Philadelphia-based Comcast, the nation's largest cabletelevision company, more than quadrupled its total donations in
2005 from 2001, the year before the last mid-term election. The
company gave $652,450 to federal candidates and the political
parties in 2005 through its PAC, and $186,800 to independent
groups as Congress prepared to rewrite the laws governing
telephone, cable and Internet service. Comcast also spent $1.7
million on lobbying in the first half of 2005.
Four years earlier, Comcast's PAC gave $120,400, and the
company donated $70,000 in soft money. Tim Fitzpatrick, a
spokesman for Comcast, had no immediate comment.
GM Doubles Giving
Detroit-based General Motors, the world's largest automaker,
more than doubled its PAC donations to $508,080 in 2005 from
$200,434 in 2001, FEC records show. The company gave $21,500 in
soft money in 2001.
General Motors also spent $4 million during the first half
of 2005 lobbying on such issues as fuel-economy standards and
limiting class-action suits. ``One of the most effective ways we
have to communicate what our issues is by participating in the
PAC,'' says Christopher Preuss, staff director for government
policy and technology communications at GM.
United Parcel Service Inc. was the top PAC giver, donating
$1.4 million to candidates and political committees in 2005. Four
years ago, the Atlanta-based company contributed $1.2 million,
including soft money. Fairfield, Connecticut-based General
Electric Co. boosted its total political giving to $959,000 in
2005, from $722,011 in 2001.
GM is one of 66 companies and associations that have hired
Democracy Data & Communications, an Alexandria, Virginia,
consultant, to help them increase donations to their PACs. Prior
to the soft-money ban, Democracy Data's PAC department had two
clients, Chief Executive Officer B.R. McConnon III says.

Democracy Data advises its clients to talk about the
importance of lobbying and how the PAC helps those efforts.
``Companies want to have a political presence that reflects the
size and strength they've established in the marketplace,'' says
Holly Pitt Young, a Democracy Data vice president.
Another client, Schering-Plough Corp., set aside time during
a sales conference last July to hold a reception for PAC donors,
featuring Chairman Fred Hassan.
``We're one of the most highly regulated industries, and we
have to pay attention to what government is doing,'' says Paul
Ehrlich, manager for legislative affairs for the Kenilworth, New
Jersey-based company, which spent $760,000 between January and
June 2005 to lobby the federal government. One target:
legislation that would allow consumers to import drugs from
Canada.
While Schering's PAC last year donated $210,000, more than
25 percent over what it gave in 2001, the company's overall
contributions were reduced by the soft-money ban and were less
than half those of four years earlier.
To build its contributions back up, the company is urging
employees to give more to its PAC.
Edward Jordan, a regional sales director, began contributing
last year after talking to colleagues and reading a newsletter
that Schering mailed to his home in Great Falls, Virginia. He
also participated in conference calls with lawmakers, including
Representative Michael Ferguson, a New Jersey Republican, to
discuss issues such as drug imports.
``Once I had a better understanding of how the government
affects not just the company but me personally, I wanted to be
involved,'' says Jordan, 38. ``I look at this as investment in
our industry. What affects the company affects me personally.''
Other companies are taking advantage of a provision in the
2002 law that allows corporate donations to independent groups
incorporated under Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Service
Code. Such groups can accept unlimited donations from any source.
While the 527 groups can't directly contribute to races for
federal office, they can finance activities such as get-out-thevote drives that benefit all of a party's nominees, including
those for Congress.
Most of the corporate giving in this category goes to state
political party organizations. New York-based Pfizer gave
$736,000 last year, more than any other corporation, to 527
groups, including to the Republican and Democratic governors'
associations, according to PoliticalMoneyLine, a Washington-based
company that tracks such expenditures.
Pfizer, the world's biggest drugmaker, gave a total of about
$1.6 million last year, up from $1.2 million in 2001. ``Pfizer's

involvement in the political process is essential,'' spokeswoman
Judy Sandlin Brooks says.
Other large corporate givers to 527 groups last year
included Brentford, England-based GlaxoSmithKline Plc, which gave
$624,000, and New York-based Altria Group Inc., the parent of
Philip Morris USA, which gave $528,750.
``This is the new avenue for political money,'' says Kent
Cooper, a former FEC assistant staff director and the co-founder
of PoliticalMoneyLine. ``This keeps the names of the companies in
front of the national party leaders.''

Congress Avoids Lobbyists' Fundraising in U.S. Ethics Debate
By Jonathan D. Salant
March 31 (Bloomberg) -- Representatives debating new U.S.
restrictions on lobbyists next week will be able to slip out at
lunchtime -- to attend political fundraising events sponsored by
lobbyists.
Lobbyists representing companies including Verizon
Communications Inc. and Wal-Mart Stores Inc. have scheduled at
least four fundraisers for lawmakers during the week of April 3
as House panels begin drafting the ethics legislation.
Congress is focusing its first major overhaul of lobbying
rules in a decade on the trips, meals and gifts that lawmakers
receive from corporate representatives. What it isn't addressing
are the millions of dollars collected by lobbyists at fundraising
events and through other means. The Center for Public Integrity,
a Washington-based watchdog group, says lobbyists have served as
treasurers of 79 lawmakers' political committees since 1998.
``If you don't do something about the fundraising, you can't
call it real reform,'' said Rogan Kersh, a political science
professor who teaches courses on lobbying at Syracuse
University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs in
New York.
Staging congressional fundraisers is an important part of
his job, said lobbyist Wright Andrews, a partner in the
Washington-based law firm of Butera & Andrews. ``Of course you
sponsor them,'' said Andrews, whose clients include Cincinnatibased Federated Department Stores Inc. and Spring House,
Pennsylvania-based Advanta Corp. ``I personally consider it
mandatory to be effective in this town. If you don't, you don't
have as good access.''
Nothing Unseemly
Several lawmakers said there's nothing unseemly about
raising money at an event hosted by lobbyists. ``Nobody expects,
by hosting a fundraiser, they'd get me to vote in any particular
fashion,'' said Representative Steve Pearce, 58, a New Mexico
Republican whose fundraiser earlier this month was hosted by
lobbyists for companies including Houston-based Burlington
Resources Inc. and Los Angeles-based Occidental Petroleum Corp.
Congress is considering lobbying legislation in response to
the scandal involving Republican lobbyist Jack Abramoff, who has
admitted to defrauding his clients and trying to corrupt public
officials. Abramoff's former restaurant, Signatures, was a
leading Washington venue for lawmakers to raise money: Between

2001 and 2004, at least 55 fundraisers were held there by members
of Congress, according to data compiled by Dwight L. Morris &
Associates, a Bristow, Virginia-based company that tracks
campaign finance.
Temporary Trip Ban
The legislation being considered by the House would ban
lawmakers from taking privately funded trips before the November
elections and prevent lobbyists from riding along when lawmakers
fly on corporate jets. Senate legislation passed on March 29
would ban all gifts and meals from lobbyists. Both measures would
double to two years the waiting period before a former lawmaker
can lobby on Capitol Hill.
Groups pushing for stronger lobbying laws, such as Common
Cause and Public Citizen, say the legislation should also cut the
financial ties between members of Congress and lobbyists.
``They're addicted to campaign money,'' Celia Wexler, vice
president for advocacy at Washington-based Common Cause, said of
the lawmakers. ``And the lobbyists are the people who provide it
for them.''
Separate Issue
Even some lawmakers who favor stronger lobbying rules say
campaign-finance issues should be taken up separately, as part of
an overhaul of the way congressional elections are funded.
``That's not the crux of what we're trying to do with lobby
reform,'' said Representative Martin Meehan, 49, a Massachusetts
Democrat. ``The only way to get at lobbyist fundraising is to get
at public financing of campaigns.''
House committees will draft the lobby legislation with an
eye toward bringing it to the full body sometime after lawmakers
return from the Easter-Passover recess during the last week of
April.
On April 5, a day after the House Judiciary Committee is
scheduled to take up the legislation, lobbyists for such
companies as Basel, Switzerland-based Novartis AG and New Yorkbased Verizon are scheduled to host a fundraising event for
Representative Bobby Jindal, a Louisiana Republican.
The next day, the Washington-based firm of Patton Boggs LLP,
whose clients include Bentonville, Arkansas-based Wal-Mart and
New York-based JPMorgan Chase & Co., will host a luncheon at its
offices for Representative Jim McCrery, another Louisiana
Republican. Patton Boggs spokesman Brian Hale declined comment.
The offices of Jindal, 34, and McCrery, 56, didn't
immediately respond to requests for comment.

`More Than Ironic'
``That's more than ironic that people are doing fundraising
next week while we're contemplating lobbying reform,'' said
Representative Louise Slaughter of New York, the top Democrat on
the House Rules Committee, which held a hearing on the
legislation yesterday. Slaughter, 76, has no lobbyist-sponsored
fundraisers scheduled, spokesman Eric Burns said.
The Senate measure approved this week would require
lobbyists to disclose their campaign donations and the
fundraising events they arranged. The Senate declined to act on
proposals to ban lobbyists from holding fundraisers or serving as
treasurers of members' campaign committees.
The House version is silent on lobbyists' fundraising,
except for a requirement that they report campaign donations.
``I don't think they should be particularly singled out and
denied the ability to participate the way other Americans can,''
said Representative Tom Cole, 56, an Oklahoma Republican.
The lobbyists who help raise money are doing it as a favor
for lawmakers who are already their allies, not to persuade
anyone to come over to their side, said Jonathan Slade, a
principal with the Washington-based Cormac Group.
``You're basically raising money for people who already
agree with you or who are already on your side,'' said Slade,
whose firm's clients include San Antonio-based AT&T Inc. and New
York-based Time Warner Inc. ``It's not like you're raising money
and someone moves over to your side because of it.''

Abramoff Client Donated to Lawmakers, Got $3 Million (Update2)
By Jonathan D. Salant
Dec. 2 (Bloomberg) -- When the U.S. Interior Department
rejected a $3 million grant in 2003 for an Indian-tribe client of
lobbyist Jack Abramoff, the Indians doubled their political
donations to Congress -- and got their money's worth.
A joint House-Senate committee agreed later that year to
insert the grant in legislation funding the Interior Department
for 2004. The Saginaw Chippewa tribe gave $556,730 to U.S.
lawmakers in 2003-2004, up from $237,980 in the previous two
years, and more than one-fifth went to 17 of the 30 committee
members. Two members, Montana Senator Conrad Burns and North
Carolina Representative Charles Taylor, both Republicans, wrote
letters backing the grant.
Donations by Abramoff's former Indian-tribe clients are at
the heart of a Justice Department investigation of the lobbyist
that threatens to ensnare lawmakers in both political parties.
Investigators are looking into whether Abramoff, 46, rewarded
officials for helping clients such as the Saginaw Chippewa, whose
Michigan casino makes it one of the U.S.'s richest tribes.
``Whenever you see a pattern like this, it always raises the
question of whether the money was being used to induce members of
Congress to act favorably on behalf of the Indian tribe or as a
thank-you,'' said Larry Noble, former chief counsel of the
Federal Election Commission. ``Clearly, the cautionary flags go
up.''
The lawmakers involved say there was no link between the
money they got from the tribes and either their votes or the
letters they wrote in support of the grant.
Congress got involved after the Interior Department ruled in
March 2003 that the Saginaw Chippewas, who run the Soaring Eagle
Casino in Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, didn't qualify for help under a
program designed to help poorer tribes build schools.
Prior to the department's decision, 13 members of the House
and Senate had written letters either to the department or the
Senate Appropriations Committee supporting the program, according
to lawmakers and e-mails sent by Abramoff and released by the
Senate Indian Affairs Committee. Bloomberg News obtained the
letters under the Freedom of Information Act.
Indian Affairs Committee hearings over the last 18 months
revealed that Abramoff and former partner Michael Scanlon
received more than $80 million from six tribal clients. Between
2001 and 2004, Abramoff and Scanlon directed the tribes to make
millions of dollars in campaign donations to lawmakers and
Republican-leaning political groups to build support and promote

Abramoff's pet projects, according to the e-mails.
Scanlon Cooperating
Scanlon, 35, pleaded guilty last week to conspiring to
corrupt public officials and defraud clients and agreed to
cooperate with the Justice Department investigation.
Negotiators in the House-Senate joint committee met in
October 2003 to resolve differences between Interior Department
spending measures that had each been passed by the two chambers.
The school grant was added to the final $19.7 billion version,
which was sponsored by Taylor. Burns and Senator Byron Dorgan of
North Dakota, the top Democrat on the Indian Affairs Committee,
were among the lawmakers who signed on to the legislation.
Burns got more money from Abramoff and his tribal clients
than any other lawmaker between 2001 and 2004, taking in
$136,500. Dorgan ranked fourth, with $54,000. Two other members
of the conference committee were among the 10 biggest recipients:
Republican Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, who got $43,000; and
Republican Senator Thad Cochran of Mississippi, who got $37,000.
Blaming Burns
``It looks like there is some connection between the
contributions and the activities, if in no other way than the
timing and the way it was done, in conference,'' said Noble, now
executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics, a
Washington-based research group that studies campaign finance.
Dorgan spokesman Barry Piatt said the senator played no role
in the school appropriation, saying it was all Burns's doing.
``He had nothing to do with that earmark,'' Piatt said. ``It was
put in by Senator Conrad Burns. He was not consulted on it. There
was not a vote on it.''
Burns's office said the senator acted only because he was
asked to by lawmakers from the Saginaw Chippewa's home state.
``The bottom line is that this appropriation was a request
from the Michigan delegation,'' said J.P. Pendleton, a spokesman
for the lawmaker. ``Senator Burns is not hands-on in the
donations to his campaign; he doesn't know about them until he
sees the quarterly reports.''
Letter to Interior
In May 2003, Burns and Taylor wrote to the Interior
Department seeking funding for the Saginaw Chippewa school. A
month before, Taylor had received a $1,000 campaign contribution
from the tribe and $5,500 from its lobbyists. A month after the

lawmakers sent the letter, the Saginaw Chippewa gave Burns $4,000
and Taylor $3,000.
Deborah Potter, a spokeswoman for Taylor, didn't respond to
several requests for comment.
Members of the current tribal council were unaware of the
tactics used to obtain the federal funds, sub-chief Bernard
Sprague said. He said none of the funds have been spent and that
council members are considering giving the money back to the
government if it will be used on school construction for a poorer
tribe.
``Since we found out exactly how they went about achieving
this $3 million grant, the current administration does not feel
comfortable accepting these funds,'' Sprague said.
The Saginaw Chippewa reached a confidential settlement with
Abramoff's law firm, Miami-based Greenberg Traurig LLP, over the
amount of money the tribe paid, Sprague said.
Funds Needed
In 2002, Democratic Senators Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow
of Michigan had written a letter to Burns and Senator Robert
Byrd, the West Virginia Democrat who was then chairman of the
Appropriations Committee, asking for funds for the school.
``These buildings cannot accommodate the current student body or
the expected future growth in the student enrollment,'' the two
senators wrote on March 22, 2002.
That month, the Saginaws' chief lobbyist, Chris Petras,
contributed $2,000 to Stabenow's campaign. He gave another $2,000
in June 2003.
Petras didn't return e-mails and calls seeking comment. A
person answering the phone at his office at Central Michigan
University in Mt. Pleasant, where he is now a professor, hung up
when reached by a reporter.
Stabenow spokeswoman Angela Benander said there was no link
between the senator's support of a constituent's request and
campaign donations. ``They were not connected, absolutely not,''
she said.
Cochran's press secretary, Jenny Manley, said, ``There was
no connection whatsoever between any donations and any assistance
he had provided anyone.'' A call to Brownback's press secretary
wasn't returned.
In January 2003, still looking for the grant, both Stabenow
and Burns spoke on the Senate floor in support of the Saginaw
Chippewa, according to the Congressional Record. ``The Saginaw
Chippewa of Michigan is eligible, willing and capable to take
advantage of this innovative program,'' Burns said.

Republicans' Texas Spending May Bolster Charges Against DeLay
By Jonathan D. Salant
Oct. 14 (Bloomberg) -- The Republican Party's $190,000 in
donations to seven Texas politicians in 2002, which are at the
center of criminal charges against Representative Tom DeLay,
dwarfed all other contributions the national party made to state
legislative races that year, federal records show.
The size of the donations -- five times more money than the
national party gave to other state legislative candidates -- may
bolster a prosecutor's accusations that DeLay channeled funds
through the party to skirt a Texas law banning corporate
contributions to political races, campaign-finance experts say.
The money was distributed on Oct. 4, 2002, to Republican
legislative candidates backed by DeLay's political action
committee, Federal Election Commission records show. That was
about two weeks after the national party got $190,000 from the
PAC. An indictment obtained by Texas prosecutor Ronnie Earle
charges that DeLay's PAC sent a list of the candidates to the
party along with $190,000 raised from companies.
``It's just more evidence that these were earmarked
contributions,'' said former Federal Election Commission general
counsel Larry Noble, now executive director of the Washingtonbased Center for Responsive Politics, which studies political
giving. ``It just adds to the case if there was no history in
giving money to state legislative candidates.''
`Not the Same Money'
DeLay, 58, who was forced to step down as majority leader of
the House of Representatives after his indictment, faces
arraignment in Austin on Oct. 21. His lawyer, Dick DeGuerin,
called the charges ``groundless.''
``There is a patchwork quilt of campaign-finance laws across
the country,'' said DeGuerin, 64. ``Trmpac was very careful to
make sure it followed all of them,'' he said, referring to
DeLay's PAC, Texans for a Republican Majority.
The corporate contributions from Texas were sent to
candidates in states where corporate money was allowed, he said.
``It's not the same money at all,'' he said. ``The corporate
money did not come back to Texas for the individual races. It was
two different piles of money. It wasn't an exchange.''
DeLay spokesman Kevin Madden and Republican National
Committee spokeswoman Tracey Schmitt both declined to comment.
Apart from the seven Texas politicians, the Republican
National Committee in 2002 gave a total of $35,775 to 68 other

state legislative candidates, with no single nominee getting more
than $2,000, FEC records show. These included nine other
candidates in Texas, who received $500 apiece.
Indictments
The Republican National Committee's contribution to state
legislative races was a small amount of the millions it spent for
the 2002 elections. Most of the money the committee doled out to
the states went to the state parties directly or to gubernatorial
candidates such as Bob Riley in Alabama, who received $2.5
million and was elected.
Earle, the Travis County district attorney, obtained
indictments on Oct. 3 against DeLay and two associates, Jim Ellis
and John Colyandro, charging them with money laundering and
conspiracy to commit money laundering. Last month, Earle also got
indictments against DeLay's PAC and an allied business group, the
Austin-based Texas Association of Business, charging them with
accepting illegal corporate donations during the 2002 elections.
The money from DeLay's PAC was intended to help Republicans
take over the Texas legislature and redraw congressional
boundaries to favor the national party. It worked, with state
Republicans winning control that year and carrying out the
redistricting. That helped the party pick up six U.S.
congressional seats in the state in the November 2004 elections.
The seven Texas Republican legislative candidates who shared
the $190,000 in contributions were mentioned in the Oct. 3 Texas
grand jury indictment of DeLay, Ellis and Colyandro. None of the
candidates was charged with wrongdoing.
The money was given to the seven in checks ranging from
$20,000 to $40,000. A $40,000 check to one candidate, Glenda
Dawson, was more than the entire amount given to the other 68
state legislative candidates by the national party.
Six of the seven candidates ran against Democratic
incumbents or for open seats, and all won their races. The only
loser was the lone incumbent on the list, Rick Green.
``They have been singled out compared with the rest of the
country,'' said Kent Cooper, former FEC assistant staff director
for disclosure and co-founder of PoliticalMoneyLine, a
Washington-based group that tracks campaign contributions.
DeLay's involvement in a June 2002 fund-raiser for his Texas
PAC drew a rebuke from the House ethics committee last year. He
was the featured guest at an event for energy companies at a time
when he was helping to negotiate an energy bill. The ethics
committee said the fund-raiser ``created the appearance that
donors were being provided with special access.''

Show Date:
Display Timing:
Segment Number:
Series:
Trans. Title:
Cat. Title:

2006-02-08
00:04:58
11
MORNING EDITION
D.C. DEMAND SPIKES FOR LAWYERS WITH CORRUPTION
SPECIALTY
DEMAND FOR LAWYERS WITH CORRUPTION SPECIALTY

STEVE INSKEEP, host:
This asbestos battle comes at a time when lobbyists and lawmakers face
pressure to reform. Congressional Republicans just elected a new leader
and adopted new rules. And those changes happened in part because of
the investigation of Lobbyist Jack Abramoff. That investigation
continues. And that explains why one kind of legal specialist is
suddenly in demand all over Washington, D.C.
NPR's Peter Overby reports on the seller's market for lawyers who know
federal corruption laws.
PETER OVERBY reporting:
It's so much of a seller's market, in fact, that two weeks of reporting
turned up virtually no lawyers in Washington who would discuss this
case on the record. Some of them already have clients and the rest of
those contacted said they don't want to upset any potential clients.
Mr. RANDALL ELIASON (Former Prosecutor, D.C.): Boom times for whitecollar defense attorneys.
OVERBY: Meet Randall Eliason, one of the few D.C. lawyers who will
talk. In the 1990s, he was a federal prosecutor on the case against
former Democratic Congressman Dan Rostenkowski. Now he teaches and
writes. Eliason, along with all of those off-the-record lawyers says
the legal framework of the Abramoff case is already set. It rests
primarily on three laws.
Mr. ELIASON: Sort of the normal universe of charges, if you're talking
about a corruption case involving a federal official. Bribery and
gratuities are the main corruption statutes and then fair and honest
services, mail fraud or wire fraud is also a very popular theory.
OVERBY: In a bribery case, a public official agrees to perform an
official act in exchange for something of value. The reward doesn't
have to go to the official, it could go to a campaign committee or

anywhere else it's agreed on. The prison sentence can run up to 15
years.
A second separate crime is accepting an illegal gratuity, that's just
two years in prison. The gift has to be linked to a specific official
act, not just good will. But unlike bribery, no explicit agreement is
needed.
Then there's mail or wire fraud. Prosecutors can charge a public
official with using mail, telephone, e-mail or other devices to defraud
constituents of the officials' honest services; in other words, selling
a public office to a private buyer. That could bring a sentence of up
to 20 years.
The attorneys stressed that none of these charges is what you'd call a
slam-dunk in court. For starters, prosecutors have to get over a hurdle
set by the Constitution. The Speech-or-Debate clause says members of
Congress cannot be prosecuted for legislative activities.
Mr. ELIASON: He can't always show, sort of, the end game; what did the
representative do to, you know, introduce this bill? He made this
speech in committee, things like that.
OVERBY: But, as Randall Eliason points out, the Speech-or-Debate clause
does not give lawmakers complete immunity, or anything like it.
Mr. ELIASON: For a bribery case the crime is the agreement. It's
actually irrelevant to guilt or innocence whether they ever carried out
their end of the bargain.
OVERBY: A lawmaker can also be charged for non-legislative acts -things that don't involve the making of a law; say, signing a letter to
a Cabinet secretary to support a lobbyist's client. But here's another
catch in prosecuting bribery. Nobody involved is a victim, so none of
the parties has a natural incentive to help the prosecution. Again,
Randall Eliason.
Mr. ELIASON: That's why Abramoff's plea is such a big development in
this case because if there were corrupted deals that took place, now
they have one party to the deal who's going to testify about it.
OVERBY: Even when someone turns and cooperates with the prosecutors, a
corruption case can come down to one tainted witness against another,
so the strongest cases have tended to be stings where the crime is
captured on tape.
The model for this was Abscam in 1979. FBI agents videotaped seven
lawmakers taking payoffs from a man masquerading as an Arab sheik. With
a surveillance camera rolling, Democratic Congressman Michael “Ozzie”
Myers got an envelope with $50,000 in it. He uttered a tough-guy cliché

about what talks and what walks.
Mr. MICHAEL MYERS (Former Representative from Pennsylvania): I'm gonna
tell you somethin' real simple and short; your money talks in this
business and bull(bleep) walks. It works the same way down in
Washington.
OVERBY: Myers went to prison. Philip Heymann was the Assistant Attorney
General who oversaw Abscam. Now he teaches at Harvard Law School.
Mr. PHILIP HEYMANN (James Barr Ames Professor of Law, Harvard Law
School): Nobody was coaxed to take the cash. Everybody either
voluntarily took it or walked away from it.
OVERBY: Heymann says the courtroom testimony in the Abramoff case could
be a wash -- Abramoff's word versus the defendant's -- if only Abramoff
hadn't left such a rich trail of e-mail.
Mr. HEYMANN: Presumably they will ask Abramoff to testify to the fact
that he had already had the following discussions with the congressman
and that would do it if the jury believes Abramoff and they'll use, I
assume, the e-mail to bolster Abramoff's testimony.
OVERBY: And that's why some people named in those e-mails might be
shopping around for a defense attorney. Peter Overby, NPR News,
Washington.
STEVE INSKEEP, host:
The Abramoff scandal prompted lawmakers and good government groups to
propose a flurry of reforms and you can compare their plans by going to
our website, NPR.org.

Show Date:
Display Timing:
Segment Number:
Series:
Trans. Title:
Cat. Title:

2005-08-08
00:04:00
2
ALL THINGS CONSIDERED
ANALYSIS: NEW ENERGY BILL PROMOTES NUCLEAR ENERGY
PRODUCTION
ENERGY BILL GIVES BREAKS TO NUCLEAR INDUSTRY

MICHELE NORRIS, host:
The energy bill President Bush signed today offers billions of dollars
in tax incentives, loan guarantees and other aid to promote energy
production. There's been a lot of attention on spending for the oil and
gas industry, but as NPR's Peter Overby reports, nuclear power did
pretty well, too.
PETER OVERBY reporting:
President Bush has his roots in the oil industry, but in a speech on
energy policy last April, he left no doubt how he regards the nuclear
industry.
SOUNDBITE OF APRIL SPEECH
President GEORGE W. BUSH: One of the most promising sources of energy
is nuclear power.
SOUNDBITE OF APPLAUSE
OVERBY: Right now nuclear power supplies 20 percent of the electricity
in the United States, but nobody in the US has built a new reactor
plant since the early 1970s. The new energy policy in the bill signed
today is intended to change that, by providing new subsidies for the
industry and extending old ones. Angelina Howard is executive vice
president of the Nuclear Energy Institute.
Ms. ANGELINA HOWARD (Executive Vice President, Nuclear Energy
Institute): This bill passed with strong bipartisan support, and the
nuclear provisions were not the controversial provisions in the energy
bill.
OVERBY: Here's what the bill has to offer the nuclear industry. It
extends an existing cap on the industry's liability in case of a
catastrophic accident; the extension is good for 20 years. For the
first six plants to be built, the federal government will guarantee the
construction loans. That lets the builder get financing at a lower

interest rate. It also leaves the government with the tab if the
builder defaults. The bill provides eight years of tax credits for the
operating costs, the same tax break that goes to wind farms and other
non-polluting sources.
Anna Aurilio is a lobbyist with the US Public Interest Research Group,
which opposed the bill.
Ms. ANNA AURILIO (US Public Interest Research Group): It's hard to
imagine how the federal government could do any more for nuclear power
besides actually start laying the bricks and the mortar themselves.
OVERBY: But there's another break for the nuclear industry that's
raised the most eyebrows. For the first six plants, the energy bill
provides risk insurance, or, as the industry prefers to call it,
standby support. Should one of those plants not get its license on
schedule, the federal government would pay the power company either a
quarter or half a billion dollars. The snag could be caused by anything
from bureaucratic lethargy to a lawsuit to a terrorist attack. Again,
industry spokeswoman Angelina Howard.
Ms. HOWARD: That came from the administration asking the industry,
`What would it take for industry to commit private capital to build new
nuclear plants?'
OVERBY: The first public sign of this new benefit came in April in that
speech by President Bush. The president said he wanted to make the
country less dependent on imported oil.
SOUNDBITE OF APRIL SPEECH
Pres. BUSH: To do so, I've asked the Department of Energy to work on
changes to existing law that will reduce uncertainty in the nuclear
plant licensing process. It can also provide federal risk insurance
that will protect those building the first four new nuclear plants
against delays that are beyond their control.
OVERBY: What started as four plants then grew to six. Risk insurance
had not been considered by Vice President Dick Cheney's energy task
force back in 2001, nor had it ever appeared in subsequent versions of
the energy bill until this summer. Congress never held hearings on it,
nor was it debated on the House of Senate floor before it was added to
the final version of the bill last month. Jerry Taylor is director of
natural resources studies at the free-market think tank the Cato
Institute. He says the problem with nuclear power is that it just costs
too much for the market to bear.
Mr. JERRY TAYLOR (Director of Natural Resources Studies, Cato
Institute): When you hear Republicans talk about the glories of nuclear
power, you might as well hear the Democratic left talking about the

glories of solar power. They're the identical speeches, and neither
speech talks about price. Will this bill throw enough subsidies at the
industry to create a Potemkin village market, kind of like we've
created for ethanol?
OVERBY: Taylor says he hopes not. But it would be a mistake to
underestimate the political clout of the nuclear industry, an industry
that was created by the federal government and, in good times and bad,
has never fallen from favor. Peter Overby, NPR News, Washington.

Show Date:
Display Timing:
Segment Number:
Series:
Trans. Title:
Cat. Title:

2005-05-12
00:04:00
1
ALL THINGS CONSIDERED
ANALYSIS: TOM DELAY'S FINANCIAL CONNECTIONS REACH
ALMOST ALL THROUGH CONGRESS
DELAY & HIS PAC GAVE $ TO GOP ON ETHICS COMMITTEE

ROBERT SIEGEL, host:
This is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED from NPR News. I'm Robert Siegel.
MICHELE NORRIS, host:
And I'm Michele Norris.
Conservative groups in Washington say they've sold every seat for
tonight's tribute dinner honoring House Majority Leader Tom DeLay. The
dinner is meant to give DeLay a boost as the House ethics committee
prepares for a likely investigation. Under scrutiny: overseas trips
DeLay took with a lobbyist. That lobbyist, Jack Abramoff, is already
facing other government investigations.
SIEGEL: In a few minutes, we'll hear about that dinner and about new
ethics guidelines Republicans hope will protect them from future ethics
problems. First, Peter Overby looks at Tom DeLay's financial ties to
members of the ethics panel and almost every other Republican in the
House.
PETER OVERBY reporting:
Two of the five Republicans on the House Ethics Committee have already
recused themselves from this case. Tom Cole of Oklahoma and Lamar Smith
of Texas were in an awkward spot because they had given money to
DeLay's legal defense fund.
But when it comes to cash flowing the other direction, from DeLay and
his personal political action committee to other members, it's hard to
find anyone who hasn't received some. All three of the remaining
Republicans on the ethics panel are affected, and so are all but four
of DeLay's 231 GOP colleagues in the current House. That's according to
an analysis done for NPR by the non-partisan Center for Responsive
Politics. The data reach back as far as 1989.
Most House members were elected over this span, as DeLay was building
his reputation as a congressional powerhouse. The analysis shows that
Melissa Hart, first elected in 2000, got $15,000 from DeLay's

organization. Hart says that, all told, her campaigns have cost about
$4 million. She's on the ethics committee, and she says it isn't a
problem.
Representative MELISSA HART (Republican, Pennsylvania): If anyone would
suggest that because someone gave me money that I would do what they
tell me or I would be somehow beholden to them, I would suggest that
every member of Congress can't vote on anything.
OVERBY: Judy Biggert of Illinois says her contribution from DeLay was
small and long ago.
Representative JUDY BIGGERT (Republican, Illinois): And I got a lot
more from other people. And I just think that it's a nice thing to do,
and I do it, really, to help the party. And I think that's what all of
us do, and I think probably what Leader DeLay does, too.
OVERBY: But not all House Republicans agree. One dissenter is Ray
LaHood, a six-term veteran from Illinois.
Representative RAY LAHOOD (Republican, Illinois): I think anytime you
write a check to somebody, you make an investment. If you write a check
to a candidate or to a member, they know you're making an investment in
them.
OVERBY: LaHood says the answer for the ethics committee is pretty
obvious.
Rep. LAHOOD: If there are members of the ethics committee that have
received contributions from Leader DeLay's political action committee,
they should recuse themselves from consideration.
OVERBY: But if they did, who'd be left to serve? It's a short list of
possibilities. Fifty Republicans can at least say they got less than a
thousand dollars each from DeLay's organization. Frank Wolf of Virginia
can say he gave back his $20 contribution, and DeLay never gave at all
to Tom Osborne of Nebraska, Joe Schwartz of Michigan or this lawmaker,
Todd Platts of Pennsylvania.
Representative TODD PLATTS (Republican, Pennsylvania): My practice for
12-plus years in public office is to only accept contributions from
individual contributors, to not accept it from any PAC.
OVERBY: DeLay became a leading practitioner of money politics in the
1980s, as the seniority system was fading away and cash was becoming
the avenue to power. Now many lawmakers have so-called leadership PACs
like his.
Just for comparison, House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi and her PACs
gave money to four of the five Ethics Committee Democrats, roughly half

as much as DeLay did on the other side -- but then Pelosi hasn't been
in the leadership as long.
Larry Noble, director of the Center for Responsive Politics, says
lawmakers remember where their money comes from.
Mr. LARRY NOBLE (Center for Responsive Politics): And they can't deny,
in the end, that that does affect their relationships. You are less
likely to go against somebody, especially as they're coming up in the
leadership, who supported you in the past. That's just human nature.
OVERBY: Just as it's the nature of politicians to protect their flanks
by making as many allies as they can. Peter Overby, NPR News,
Washington.

