Using data
for Profit and Nonprofit Businesses
David Wethe
Fort Worth Star-Telegram
dwethe@star-telegram.com
This list is not intended to be a complete collection of computer resources. It
highlights some of the most helpful sources available when backgrounding a business.
Company Websites
--This seems like an obvious first step, but it’s almost always the first thing you should
do when backgrounding a company. Just about any company has a web site these days.
It’s the best way to see what a company says about itself. Often, you can find contact
information, company history, a listing of top executives and even financial documents or
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Even if the company doesn’t have
a website, plugging the company’s name into Google (www.google.com) can yield
interesting chatter about a person or business. That can lead to better questions to ask
down the road.
Publicly traded companies
--All publicly traded companies must file regular reports with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Their government’s site (www.sec.gov) seems to be the best for
finding these filings because everything is free. Under “Forms and Filings,” click on the
“Search for company filings.” The SEC’s site will also have filings from companies that
are not publicly traded but must disclose key information about themselves. For example,
mortgage lenders must file when they offer up large bundled mortgages for sale.
Private companies
--Hoovers (www.hoovers.com) is about the best free website out there for finding
information on large privately held companies.
Secretary of state websites
--While it varies from state to state, many secretary of state websites allow you to search
for corporation names and the key executives associated with them. If you can’t find the
search option on the secretary of state site, check your state’s comptroller website.
--A collection of all 50 state websites (http://www.statelocalgov.net) offers links to sites
for the secretary of state and comptroller offices.
County tax assessors office
--If your county has a tax assessor website, this is a great way to find out the appraised
value of the property. Counties usually store the tax rolls electronically. If you're up for
the challenge, you can file an open records request to receive the tax rolls electronically.
Then you can sort them in a table using Excel, Access or FoxPro software.

Telephone directory
--Anywho (www.anywho.com) seems to be pretty helpful for looking up business
numbers, or for doing a reverse lookup of numbers when all you have is the phone
number. You can also click on the listed name and see all the other businesses on that
block.
Newspaper clip file
--It’s good to check out everything that’s been said in print about the company.
Sometimes you can find some excellent industry knowledge about a company based on
what was said in the monthly trade journal, for example. LexisNexis (www.nexis.com)
has the best collection, but it’s a pay service.
Court filings
--Bankruptcy documents, lawsuits and divorce filings can offer details of the lives of
executives and the companies they run that may otherwise not be made public. The
federal courts are more easily searchable online using a pay service called Pacer
(http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/) than the state courts. The availability of imaged court
filings and dockets varies from county to county within the state court system.
Certificates of occupancy, building permits, plats
--It’s hard to find these city documents online, but don’t discount them. They offer great
sources of public information about a company's planned construction development,
renovation or teardown.
Land sales
--Not all states require land sale prices to be made public. Therefore it can be a challenge
to find this information anywhere. Real estate deeds are kept on file with the county
clerk's office. Sometimes a county's website will offer a search function to find real estate
transactions for free.

