Info merchants
and influence peddlers:
Tracking lobbyists, consultants and fund-raisers
James Drew
Columbus bureau chief
The Blade
jdrew@theblade.com

Mike Wilkinson
Reporter, assistant city editor
The Blade
mwilkinson@theblade.com
Blade archives
www.toledoblade.com

State campaign finance records
If your paper doesn’t have its own standing database, hopefully your state will. In
Ohio, it’s at the Secretary of State’s site, www.sos.state.ohio.us. In addition to
campaign finance, which is both searchable and has massive files that can be
downloaded, the secretary of state’s site also includes corporate information that
allows you to determine who a company’s agents are, sometimes it’s top officers,
its address, and purpose. It helps unravel all the different entities an individual
may be using.
Federal campaign finance records
For quick searches on individuals, www.opensecrets.org has a good search
engine. However, if you’re using it by employer, it’s not as good. Therefore, go to
www.fec.gov. But remember: searches have to be done many different ways.
Political charities, or ‘527’ money
The IRS site is OK, but the search engine is a tad clunky, but here it is:
forms.irs.gov/politicalOrgsSearch/search/gotoAdvanced8871Search.action.
Opensecrets.org also lists some 527 money. Beware on the IRS site: sometimes,
because of amended reports, you’ll get the same contribution appearing two and
three times.
Federal contracts
In addition to the IRE site, if you have the time to learn the site, go to the federal
procurement data system, (note the https) https://www.fpds.gov. You can get
information that is geography specific (biggest federal contractor in your
city/zip/state) or company specific. It will tell you if the project was competitively
bid.
Open records laws
Know your state’s laws. Know how to file a request and how to follow up. If they
have five days to respond, call on the fifth day. Put the burden on them.
Hopefully, your paper will have a good lawyer and a publisher who likes to use
her. If not, bluff, but with good knowledge of the law. In Ohio, the bureau of
workers’ compensation kept finding documents months after honoring our

requests, saying ‘didn’t we already give this to you?’ In many cases, they had
not.
Ohio specific sites
OK, not everyone works in Ohio. But it’s likely that some of these databases are
available in your state. Our state lobbying center is at www.jlec-olig.state.oh.us.
You can check on attorneys’ licenses and disciplinary records at
www.sconet.state.oh.us/atty_reg/Public_AttorneyInformation.asp. If you want to
find out if a guy who says he’s a stock broker really is, go to the Ohio License
Center at license.ohio.gov/lookup/default.asp.
Local courthouse
Know where marriage licenses are, how to check out probate and divorce court,
property records (many are now online. Florida is excellent. Not everyone can
afford Autotrack, so you have to look at the free, government sites.) Federal tax
liens are filed at the county level, as are state tax liens.

