Investigating Conflicts of Interest of Federal Judges
Will Evans, reporter
Center for Investigative Reporting
wevans@cironline.org or 510-809-3173
www.muckraker.org

2006 IRE National Conference
Fort Worth, TX
Investigating judges and prosecutors

Federal judges are prohibited by federal law and their official code of conduct from sitting on
cases involving companies in which they own stock. It’s an important ethical rule meant to
ensure public confidence in the judiciary, and it’s easy for judges to set up a system to make sure
they never preside over such cases. But some do anyway. I found that two of Bush’s nominations
to the appellate bench – Judge James Payne and Judge Terrence Boyle – had been repeatedly
violating the law on judicial conflicts of interest for years. After the conflicts came to light,
Payne withdrew his nomination and Boyle is currently under fire for the ethics problems.
Despite the fact that public documents prove the conflicts of interest, no one had looked. Judges
essentially police themselves, and most lawyers either don’t care or are too afraid to upset
anyone by snooping around. Yet, the process for finding this kind of conflict of interest is
straight-forward and something that any reporter can do (with some time) for federal judges
across the country. I, for example, basically copied the method from Washington Post reporter
Joe Stephens, whose 1998 series for the Kansas City Star pioneered reporting on this topic.
There are different kinds of judicial conflicts of interest to look for, but this tipsheet will focus on
comparing a judge’s stock portfolio to the companies in cases before him or her.
-Start with the judge’s financial disclosure forms. Every federal judge and magistrate judge
must file annual reports listing financial interests of the judge and immediate family. The filings
are public, but must be requested from an office in Washington D.C. They only keep the last 6
years of filings.
-Download the request form: http://www.uscourts.gov/forms/AO010a.pdf and fax the
completed form to (202) 502-1899.
-The office will take about two weeks before notifying you of how much your request
will cost (copies are 20 cents per page). To speed up the process, ask them to fax you the
notice of the cost, instead of mailing it.
-During this time, the judge will be notified who is making the request. Judges also have
an opportunity to redact information, though major redactions aren’t common.
-Mail the check and your original request form (which you already faxed) to the Office of
the Committee on Financial Disclosure, Administrative Office of the United States
Courts, Suite 2-301, One Columbus Circle, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20544.
-For questions, call (202) 502-1850.
-Make a spreadsheet. It’s not necessary, but I found it helpful to create an Excel spreadsheet
showing the judge’s stocks year by year. It helps identify which stocks are the most prominent in
the judge’s portfolio and if there are any mistakes on the disclosures (the judge may have
skipped reporting a stock one year).
-Limit yourself to looking at common stock – mutual funds are different. Though Justice
Samuel Alito tripped over the issue, generally a judge who invests in a mutual fund can

sit on a case involving the mutual fund company or the companies whose stock is held by
the fund.
-The annual disclosure reports should show if the judge bought or sold stock that year,
and the date of the transaction. Nomination filings, however, are filed by judicial
nominees (even if they are already judges) and just list the stock name, not whether it was
bought or sold that year.
-Look up cases involving the companies. You can look up cases at the judge’s courthouse, or
remotely, by using the online PACER system (http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/). You can search
by case number or the name of a party or attorney, but unfortunately not by the judge’s name.
You must look up all the cases involving the companies you are interested in and then check who
the judge was. Then compare the dates to make sure the judge owned the stock at the time he/she
sat on the case.
-Set up a PACER account: you will be charged 8 cents per page. It can add up.
-Find the PACER web page for the court you want:
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/psco/cgi-bin/links.pl
-Plug in the company’s name in the “last name” field.
-Often, you can identify the judge on the case just by the last few letters of the case
number (BO for Boyle or JHP for James H. Payne). But to be thorough, check all the
cases involving the company at issue, because your judge may have had the case in the
past – violated the rules – and later reassigned the case to someone else.
-Once you click on the case you are interested in, click on “docket report” and then “run
report.” This will give you a list of all the parties and lawyers involved as well as a
step-by-step history of everything that happened in the case. (It may cost you a couple
bucks, depending on how long the case history was.) With this, you can see what the
judge actually did, what orders he signed, etc. You can then click on many of the court
filings to read the PDF of the actual document.
-Double check. If you find some significant conflicts and you think you have a story, I found it
extremely helpful to run all the documents by a legal ethics expert or friendly law professor who
knows the issue to make sure you’re interpreting it correctly and to help give you a sense of how
serious the violations are.
-People. Judges wouldn’t call me back, so before we published I sent each judge a letter
detailing all the cases where I found conflicts and asking for an explanation. They didn’t get
back to me, but I’d still recommend it. Lawyers, not surprisingly, often don’t want to talk or will
defend the judge enthusiastically without speaking to the conflict issue. Individual plaintiffs,
though, often have an intuitive sense that if their judge has investments in a company they are
suing, they won’t get a fair shake. This gets to the spirit of the law: avoiding even the
appearance of a conflict of interest in order to ensure trust in the system.

Remember:
-Stocks listed on a judge’s financial disclosure forms could belong to anyone in his/her
immediate family. Writing that the judge personally owned the stock could be wrong – although
it counts as a financial interest of the judge either way under the law.
-Don’t forget to look at whether the judge jumps off any cases where it looks like there is a
conflict once you start calling, or once you’ve published. One judge I wrote about did both.
-Look up cases involving subsidiaries of the companies at issue too.
-Read the law (28 USC Sec. 455). There are a number of exceptions to the rule, and there are
some exceptions people think exist but do not. For example, lawyers are not permitted to waive a
financial conflict and allow a judge to continue sitting on a case just because they don’t care. But
a judge could keep sitting on a case involving a conflict if, upon realizing the conflict, the judge
sells the stock.
-Ignorance is a bad excuse: The law says “A judge should inform himself about his personal and
fiduciary financial interests,” so judges can’t easily claim that they didn’t know or didn’t
remember their stock holdings. Also, remember that they sign that annual disclosure statement.
-State judges have different rules to follow, depending on the state.
-This is only one kind of conflict: The judge could have presided over cases involving the law
firm of the judge’s son or daughter, the nonprofit on whose board the judge sits, a close friend
and former law partner, etc. Check the rules on those kinds of conflicts if you find them.
Important Web Sites:
http://www.judicialwatch.org/judges.shtml
-The organization Judicial Watch posted online the 2003 financial disclosure forms for all
federal judges (and many of the 2004 forms). That might be a good place to start before you
request years of disclosure forms, which will take a few weeks.
http://www.uscourts.gov/
-The web site of the federal courts system, including a map of circuits, links to courts,
background on the judiciary, and judicial publications.
http://www.uscourts.gov/guide/vol2/ch1.html
-The Code of Conduct for U.S. Judges. Canon 3C mirrors the federal statute on conflicts
of interest.
http://www.fjc.gov/history/home.nsf
-Look up a brief bio of any federal judge (past or present). Click on “Judges of the United
States Courts.”
http://dictionary.law.com/
-Legal dictionary

http://lawyers.findlaw.com/lawyer/lawyer_dir/search/jsp/name_search.jsp
http://www.martindale.com/xp/Martindale/home.xml
-Both help in finding a lawyer or law firm.
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/links.pl
-A list of PACER links that will take you to the PACER web page of any federal court.
http://www.uscourts.gov/forms/AO010a.pdf
-Download the request form for a judge’s financial disclosure reports. It includes
instructions.
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/senate/judiciary/index.html
-The Senate questionnaires that judicial nominees must submit are a rich source of
background info on a judge. Nominees to the federal bench must list their spouse, former jobs,
club memberships, volunteer work, professional awards, cases they tried as lawyers and more.
Go to this web site and click on the time period you want under “Hearings” for most of the
Senate hearings and questionnaires of judicial nominees since 1999. (You will have to know
when the judge had his/her hearing.) Try law libraries for judges nominated before 1999. Try the
Senate Judiciary Committee for the most recent nominees.
http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html
-Search for financial filings of public companies, to look up subsidiaries.
http://www.abanet.org/scfedjud/ratings.html
-The American Bar Association’s ratings of judicial nominees. The ratings don’t include
any detail or explanation.
http://www.usdoj.gov/olp/judicialnominations.htm
-DOJ’s page on judicial nominees. Good for background info on Bush’s nominees but not
very well updated.
http://www.uscourts.gov/cfapps/webnovada/CF_FB_301/index.cfm?fuseaction=Reports.Vie
wVacancies
-A list of current judicial vacancies and nominations.
http://dir.salon.com/topics/bush_judges/
-An index of stories on judges by the Center for Investigative Reporting for Salon. My
stories on Judge Payne and Judge Boyle are on top.
http://www.courtinginfluence.net/
-My stories built on previous, innovative work by CIR on appellate judges and nominees
catalogued on this site.
http://www.muckraker.org/pg_one_investigation-1227--0.html
-Documents I used for stories on Judge Payne.
http://muckraker.org/pg_one_investigation-1234-7-0.html
-Documents I used for stories on Judge Boyle. More here:
http://www.muckraker.org/pg_one_investigation-1236-7-0.html

