Tawnell D. Hobbs, Staff Writer
The Dallas Morning News
Contact: tdhobbs@dallasnews.com, 214-977-8558
2006 IRE Conference, Dallas/Fort Worth
Panel: First day on the beat: Investigating education

“Tools for the investigative education reporter”
1. Obtain your school district’s database of all employees’ salaries and stipends.
This database has the potential to produce numerous investigative stories. We were able
to use such a database to determine the number of Dallas school employees receiving car
allowance stipends and the cost to taxpayers. The numbers we found were much greater
than expected and resulted in a front-page story and the school district making changes.
2. Get copies of big contracts. We spent two months getting information and scouring
several databases and spreadsheets to find out if the Dallas school district was saving
money on a multi-million dollar printing and copying contract. Our research showed that
the district was spending millions more on a contract that was supposed to save taxpayers
millions. Also, be sure to look for special perks in the contract.
3. Obtain electronic information for credit cards, cell phone bills and travel
expenses for your school board members. See who is spending what and if there are
any outlandish charges.
4. Request databases that deal with discipline in your school district or state. Some
state education agencies have databases with discipline information, allowing you to
check by race, special education and grade level. In Texas, the state education agency can
even provide the reasons why students were disciplined.
5. Depending on your state, get your school district’s database for all students and
their contact information, such as school, address and phone number. Do the same
for your school district’s employees. These databases are very helpful during breaking
news and are a way to get fresh voices in your stories.
6. Get your school district’s database of consultants. The information should include
contract amount, duration and duties performed. This information is great for checking
for outlandish spending and measures your district is taking to educate students.
7. Get a database with date of births for all school employees. This is helpful when
running background checks.
8. Visit chat rooms for educators, such as Teachers.Net, which allows you to search for
discussions by state.
9. Create your own contact database by saving speaker lists from your meetings.

Make sure to include what issue the speaker addressed. Use the list to look for patterns.
For example, I began to see a pattern of parents complaining at board meetings about
gang incidents on campuses. I investigated – and found – that there was an increasing
problem with gang violence.

