Digging Into the Environment
IRE 2006 Fort Worth
Matthew Waite
St. Petersburg Times

Four Tips to Help You Dig
Be on the lookout for other kinds of data.
The environment beat is awash in data, and all kinds of it. The list is long, and
usually an alphabet soup of acronyms. Testing, permitting, enforcement,
administration – all have their own databases. And lots of useful data can be
found outside the beat: campaign donations, land records, emails, court cases.
Data can help you today, and tomorrow.
We spent a year fighting for a permit database that turned out to be largely
useless. We thought the database would be great for analysis. It turned out it was
a useful lookup tool on our intranet. When you get a big database as part of a
story, think of ways it can still help you after your story is done. Databases don’t
answer just a few questions. If you can’t make them searchable online, spend
some time setting up canned queries in Access that do what you want.
Look for new ways to manage data, for this project and for your beat
One of the most useful tools I’ve ever developed for a project is the use of a wiki
to store information. A wiki – not Wikipedia, but the idea that drives it – can be
harnessed into a massive, searchable notes database that you can store all kinds of
messy text data in. We transcribed dozens of interviews and added dozens of
reports into the wiki, both to share it with each other on the project and to make it
searchable in the future. You never know when something that comes up in an
interview today will be useful tomorrow. You can find a list of wiki software,
good and bad, needing a server or working on your desktop, here:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_wiki_software
Don’t be afraid of data you’ve never worked with before
Dig deep enough on the environment beat and you’re going to run into data
you’ve never heard of before. Ask enough questions, and you’re going to run into
ones that the agencies can’t – but should be able to – answer. Don’t fear doing it
yourself. Some of the most important work we’ve done – and some of the most
interesting work other papers have done – involved doing their own testing, their
own analysis of data. Ask yourself: if not you, who?

