TIPSHEET:

WOMEN JOURNALISTS DOING INTERNATIONAL INVESTIGATIONS
[Saturday 11.20 a.m. - Trinity Central]
Vivienne Walt,
Time Magazine
194 Boulevard Saint Germain
75007 Paris France
vivwalt@yahoo.com
These tips focus on style rather than substance, for good reason: Women journalists face specific
issues when doing international investigations. Here are some lessons learned—the hard way!—in the
field. Much of this is geared to women reporting in the Muslim world – Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan,
Pakistan, etc.–or on Muslim communities in the US or Europe:
** TREAD SOFTLY: Let the information unfold a little before zeroing in on your questioning.
Watch that you don't sound aggressive: tone down the reporting style you use back home. You have
two key advantages: to most people, you appear less threatening than men. And unlike male
colleagues, you can talk to women who are barred from talking to strange men. Women often know a
lot about what’s going on, and will offer unguarded information if you tread softly.
** DON'T BECOME A KNOWN FACE: A foreign woman is a curiosity factor, and quickly noticed
on the street. That can be dangerous in places like Iraq and Afghanistan. For in-depth reporting,
change your clothing, your hairstyle, etc., frequently, to avoid being easily recognized.
** DRESS, BEHAVIOR AND LANGUAGE: This for reporting in Muslim communities: Avoid
curse words or references to God. Avoid revealing dress, or an over-confident, breezy style. If
women cover their heads and limbs, do the same, even when ordering room service –waiters are
certain to be men. (I learned this the hard way in a Tehran hotel.) Never attempt to 'convert' people to
your more liberated ways: It could well alienate them and even endanger you.
** KEEP YOUR PERSONAL LIFE UNDER WRAPS – For women journalists, it is best not to chat
about your personal life, especially if you're unmarried. This rule can be broken if you have children
–a universalizing bond among people—but even so, restrict your chatting about the kids, because you
could come off as unserious.
** HIRE AND FIRE LOCAL PEOPLE WITH GREAT CAUTION: Most drivers and translators will
be men, and many might rarely have taken orders from women before. Hire carefully: AP and
Reuters bureaus often know local freelancers you can work with. Call ahead for recommendations.
Set clear working conditions, including hours. Don't overpay – it complicates things for those
working in the country. Some translators assume women journalists aren't important, so check that
they aren't cutting corners: Record an interview, then play it to a third person to check the translation.
If you have to fire someone, discuss with a local-based journalist how to go about it. Firing can cause
anger and possible retaliation, especially because of the humiliation of being rejected by a woman.
** PACKING: Pack to avoid being dependent; dependence can make for tricky relationships with
men. Keep a travel check-list, or a ready-to-go kit if you travel a lot. Mine includes: two walkietalkies which run on disposable AA batteries; a short-wave radio; water-purification tablets; malaria
tablets; sleeping mask; lots of batteries for every device; Gore-Tex gloves and cap; compact sleeping
bag; universal adaptor; powerful flashlight; Ziplok bags in different sizes; electrical power strip; car

adaptor (Radio Shack item) into which to plug that power strip, so you don't need any electricity.
Check all gear before leaving. Check internet and mobile-telephone capability in your destination.

