Deborah Crowe, staff reporter
Los Angeles Business Journal
http://www.labusinessjournal.com
dcrowe@labusinessjournal.com
debcrowe2@yahoo.com

Basics of Business Investigations:
From Backgrounding to Ideas
IRE National Conference 2006 – Fort Worth, Texas

When Tracking & Back-grounding Public Companies …
Tip #1: Make routine tracking of company news and regulatory filings quick and easy by creating
an investment portfolio in Yahoo! Finance, one that includes the ticker symbols of all public
companies based in your coverage area and the parent companies of local employers. If you
have a Wall Street Journal online subscription, do the same in its My Portfolios section. At a
minimum, check each portfolio first thing in the morning and then mid afternoon after the markets
close. These are the most common times news releases come out. Then go to the Investor
Relations page on each of the above company’s Web site and sign up for their email notification
of press releases and regulatory filings.
Tip #2: As soon as you get word of a major filing such as a 10Q (quarterly financials), 10K
(annual financials) or DEF14 (includes proxy statement sent to shareholders before the annual
meeting) download a copy and check the management discussion, legal proceedings and
footnotes sections for disclosure of new lawsuits, layoffs or plant closings the company may be
hiding in plain sight. Note: Some public filings are available for private companies that sell their
bonds on the public market.
Tip #3: When backgrounding a company you’re investigating, check a least a few years’ worth of
these filings. The 10K includes a detailed overview of what the company does, bios of top
officers, key business units, products, and business challenges. The appendix usually consists of
routine documents referenced in the filing, but occasionally contains gems like employment
contracts. The DEF14 details executive compensation, including stock holdings, option grants
and perks. The company’s S-1 filing, which includes the prospectus, provide details about
management’s expectations that can be compared to today’s reality.
Tip #4: Don’t discount sell-side or equity analysts (those who work for brokerage houses), just
take what they say with a grain of salt (especially if they have a “buy” rating on shares). That said,
buy-side analysts (those working for pension funds and other institutional investors) and bond
rating analysts (such as Moody’s and Fitch) tend to be more independent sources about a
company’s strengths and weaknesses. Be skeptical of statements made in investor chat rooms
(whose participants can be a pro-company plant or a short seller looking to stir up trouble) but the
chatter often can provide some interesting leads to look into.

Useful Web Sites
California Secretary of State (or the equivalent in your state)
http://www.ss.ca.gov/
SEC Filings & Forms (EDGAR)
http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
Fedstats (billed as a one-stop shopping source for federal statistics)
http://www.fedstats.gov/

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
http://www.bls.gov/
Federal Trade Commission
http://www.ftc.gov/
PACER Service Center (filings for bankruptcy and federal civil cases, subscription required)
http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/
Hoover's Business Directory (good source for basic private company info, but much of he good
stuff (competitors, market analysis) requires a subscription)
http://www.hoovers.com/
The Thomas Register (profiles of manufacturers and distributors)
http://www.thomasnet.com/
CFA Institute (a professional association for chartered financial analysts that does significant
outreach to journalists; formerly the Association for Investment Management & Research)
http://www.cfainstitute.org/pressroom/
Business & Investment Terminology
Investopedia.com
http://investopedia.com/
New York Times Glossary of Financial and Business Terms
http://www.nytimes.com/library/financial/glossary/bfglosa.html?8ym

Suggested Books
Understanding Financial Statements: A Journalist’s Guide, by Jay Taparia; Marion Street
Press, 2004.
Taparia, a Chicago-based chartered financial analyst, has been introducing journalists to the
mysteries of forensic accounting for years at workshops sponsored by the Association for
Investment Management & Research, now the CFA Institute..
Math Tools for Journalists, by Kathleen Woodruff Wickham; Marion Street Press, 2003.
Numbers in the Newsroom: Using Math and Statistics in News, by Sarah Cohen;
Investigative Reporters & Editors, 2001.
Both books provide user-friendly explanations of calculations (with skill drills to test your
comprehension) that can be useful in reporting business, government and sports stories.
Wickham has two chapters on business and investment formulas that can help interpret a
company’s financial statement or determine the current yield on a bond.
The Bloomberg Way: A Guide for Reporters and Editors, by Mathew Winkler and David
Wlson; Bloomberg News, 1998.
The Bloomberg News style guide includes a useful glossary of business and economic terms and
a straightforward checklist of questions to ask when covering standard business stories, such as
initial public offerings, mergers, financings, and quarterly financial reports.
Find It Online: The Complete Guide to Online Research, by Alan Schlein, Facts on Demand
Press, 2004.
This comprehensive guide includes sections on business and economic Web sites.
Writing About Business: The New Columbia Knight-Bagehot Guide to Economics and
Business Journalism; Columbia University Press, 2002
Chapters written by alumni of the Knight-Bagehot Fellowship in Economic and Business
Journalism at Columbia University’s Graduate School of Journalism. Topics range from a review
of macroeconomics to strategies for investigating industries from entertainment to
telecommunications.
The Investigative Reporter’s Handbook, by Brant Houston, Len Bruzzese & Steve
Weinberg; Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2002.
Chapters 11-19 provide an overview of how to investigate for-profit and nonprofit businesses, as
well as a look at several specific industries, including health care, insurance, financial institutions
and real estate.

