Making the most of the U.S. Census Bureau's Factfinder
Kelly Guckian, Database Editor - San Antonio Express-News
kguckian@express-news.net - http://mysanantonio.com

U.S. Census Bureau web site: http://www.census.gov
What’s available in the Census Bureau’s Factfinder? (http://factfinder.census.gov/)

Decennial Census, American Community Survey, Population Estimates, Economic Census (every 5 years),
Annual Economic Surveys, Fact Sheets (quick facts for your state or community), and the U.S. Population Clock.

American Community Survey (ACS)

American Community Survey > learn more > American Community Survey Home Page
The ACS is scheduled to replace the long form in the decennial (once every 10 years) census, beginning in
2010. From that time on, censuses will consist of a short form only. 2.5% of the population will be surveyed
per year -- or about 1-in-40 a year. During Census 2000, about 1-in-6 addresses received the long form.
Starting in 2006, data will be available annually for all areas with populations of 65,000 or more. For smaller
areas, it will take three to five years to accumulate a large enough sample to produce annual data. For
example, areas of 20,000 to 65,000 can receive data averaged over three years. For rural areas, small urban
neighborhoods or population groups of less than 20,000, it will take five years to accumulate a sample size
comparable to the decennial census. These averages will be updated every succeeding year.
Annual results will be available for all areas by 2010.

Survey Questionnaire (current and previous years): Survey Basics (tab): Survey Questionnaire
Direct link: http://www.census.gov/acs/www/SBasics/SQuest/SQuest1.htm
There are more than 60 questions on the American Community Survey, and they are comparable to those on
the Census 2000 long form.
2000 Census Long Form Questionnaire: http://www.census.gov/dmd/www/pdf/d02p.pdf
Historical Census Comparability: see http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2000/doc/sf4.pdf, Appendix B.
Subject Definitions: Using the Data (tab): Subject Definitions
Direct link: http://www.census.gov/acs/www/UseData/Def.htm
Definitions on population and housing variables to help you understand the results.
Group Quarters Questionnaire: Survey basics (tab): Information about Group Quarters
Direct link: http://www.census.gov/acs/www/SBasics/GQ/index.htm
What’s included in Group Quarters? Correctional Facilities, Nursing Homes, Drug & Alcohol Abuse Centers,
Hospitals, In-Patient Hospice Facilities, College/University Housing, Military Living Quarters, Emergency and
Transitional Shelters (with sleeping facilities) for People Experiencing Homelessness, Military Ships, etc.
Group Quarters Definitions: Using the data (tab): ACS Group Quarters Definitions
Direct link: http://www.census.gov/acs/www/UseData/GQ/def.htm

Getting started: http://factfinder.census.gov/
Click on “get data” under American Community Survey in the “Getting Detailed Data” section.
The most current year available is pre-selected. You can, however, select any year going back to 2000.
Immediately to the right of your selection you will see several options to choose from.
Feel free to explore these options at your leisure sometime. This session will primarily explore the “detailed tables.”
Click on “detailed tables” to get to the following screen:

Navigating to the numbers you need
Select a geographic type: The geographic type describes the level at which the numbers will be totaled. You’ll
typically be looking for national, state, county, place (city), or MSA (metropolitan statistical area).
Note: If you don’t know what an MSA is, click on the Glossary link at the top of the page for more information.
Select: Place
Once you select a geographic type, the screen will refresh and populate the next input box.
Select a state: select New Jersey from the list of states. The screen will refresh again and allow you to select from
the available cities (population 65,000 or more)

Select one or more geographic areas and click ‘Add’: The contents of this box will only relate to the geographic
type you have selected. In this case it will allow us to from cities (places). Select Newark and click the Add button.
The selection will be added to the “Current Geography Selections” box.
You can add more than one selection and they don’t have to be the same geography type. To add more selections just
start over from the “Select a geographic type” box and follow the instructions above.
For example: If we’d like to compare ACS figures for Newark, NJ with San Antonio, TX. We can do this from this
screen before moving on. The geographic type remains the same, so we will go back to the state listing and select
Texas from the drop down list. Then select San Antonio and click the Add button.
Now you’re screen should look like this:

Click on the Next > button to move to the next screen to select from a list of tables.
For this exercise we will pull poverty statistics for both locations.

Scroll down the list of tables and select:
B17001. Poverty Status in the past 12 months by Sex and Age.
Then click the Add button.
Note that you can also use the “by subject” or “by keyword” tabs to search for a table.

We’re ready to view the results, so click on the Show Result > button to go to the next screen which should look
something like this:

The results for Newark are displayed above the results for San Antonio.

There are several things you should notice here. Most importantly, the Print / Download link above table. You can
save the results to a comma delimited or Excel Spreadsheet file so that you can organize the data for a graphic.
You can also use the navigation links at the top (to the right of “You are here”) to go back and change any of the
selections you’ve made or add additional locations to the results.
Here are the general subjects covered by the U.S. Census Decennial Census. The American Community Survey
includes topics previously covered in the long form.
100-percent characteristics (short form): A limited number of questions were asked of every person and housing unit in the United States.
Information is available on:

Age
Sex
Hispanic or Latino origin Tenure (whether the home is owned or rented)
Household relationship Vacancy characteristics
Race
Sample characteristics (long form): Additional questions were asked of a sample of persons and housing units
(generally 1 in 6 households). Data are provided on:
Population

Housing

Ancestry
Farm residence
Disability
Heating fuel
Grandparents as caregivers
Number of rooms and number of bedrooms
Income in 1999
Plumbing and kitchen facilities
Labor force status
Telephone service
Language spoken at home and ability to
Units in structure
speak English
Utilities, mortgage, taxes, insurance, and fuel
Marital status
costs
Migration (residence in 1995)
Value of home or monthly rent paid
Occupation, industry, and class of worker Vehicles available
Place of birth, citizenship, and year of entry Year moved into residence
Place of work and journey to work
Year structure built
School enrollment and educational
attainment
Veteran status
Work status in 1999
If you get lost and don’t know where to find the information you are looking for, I’ve found the Subject A to Z
index to be very useful. You’ll find a link to it on the Census Bureau home page.
News releases, reports, data tables and radio transcripts are available on the Public Information Office’s Web page at
<http://www.census.gov/pubinfo/www/news.html>. Questions or comments should be directed to the Census
Bureau’s Public Information Office at (301) 763-3030; fax (301) 457-3670; or e-mail <pio@census.gov>.
Census Bureau Alert Mailing List: census-bureau-alert@lists.census.gov
http://lists.census.gov/mailman/listinfo/census-bureau-alert
State Data Centers: Census Home Page > Related Sites >
Direct link: http://www.census.gov/sdc/www/
The U.S. Census Bureau partners with a network of state agencies, universities, libraries, and regional and local
governments to provide easy and efficient access to U.S. Census Bureau data.

