Difficult analyses: Profiling stories and other challenges
IRE Fort Worth/Dallas 2006
Mary Jo Sylwester, St. Paul Pioneer Press

651-228-5507
msylwester@pioneerpress.com
Steve Doig, Arizona State University

480-965-0798
steve.doig@asu.edu
Expect such projects to take longer than you would expect. Be sure to get buy-in on these from
your editors. Have a serious conversation with your editors about whether it’s worth your time
and resources to go down this road. Have regular meetings with your editors to let them know of
your problems and progress.
Do mini “tests” on the data to check out how serious the problem is and what options you have
for fixing or getting around it.
Some categories of “big trouble” data projects
1) Bringing together data from multiple sources
Example(s): Center for Public Integrity’s “State Secrets” project, first published in June
2002, that involved building a database of all campaign contributions and expenditures reported
by more than 300 political party committees in every state. Some of the data was electronic, but
most came on paper. The fields of information on the reports varied from state to state. And the
reporting thresholds, time periods and other factors varied.
Advice: On the data collection part: build yourself a spreadsheet or database that you can
use to track your FOIA requests. Be sure to put the contact info to the agency you’re dealing with,
a field to type notes about the status, and anything else that will help you stay organized. When
you get the data into electronic format, lay out a game plan before starting to merge the files.
Compare record layouts and see what fields you can and can’t merge. Figure out what cleanup or
coding you might have to do to standardize data.
2) Data is riddled with holes, other problems or doesn’t exist
Example(s): San Diego Union Tribune got the city’s property inventory and found that
the city’s list and the county assessor’s records were both wrong; Denver Post found many cases
of assaults in schools not reported on School Accountability Reports that are delivered to parents;
Chicago Tribune series on nursing mistakes used the MAUDE database as a starting point.
Advice: Sometimes the dirty data is the story in and of itself, which was the case for the
San Diego and Denver stories. The Tribune story exemplifies the other scenario: you use the dirty
or incomplete data as a starting point and build your own database by filling in the gaps or fixing
problems using paper records and other sources.

3) Matching two datasets not intended to go together
Example(s): Tulsa World matched addresses of nursing homes, assisted living centers
and facilities for the mentally retarded against addresses in a database of registered sex offenders.
Advice: Usually the biggest problem is that the field(s) you want to join on are not
standardized, so you have to do extensive data cleanup. Second problem is making sure your join
didn’t match something that shouldn’t match; that means a lot of street reporting to verify the
matches. Bottom line is that this is an endeavor that will require more time than you think. And
the bigger the two databases are, the harder it will be.
4) A subject that has its own built-in complications and pitfalls
Example(s): Kansas City Star analysis of leaking underground storage tanks; Numerous
stories on racial profiling (Dateline, Mpls Star Tribune, San Antonio, others); Miami Herald’s
work on Florida’s clemency system; St. Paul Pioneer Press series on drunk driving convictions
Advice: Any databases that are designed and used as “case management” systems —
criminal justice being the most obvious examples — tend to have huge flaws when you want to
use it for analysis. For example, the conviction data the Pioneer Press used was only about 70
percent complete; misdemeanor crimes (including DWI) are entered inconsistently. Court data
had info on sentencing and pleas, but it lacked any indication of how many prior DWI cases a
defendant had — a key piece of the investigation.
Environmental databases can sometimes fall into this trap as well, but then they often
have another layer of complexity: you need some scientific background on the topic in order to
understand the data.
Also, beware the temptation to do a cancer cluster story (or one involving other diseases).
Epidemiology is fraught with many complications. For example, if you are looking at a large
amount of data that comes from a good national data-collection effort such as the Center for
Disease Control’s surveillance, you are almost guaranteed to see clusters appear strictly by
chance.
5) A subject that requires complicated statistical techniques
Example(s): Dallas Morning News studies of racial bias in jury selection and of cheating
in Texas school test scores; Boston Globe study of racial bias in the decisions on whether to give
a ticket or a warning to people stopped for speeding; Kansas City Star watchdog report on
municipal efficiency.
Advice: In advance, seek advice from a statistics expert about which statistical tools
might be useful for your project; your local university almost certainly will have a professor who
would love to help. Also look for experts who have studied elsewhere the problem you are
tackling; they will have good advice about the tools to use, and the fact that they use such tools
will legitimize your methods. Finally, if you realize you need to use an advanced technique (such
as logistic regression) that you have never tried, find an expert who can look over your methods
and your findings and confirm that you have done it properly. If necessary, hire the expert to do
the analysis directly – but get him or her to teach you how to do it yourself in the future.

6) A subject for which the necessary computer data isn’t readily available
Example(s): St. Petersburg Times project about vanishing wetlands in Florida; St. Pete
Times story about accidents involving elderly pedestrians trying to cross a busy stretch of
highway; Dallas Morning News study of racial bias in jury selection
Advice: If your data is in paper records, strongly consider hiring a data punch house to
enter the relevant information. Pay for double entry, too – that way discrepancies can be found
and corrected readily.
You might also consider whether a proper sample of the paper records will tell you what
you need to know. If so, decide how much of an error margin you are willing to accept.
If no data exists, consider gathering your own. Before you start, plan out how to
minimize the effort. See if hardware (such as a GPS) or software exists that will ease the task.
Make sure you decide in advance which variables are necessary, so you don’t have to repeat your
work, and which are unnecessary, so you aren’t doing extra work.
7) Data is available, but it must be transformed into some other record format
Example(s): Miami Herald “Crime and No Punishment” series
Advice: Often the problem is that the data comes in some machine format (like EBCDIC)
or proprietary software format that must be converted into a format that your computer can use.
Such problems are relatively easy to solve these days; pose it to the NICAR-L list if you don’t see
a ready way to do the conversion.
More difficult is when the record layout is such that it can’t readily answer your
questions; an example would be a criminal justice database in which each record is a charge
against a defendant, when what you need is a database in which each record is a defendant. The
answer is to use computer programming in a language such as Visual Basic or SAS to do the
transformation. Once it’s done, however, you need to compare some random results in the new
database against the records in the old one to ensure that your programming did what you
intended.
8) A project warning about the potential for a problem that hasn’t actually happened
Example(s): New Orleans Times-Picayune “Washing Away” series three years before
Hurricane Katrina flooded the city; stories suggesting problems with complicated financial
instruments such as derivatives or still-booming companies like Enron.
Advice: Talk to a wide range of experts to make sure that your disaster scenario is
plausible; don’t just listen to a narrowly-focused Cassandra who has his or her own agenda.
Even if there’s agreement that you’re looking at a real problem, be aware that your work
is unlikely to bring about any real change until after the disaster does hit. Chances are good that
your stories will be criticized as nay-saying by people who are making money from the current
situation, or who would lose money by acknowledging the problem. Therefore, lay out your case
in great detail, and try not to rely solely on sources who could be challenged as having their own
agendas. This still won’t bring about the necessary changes that could save lives, money or
property, but will make you look pretty smart when the inevitable finally happens.

