Sam Roe

Jan Barry

Mark Katches

Projects reporter
Chicago Tribune
Sroe@tribune.com
312-222-4418

Reporter
The (Hackensack, NJ) Record
barry@northjersey.com
973-569-7779

Investigative Editor
Orange County Register
mkatches@ocregister.com
714-796-7724

Tip sheet: IRE National Conference, June 15-18, 2006.

DOING YOUR OWN LABORATORY TESTING
The Chicago Tribune, the Record and the Orange County Register have all relied
on laboratory testing.
The Chicago Tribune in 2005 conducted one of the most comprehensive
studies of mercury in commercial seafood. Reporters bought 162 samples of fish
from randomly selected supermarkets in the Chicago area. Rutgers University
tested the samples for mercury, a toxic metal that can cause learning disabilities
in children and neurological problems in adults. The results kicked off a three-day
series titled “Mercury Menace.” (www.chicagotribune.com/mercury)
The (Hackensack, NJ) Record conducted its own tests for hazardous metals
and chemicals as part of an investigation into an incomplete cleanup of a
Superfund site in Ringwood, NJ, where Ford Motor Co. had dumped lead-based
paint sludge and other industrial debris nearly 40 years ago in and around a rural
neighborhood. Tests by Ford consultants indicated that hazardous levels had
declined over the years and posed little or no public health threat. On the other
hand, an environmental watchdog group's tests found alarmingly elevated levels
in the same locations. We set out to see what our own lab tests would find. The
results were reported as part of a five-day series titled "Toxic Legacy."
(www.toxiclegacy.com)
The Orange County Register spent two years investigating the dangers of
Mexican candy, testing ingredients and candy samples. Children were tested in a
Mexican village where candy containers are made. Their lead levels were off the
charts. The newspaper conducted more than 400 tests for the project and found
dangerous levels of lead in 30 percent of the candy brands tested. The story ran
as a six-part series Toxic Treats (www.ocregister.com/investigations) and was a
Pulitzer finalist in public service in 2005.

SOME TIPS
9 Study the studies. Look at how similar testing has been done. How were
samples collected, packed and transported? How many samples were
selected? Make your testing as scientifically valid as possible.

9 What’s the target? Do you just want to know what chemicals are in a
certain product? Or do you also want to know if there is a difference
among suppliers? Think about these things before testing. The Tribune
bought fish at both supermarkets and fish markets to see if there was a
difference between the two in terms of mercury levels. (None was found.)
reporters also tested several brands of canned tuna to see if there were
differences. (No.)
9 Consult experts. Tell them about your methodology, and see if they can
help you design a better study. In the end, you want your story to be able
to withstand intense scrutiny. Make sure to play devil’s advocate.
9 Develop a testing strategy. Once you’ve spoken to the experts, put
together a written plan on how you will go about testing samples. Make
sure you get buy-in from the top and figure out your budget. Some types
of product testing are relatively inexpensive. Other types are tremendously
costly.
9 Choose labs carefully. Pick a reputable lab that doesn’t have any
conflicts. Labs at universities are often least expensive, and researchers
there might alert you to any unusual findings. The Record used a statecertified lab that did previous work for newspaper investigations. It cost
more than $10,000 to do a series of water and sediment tests in two
communities, including an area next to Ford's long-closed assembly plant
where paint sludge was buried in the floodplain of a major water supply
river.
9 Review results with the lab. The Record sat down with the testers to
discuss the lab reports. Reporters discussed possible conclusions,
comparisons to other places they've tested, current cleanup standards and
background on how thresholds for some chemicals and metals have
changed.
9 Consider conducting a random sample. The Tribune didn’t want to
simply buy fish at the nearest store or where reporters personally
shopped. A random sample removes biases you might have and gives
you results that are representative of a larger population. Plus, a random
sample is fair. If you want to name names – identifying stores where you
bought tainted items, for example – you should do a random sample.
9 Do quality control. The Tribune asked its lab to test 10 percent of the
samples twice for quality control.
9 Keep the samples. After your testing is complete, have the lab hold onto
the samples for a few weeks in case you want to do further testing on
those same samples.
9 Make sure your sample size is large enough. This can be tricky. How
many samples do you need to prove your point – while not breaking the
bank? The Register tested five samples of each brand of candy – a total of
180 pieces of candy and wrappers. For chili, the Register tested 25
samples of ground chili; 20 samples of dried chili and a fewer number of
fresh-picked chili. A handful of salt and sugar samples were tested. But

9

9
9

9

the testing of those ingredients was stopped after all the results came
back clean.
Review results with experts. The Record reviewed findings with experts.
A local health official, for instance, provided information that one chemical
was likely from a different industrial source. A former EPA epidemiologist
noted that the array of hazardous substances could create a synergistic,
"toxic stew" effect on the health of local residents.
Show the lab results. The Register and the Record posted lab reports
and other test data online.
Don’t despair. When the going gets tough, remember that these kinds of
stories resonate with the public like few others. The Tribune received
hundreds of emails and phone calls. The Tribune’s RedEye newspaper
recently tested the surfaces of commuter trains and buses for cleanliness
and bacteria – a story that was a big hit with readers.
Explain your protocol. It’s important to describe to readers how you did
your work.

