Scott Zamost
Investigative Producer
WTVJ-TV/NBC 6
scott.zamost@nbc.com
(954)622-6308
Writing the Story and Finding the Great Narrative
Characters In Conflict
Conflict is the cornerstone of a great investigation. But finding compelling characters can be a
challenge. You have the tip and are ready to check out the story. At the same time, assess whether you
can get the strongest people to weave through the narrative. Will the two sides go on camera? That
question usually can’t be answered early on, but it’s important to consider. In our “Puppy Heartbreak”
investigation, the two opposing characters were strong interviews, setting the stage for the entire
series.
Compelling Characters
How often do you have a great newspaper story that you know won’t be good TV? We had all the
material for our “911 Disconnect” series, including a revealing database of call answer times. But the
main victims had not agreed to go on camera and they were the only way to tell the story. It’s
important to focus on the main “gets” early in the process and talk about the narrative. Have a back-up
plan if the main characters don’t come through. In addition, a seemingly dull character can become
interesting during a sit-down interview.
Invisible Characters
What happens when your main character is “invisible?” In other words, he won’t talk and no one
around him will talk, but he’s essential to the story. Be creative. Our unpaid parking ticket
investigation would have been a bland story if we hadn’t discovered that Herbert Hoover, greatgrandson of the vacuum company founder, owed the most in unpaid parking tickets to Miami-Dade
County. He was out of the country, and wouldn’t talk. However, we had a mug shot that we used in a
creative segment with a Hoover vacuum.
“Crazy” Characters
We unexpectedly found the main subject of an investigation into “free government grants” that
were obviously not free at all. His interview was so outrageous that we immediately knew he was the
central character. Instead of setting up the piece with victims, we started with him and weaved him
throughout the story.
Weaving The Characters
I like to “book-end” the characters. In the puppy series, we thought we could tell the narrative
through the conflicting characters. Then we met a young girl whose puppy was sick. As soon as we
began shooting her story, we knew she would be the start and end of the piece. The lesson: Be open to
changing your storytelling as the investigation unfolds.

