Basics of Sports Investigations
IRE National Conference, Fort Worth, Texas, June 16, 2006
Duff Wilson
The New York Times
dwilson@nytimes.com
212-556-8380
“The Quick Fix: Poor Grades Aside, Top Athletes Get to College on $399 Diploma”
(Nov. 27, 2005) applied investigative reporting techniques in a sports-related
story with public policy consequences. It was runner-up, behind a Boston Globe
story, for the 2005 APSE national award for investigative reporting in sports.
Sources. The story started with a tip to a well-connected beat reporter. Pete
Thamel, The Times’ college sports reporter, cultivates sources with frequent
phone calls, personal contacts and background conversations. Don’t be shy: ask
for tips and leads and leaks for investigative stories.
Investigating companies. University High School, a private company, tried to hide
its operations and ownership. We obtained corporate documents from the Secretary
of State; the true owner was not mentioned in these documents. We interviewed
competitors. Eventually we identified the owner and investigated his other
companies. We paid $399 to enroll, obtaining welcome materials which mentioned
the “principal” who later said he’d never heard of the “school.” (We dropped our
enrollment when the registration form asked for occupation. We didn’t lie.)
Investigating people. We investigated half a dozen people in depth. For each one,
we checked LexisNexis, Accurint, court records and real estate records, for a
start. Eventually we also obtained FBI files on the hidden owner, an ex-felon. We
also investigated football players who enrolled in University High School, using
sources, state records, and interviews with many of the players themselves.
Public records. Florida law says private schools are completely unregulated, but
the state requires annual reports from the schools. We obtained these and showed
how the company lied about its teaching – and how lax state regulation let them
get away with it. We obtained a database listing three years of graduates in all
Miami Dade public schools, then compared that with rosters of many Division 1
football programs to identify players who did not really graduate from the Miami
high school the press guide claimed they did. We obtained a key report from the
University of Tennessee, the only university to really check out University HS.
Laws and standards. You need to find the standards to hold these people
accountable. We researched Florida state law on private schools and NCAA
regulations on high school transcripts. The NCAA rules, detailed in minutes of
advisory committees, were relaxed in 2000 to let anything go.
Phone calls on the day of publication. I always telephone the main subjects of
investigative stories on the day they appear. I ask, “Was the story completely
fair, accurate and thorough?” It surprises subjects to receive such a call, and
it often uncovers opportunities for follow-up stories. Knowing I am going to make
these calls has also made me extra careful to be totally fair and accurate.

