Analyzing Campaign Data
Kelly Guckian, kguckian@express-news.net
Database Editor, San Antonio Express-News
IRE Annual Conference, Dallas/Fort Worth, June 15, 2006
Some lessons learned from a few or our recent data analyses
Lobbyists -- Peddling Influence: A four day series based on an in-depth analysis of Texas lobbyist
disclosure reports and legislators’ campaign contributions revealing the influence of special interests
on public law:
http://www.mysanantonio.com/news/metro/stories/MYSA041206.1A.lobbyists.12cbb34e.html
Heavyweight Donors’ Web of Influence: San Antonio businessman, James Leininger – a
proponent for a taxpayer-funded school voucher program -- funneled millions in support of five
Republican legislative candidates running against incumbents in the Texas Spring primary elections
sparking new interest in contribution limits.
-

“Buying democracy,” by Peggy Fikac And Gary Scharrer 3/5/2006

-

“Activist groups, PACs extend his political reach,” by John Tedesco 3/5/2006

Lavish Campaign Expenditures – An analysis on Texas Senator Frank Madla's expenditures from
his campaign fund revealed he had far outspent his colleagues on some major expenses. Although his
spending was legal under Texas law, his liquor expenses alone, over a four year period, exceeded the
annual per capita income of the residents of his district -- one of the poorest districts in the state.
-

“Madla's big-bucks spending draws fire,” by Lisa Sandberg and Jaime Castillo. 2/25/2006

-

“Madla outspends them all on bottled water, booze, car washes,” by Jaime Castillo 2/25/2006

Know the laws governing local, State, and Federal political campaign candidates, PACs and
lobbyists’ activities.
- Federal law limits individual gifts to $1,000 per candidate per election.
- Texas law limits contributor cash gifts to $100 per filing period made to individual
candidates, officeholders, and specific-purpose committees.
- Corporations and labor organizations may only contribute to political committees
supporting or opposing measures exclusively.
- In Texas, a general-purpose committee cannot make contributions or have
expenditures without having at least ten contributors.
- Contributions to Texas legislators and statewide office holders are restricted for the
period beginning 30 days prior to a regular session up until 20 days following session
adjournment.
- Texas law requires lobbyists to report gifts given to members of the legislature or
executive branch if the value exceeds $50.
- Lobbyists in Texas must report expenditures made on behalf of members of the
legislature or executive branch for transportation, lodging, meals, or entertainment
that exceed $76.80 (or 60% of a legislators daily per diem).
Know the filing periods and deadlines.
- Texas semi-annual reports are due on January 15th and July 15th and cover the six
full months prior to the deadline. Prior to elections additional filings are due 30 days,
and 8 days prior to the election.
- Texas also requires campaign committees to report contributions received above a
certain amount that are accepted during the nine days prior to an election . These

-

reports are traditionally known as “telegram reports” but have recently been
renamed as “special report[s] near election.”
o Specific-purpose supporting state senators or statewide candidates must
report contributions received that exceed $1,000.
o Specific-purpose committees supporting or opposing state representative
must report contributions received that exceed $200.
o General purpose committees must report direct campaign expenditures
supporting or opposing a single candidate that in exceed $1,000 or a group of
candidates that exceed $15,000.
Lobbyists in Texas whose expenditures exceed $1,000 per calendar year must file
disclosure reports monthly. Those whose expenditures less than $1,000 only have to
file annually.

Where to find the data
-

Federal Election Commission: http://www.fec.gov/
IRE Database Library: http://www.ire.org/
Texas Ethics Commission: http://www.ethics.state.tx.us/
State by State listing from IRE’s Campaign Finance Information Center:
http://www.campaignfinance.org/

Problems and Pitfalls with data analysis
-

-

Standardization of contributor names is non-existent.
Associating individual contributors with their businesses or employers can be tricky.
Similar challenges compiling an industry analysis.
Some filers are exempt from electronic filing.
Be aware that some political candidates/office holders take in contributions directly
as well as through a committee formed in their interest. Watch for money going into
one campaign account from another when totaling all contributions for these
candidates.
Check, double-check, and triple check your figures when compiling totals. Group-by
queries based on joined tables or queries in Microsoft Access can give you misleading
results.

Making the most of your analysis
-

-

Social Network Analysis software is ideal for making web of influence graphics that
portray the flow of dollars from lobbyists’ contracts and through lobbyists’ political
contributions to candidates and PACs.
Direct the readers to additional detailed data online to view, sort, and search the
individual records.

Additional Resources
- Brookings Institution - Campaign Finance Reform: www.brookings.org
- The Center for Public Integrity: www.publicintegrity.org
- Center for Responsive Politics: www.opensecrets.org
- Covering Money and Politics (Columbia Journalism Review):
http://www.cjr.org/year/99/5/money-main.asp
- NewsLab Resources for Covering Money and Politics on TV and Radio:
www.newslab.org
- Texans for Public Justice List of Reports: www.tpj.org
National Institute on Money in State Politics: www.followthemoney.org

