Roger L. Goldman
Policing the Police
IRE Conference
Fort Worth, TX
June 15, 2006
Roger Goldman

We take it as a given that any profession or occupation that
involves interaction with the public will be regulated by a
state agency. Accountants, architects, attorneys,
cosmetologists, dentists and doctors are required to undergo
training, meet selection standards and, if they commit
misconduct, have their licenses or certifications revoked by
the regulating body. Well, what about the police?
Arguably, there is more of a need for a system of licensing
and removing the license of cops for obvious reasons: no
other occupation has the authority to use deadly force,
arrest and search; and unlike other regulated professions,
like lawyers, citizens do not get to choose their law
enforcement providers—the local police chief hires the
officers.
Although it is not generally known, 43 states already have
agencies, typically called peace officer standards and
training boards or POSTS, that license law enforcement
professionals, and revoke licenses when necessary. Officers
must be certified according to board standards to be eligible

1

for hire. Local agencies terminate an officer from a job;
state POSTs revoke the officer’s license.
In addition to improving professional standards, licensing
and the ability to revoke a license provide a remedy that the
better known mechanisms, like the exclusionary rule or
civil rights damage suits don’t provide: it can stop the all
too common problem of police officers who are terminated
from one department for misconduct getting a job in
another town in the same state, only to commit the identical
conduct in another community.
Since states have begun revocation in the early 1970’s, over
19,000 officers have had their licenses revoked. For
example, in 1999, Florida decertified 186 corrections
officers and 120 law enforcement officers. A review of all
Florida decertifications in a seven-year period showed a
high percentage involving citizen abuse was sexual
misconduct, quite often an agreement not to arrest a
speeder if she had sex with the officer.
There's wide variation among the 43 states in terms of what
type of misconduct can trigger decertification. In about
half, only a criminal conviction is grounds for
decertification, with some states decertifying only for
felonies, while others also decertifying for certain
misdemeanors, typically involving moral turpitude. In the
other states, decertification can occur even in the absence
of a criminal conviction, for example, gross misconduct
showing an inability to be a police officer, or specified
misconduct that doesn't result in a conviction, like domestic
violence or drug use.
2

Decertification hearings are typically conducted by
administrative law judges, and the officer is entitled to legal
counsel. Sanctions can range from reprimand to permanent
loss of license.
Unlike civilian review boards, which the police may
oppose on the grounds that they are being singled out—
there aren’t civilian review boards for garbage collectors—
in the case of revocation, police are one of the few
occupations not covered at all in some states, and in others,
by very weak laws. All states should have laws that
stringently regulate the police, for both reasons of
professionalism in policing as well as public confidence in
police officers.
There have been some terrific articles addressing the
performance of state POSTS. Ron Menchaca and Glenn
Smith of The Charleston SC Post and Courier Staff wrote a
series titled Tarnished Badges in 2005 that won several
journalism prizes and caused the Governor to seek a
$500,000 increase in state funding for the agency, which,
like most POST, was woefully underfunded. Heather
Radcliffe of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch did a weeklong
series on MO’s POST, prompting the state auditor to issue
a report several months later critical of the agency. Mark
Horvit of the Ft. Worth Star-Telegram did a series, Policing
Their Own, in 2003, pointing out deficiencies in the
operation of the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement.
Let me suggest some possible topics to explore if you are
considering writing about this topic. Of course, it depends
3

on the state of the law in your state—if yours is one of
seven states without the authority, an obvious topic is
whether there are shortcomings in your state with obviously
bad cops getting fired from one department and then
working in another. I would suggest that every time you
write a story on an incident of misconduct by an officer,
find out if he has come from another department and, even
more importantly, track where he goes next, if he loses his
job. It takes data like that to educate the legislature on the
importance of decertification. We would never tolerate a
situation of doctors, lawyers or even barbers committing
serious malpractice and be satisfied if they are fired as
opposed to removing their licenses. The states without
decert are in states where strong police unions would likely
oppose such a law—the states without it are MA, NJ, NY,
RI and VT in the East. CA used to have decert but lost that
authority in 2004. HI is the 7th state without it.
If you are in a state that has a POST, check out its
performance—how many officers have been decertified?
Is the problem with the law—it’s too weak—or with its
implementation because the POST is understaffed, has no
investigators, is not getting information from the local
departments who refuse to send information concerning
terminations, etc. Some states have very open records on
its POST, e.g., AZ publishes a newsletter detailing each
decert and the reasons for it. FL’s POST, within the FDLE,
has detailed statistics.
Let me now switch the topic from intrastate movement of
officers to the problem of decertified officers, or officers
4

with very unsavory records who weren’t decertified,
leaving one state and going to another. Unlike the National
Practitioner Databank for health care professionals,
mandated by Congress, there is no equivalent database for
peace officers. There is a National Decertification
Database (NDD) operated by the association of the POST
directors, called IADLEST, that includes over 7,400
records of revocation for cause, submitted by 21 states.
The new system, which will replace the NDD is the
National Decertification Index (NDI). It is currently under
development. The only information on the NDD is that the
officer has had his license revoked, whereas the doctor’s
databank has much more information on it—any sanctions
from the state medical board, any malpractice judgment or
settlement and any loss of hospital staff privileges for more
than 30 days. So another area of inquiry in your state is to
find out from your POST why your state doesn’t submit
decertification data.
What is really needed in my view is a federally mandated
databank, like the doctor’s databank, but that will never
happen until there are sufficient examples of really bad
cops leaving one state and going to another, where they
repeat the misconduct. I urge you to be on the look out for
just this sort of thing, especially those of you in Sunbelt
states that attract peace officers from the northern states.
Let me know if you have such a case because I’m trying to
compile these to make the case for a national database.
There isn’t much of a push from Middle America on the
need for such a database—the assumption is that bad

5

officers are in poor communities, and if you avoid those
communities, you won’t be subject to police misconduct.
It seems counterintuitive for a police department knowingly
to hire someone, from within or without the state, with
previous problems on the job. The answer is economics:
the person has successfully completed a state approved
training academy, which is required in all states but HI, and
therefore the department doesn’t have pay for the training
or salary while attending the academy, which they would
have to for a new recruit. And if it is a department in a poor
community, the officer can’t command much in the way of
salary if he has been previously fired from several
departments.
Let me now end with a personal offer: I’d be very pleased
to help in any way I can—sending articles, talking with
editors in the planning state, etc—if you decide to write
about revocation.

6

