Nancy Stancill
Charlotte Observer
nstancill@charlotteobserver.com
704/358-5066
Look at your beat critically and keep running lists of investigative tips and ideas. Find a few really
good sources and pick their brains regularly.
Get in the habit of reading other newspapers, Extra, Extra! on IRE's Web site or projects in IRE's
resource library to see what other reporters on your type of beat have done. If you see a
promising story for your beat, call the writer and ask him or her how it was done. Most reporters
are happy to help.
Look especially critically at the obscure and often-neglected parts of your beat. If you're a City
Hall reporter, that might be something like sewer projects. Often, elected officials don't give
proper scrutiny to the mundane and unglamorous, but you can.
If you think something's slightly off, but don't know exactly what it is, try doing a profile or
explainer on a person or situation. Sometimes that brings in the tips you need for the good story.
Try the three-notebook approach. Use the first for the daily stories that must be done. Keep a
second notebook of short-term enterprise stories, like Sunday takeouts. Keep a third notebook
with your most promising investigative idea.
Do something on your best investigative idea every day, such as dashing off a quick open
records request or doing one phone interview.
When you've done enough pre-reporting to convince yourself there's a decent story there, talk to
your editor. Most editors are dying to hear about a good investigative story. They will be more
convinced to give you leeway to pursue it if you've done some legwork.
Write a story or project proposal, outlining the minimum and maximum story you think you can get
out of it. It will give your editor something to mull over, and something to pass on to his or her
supervisor.
If it's possible, try to do the bulk of the reporting while still doing your beat essentials. Many
editors are reluctant or unable to turn a reporter completely loose for long periods. Try to wait until
the story reaches a critical stage, then ask for the week, or two, or three away from your beat that
you need to finish up. This will help give you credibility to pursue future projects.
Before you write, outline, outline, outline. It's hard to manage a complex story unless you really
know where you're going with it. If you're writing a series, it's even more crucial to be wellorganized before you head into the writing stage. Talk about your writing approaches well in
advance with your editor.
Finally, don't stop with one investigative story. You'll likely get tips for good follow-ups. And if you
don't, consult your list and get another one in the works. Always have a story going that you can
be proud that you did.

