Using Alexa
For Fast Researching on the Internet
By Randy Reddick, Texas Tech University
IRE Tip Sheet June 16, 2006
This Tip Sheet is created as a “how to” supplement to the panel presentation in Fort Worth, June 16, 2006.
The Alexa Web utility performs several useful research functions for journalists, including:
 Providing real-time site ownership (whois) information
 Linked listings of similar sites
 Web traffic rankings
 One-click access to Wayback Machine
There are three ways install Alexa on your computer.
1. Internet Explorer: Download and install the IE Toolbar from alexa.com
2. Netscape or Mozilla: Activate “What’s Related” tab in the Sidebar
3. Firefox: Third-party options include toolbar from http://toolbar.a9.com/ or Firefox extension
from http://snipurl.com/rudb
The examples in this document are taken from Mozilla / Netscape, freely available browsers that work in
Windows, Mac OS X and Linux computers.

The “What’s Related” Sidebar tab
The “What’s Related” Sidebar makes possible “viral bookmark research.” You start by finding a site that
you like – that has just the kind of information you are looking for. How you locate the first site is up to
you. Alexa does the rest. The “What’s Related” tab gives you links to about 10 similar sites. Using this list
of links, you quickly find more. Each successful find may lead to more successes. In very short order, you
develop a good collection of sites on your topic.
Fig. 1: The What’s Related sidebar
All Mozilla-based browsers come equipped with tabbed
browsing, pop-up blockers, and a sidebar. Especially for
Mozilla itself and to a lesser extent for Netscape and Firefox,
this sidebar is customizable. One easily accomplished
customization is adding the “What’s Related” tab to the
sidebar.
Any time you open a Web page, this tab reports useful
information about that Web page. At the top, you are given the
URL of the page currently open, in this case,
http://news.google.com.
Immediately below the URL you are given live links to as
many as 10 similar Web pages listed under “Related Links.”
This feature can be very useful when you are trying to build a
list of Web resources on a given topic.
At the bottom of the “What’s Related” tab, Mozilla reports
“Site Info,” which includes the site’s traffic rating on the Web
and contact information from the Whois Internet domain
database. This immediately tells you something about who
owns the site, their address and phone numbers – if this
information is available to the public.

Using Alexa ● IRE Fort Worth 2006 ● Randy Reddick ● Page 1 of 2

Activating the “What’s Related” tab
Fig. 2: Customizing the sidebar
To install the “What’s Related” feature in Mozilla or Netscape, you
have to first open the sidebar by selecting View | Show/Hide |
Sidebar. In Windows and Linux boxes the keyboard shortcut is F9.
This shortcut does not work on Macs.
From the “Tabs” drop-down menu (See Fig. 1 above) select
“Customize Sidebar.” Fig. 2 shows some of the sidebar options
that are available. You want “What’s Related,” so you will select it
and then click the “Add” button.
You may have to close your browser and re-launch it for the new
tab to be activated in Mozilla or Netscape. If you use Mozilla’s first
cousin Firefox, you will have to download either a toolbar version
(like IE) or install a Firefox extension, as described earlier in this
document.

Whois information
Many reporters have learned to use “whois” type utilities to find
out who owns / is behind a Web site that appears to provide good,
reliable information. If you have Alexa running (toolbar or
sidebar) you get real-time information on site ownership. This
information is an abbreviated version of the whois record. To get
the complete record, you will need to use a whois utility such as http://whois.domaintools.com/
Fig. 3: Whois information from Alexa Toolbar
In the toolbar version of Alexa you have to click on the
“Info” icon to view the whois summary.

Using Alexa ● IRE Fort Worth 2006 ● Randy Reddick ● Page 2 of 2

