Tracking Public Companies: IRE Conference 2006
David Heath, The Seattle Times
Books on uncovering corporate deception
Financial Shenanigans: How to Detect Accounting Gimmicks & Fraud in Financial
Reports, Second Edition, by Howard M. Schilit, McGraw-Hill, 2002.
The Financial Numbers Game: Detecting Creative Accounting Practices, by Charles W.
Mulford, Eugene E. Comiskey, Wiley, 2002.
Take On the Street: What Wall Street and Corporate America Don't Want You to Know,
by Arthur Levitt, Pantheon, 2002.
Web resources
Securities and Exchange Commission, http://www.sec.gov
The Edgar database, accessible from the SEC’s home page, stores major financial
filings of publicly traded companies. A real treasure trove!
Yahoo Finance, http://finance.yahoo.com/
A terrific compilation of company highlights, recent news and stock data,
including historical stock prices, insider trading info and analyst reports. Even the
message boards can prove valuable, if you are willing to wade through a lot of
junk.
LexisNexis, http://www.nexis.com
A paid service that allows you to search various business records, including fulltext searching of SEC documents and state incorporation records. Of course, this
is also the premier site for news clip searches.
NASDAQ, http://www.nasdaq.com
A great source of financial information about companies listed on NASDAQ. Site
includes detailed insider trading and institutional holdings information. Also
check out www.nasdaqtrader.com, where you can get information on sales of
individual stocks by the market market.
National Association of Secretaries of State, http://www.nass.org/sos/sosflags.html
Allows you to search for basic information about corporations in a state, such as
an addresss, date of incorporation and contact information.
PACER, http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov/
A paid but inexpensive service for searching federal court records. In some
lawsuits, you can find virtually all the documents filed available for download.
But the availability of records varies by jurisdiction.

