The nuts and bolts of FOIA
Jennifer LaFleur
The Dallas Morning News
jlafleur@dallasnews.com

1.

Get them
x Continue to request public records.
x Do it long before you have to have them (According to FOIA annual reports, The Department of State reported
351 days in 2001. The Department of Energy reported 75 in 2002)

2. Try the informal approach first, then a written request
x Before filing a formal request – ask for the records
x If they require a formal request, find out who it should go to and what you should ask for
x Letter should describe what you’re asking for under the FOIA
x State that they should reply within 20 business days (your state may have other time limits)
x Request an itemized cost estimate if charges exceed a certain amount
x Provide all possible contact information
x Note that you’re willing to negotiate
x Ask for a fee waiver
x Ask for expedited review
x Consider inspection rather than copies (not always possible)
3. Do your homework.
x Know what you’re looking for.
x Know what they can charge you for records. Note: You may save money requesting electronic
records/data rather than printouts.
x Know the agency’s history.
x For state stuff – check prior court decisions, AG opinions
x For federal – check annual reports
4.

If the time period passes with no response – follow up. Do not let a sleeping request lie. If you are denied,
appeal.

5. Know what is covered by FOIA: Records in possession or control of a federal agency.
x They don’t have to give you “information” – just records
x FOIA doesn’t cover: Congress, courts, answers to questions, the President. Some of these are covered
by other laws.

6. Know the exemptions and how they may be used:
FOIA Exemptions
I.
National Security
II.
Internal agency personnel rules – these should be used only internally
III.
Information exempted by other laws (pay attention here) – Common statutes cited here protect things
such as contract proposals or grand jury information. Other more obscure statutes include the
Watermelon Research and Promotion Act and the Honey Research, Promotion, and Consumer
Information Act to withhold information.
IV.
Trade secrets and confidential commercial information
V.
Internal agency memoranda and policy discussions – “inter-agency or intra-agency”
VI.
Personal privacy
VII.
Law enforcement investigations (part 7 c protects privacy for law enforcement reasons)
VIII. Federally regulated banks
IX.
Oil and gas wells
7. Don’t be tripped up by HIPAA
Congress passed the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act in 1996 and the law went into affect in
April 2003. It was designed to protect patient information and covers entities that electronically transfer patient
information. It can affect reporters’ access to hospital directory information, billing data, discharge data and other
records.
Reporters have been hit with HIPAA when trying to get ambulance, police and fire department records. JUST
BECAUSE SOMETHING IS HEALTH-RELATED, DOESN’T MEAN IT’S COVERED BY HIPAA. The agency
should be able to specify how they are an covered by HIPAA. In some cases, ambulance services that also do billing
have been designated as HIPAA-covered entities. Check your state attorney general opinions for HIPAA decisions.
8. Know the law and the FOI experts in your state who are resources on the law.
9. Set the tone with your sources on FOI. Educate, educate, educate!
10. Be firm and aggressive with custodians — but also be nice.
There's truth in the saying "You can catch more flies with honey than vinegar."
11. Don't let the documents or materials you request gather dust.
Officials won't take you or your news organization seriously if you ask, they provide and you don't follow through.
12. Ask to inspect materials before you seek copies.
In some cases, perhaps you need a slice, not the loaf.
13. Think beyond documents and disks when pondering requests.
Public records can take many forms, from training tapes and videos to photo negatives and
brochures.
15. Get on the FOI-related listservs in your state and beyond
There are great sources for educating yourself about records issues and FOI trends.
16. Write stories about denials of public records.
This is a tool we as journalists don't use nearly enough.

Resources:
x The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press: www.rcfp.org -- check out the newly revised “How to
use the Federal FOI Act” and “Tapping Officials’ Secrets.”
x Brechner Center’s Citizen Access Project: Lots of info on state access -- www.citizenaccess.org
x Investigative Reporters and Editors – www.ire.org/foia
x Freedom of Information Center at the University of Missouri -- foi.missouri.edu
x Society of Professional Journalists – www.spj.org/foia.asp
x The National Freedom of Information Coalition – www.nfoic.org
x Justice Department’s FOIA page (includes links to FOIA officials and annual reports) -www.usdoj.gov/04foia/index.html

And don’t forget your state freedom of information coalition, press organization, attorney general

4/25/2004, THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS
Public right to know vs. Homeland Security
By JENNIFER LaFLEUR
For a department criticized for its secrecy,
Homeland Security comes off pretty good in an
initial assessment of how it handles information
requests, granting almost half during its first eight
months of existence.
When it did withhold information, the
department cited privacy most often. National
security reasons were cited in less than 1 percent
of cases, according to the department's first
Freedom of Information Act Annual Report.
Of the 161,000 requests DHS received in fiscal
year 2003, it fully granted 47 percent; it partially
granted 40 percent, and it denied 1 percent of all
requests. In about 10 percent of the cases, it said
the records didn't exist.
In the remaining cases, requests were either
withdrawn or referred to another agency.
Of the requests that went to DHS, nine out of
10 went to the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Service, formerly the Immigration and
Naturalization Service.
The appearance of openness could change in
the next report, though,especially as the agency
implements ways to deal with criticalinfrastructure information.
Critical infrastructure concerns confidential or
proprietary business information submitted to DHS
by companies so the agency can assess
vulnerability to terror. Companies worry they
could be damaged by this kind of information
getting out to the public. No requests were denied
in 2003 because guidelines for seeking criticalinfrastructure information weren't in place until
recently.
Pesky exemptions
The department was formed by the Homeland
Security Act of 2002, which included language
exempting particular types of information from
being subject to the FOI Act. Criticalinfrastructure information is generally exempt
from disclosure under the FOIA.
Requesters, therefore, won't be able to find out
if a company submitted a report, said Patrice
McDermott, deputy director of the American

Library Association's Office of Government
Relations.
Ms. McDermott suggested that it might be
useful for the public to know that a company
indeed submitted information, even without
knowing all the details.
Restricting this information won't "serve any
function except allow companies to hide
information when it's useful for them to do so," she
said.
"Then it's difficult for communities to find out
what the vulnerabilities are."
Homeland Security also has the authority to
determine how "sensitive, but unclassified"
homeland security information will be handled.
This move, too, has drawn criticism from
several open-government organizations and
environmental organizations worried that the
public would no longer be able to get information
about vulnerabilities.
Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., a long-time advocate
of open government, called the Homeland Security
Act the "most severe weakening of the Freedom of
Information Act in its 36-year history."
Sen. Leahy also expressed concern about
provisions in the law that punish a government
employee who releases critical infrastructure
information.
"Criminalizing disclosures - not of classified
information or national security related
information, but of information that a company
decides it does not want public - is an effective
way to quash discussion and debate over many
aspects of the government's work," Sen. Leahy
said in a Nov. 19, 2002 statement.
Guard dog
In its rules published Feb. 27, the department
noted that "for many years, private industry has
indicated that its reluctance to share critical
infrastructure information with the Federal
government is based upon a concern that the
information will not be adequately protected from
disclosure to the public."
It goes on to say that businesses also worried
that such information could get into the hands of
"entities intending to harm our nation."
And it's those businesses that have "all the
authority under this new process," said Sean
Moulton, senior policy analyst with OMB Watch,

a federal-government accountability organization.
"DHS has almost no ability to use the information
without the submitters' approval for whatever
action DHS wants to take."
The public "perceives DHS as a guard dog,"
Mr. Moulton said. "They're here to protect us, and
here we set up this rule that puts the nation's guard
dog on corporations' leashes."
Mr. Moulton acknowledged that a number of
corporations do have the public's interest at heart,
but "everyone has to acknowledge that at this
point, there are bad actors out there that will
consider their concerns above all others."
Counting the requests
Details about how DHS processed requests for
information during its first year are outlined in its
FOIA Annual Report, a report all federal agencies
must produce each year.
The FOIA report details the number of requests
the department received for information and how
those requests were handled. It does not provide
information about the types of requests received or
who submitted them. The DHS report is for the
period starting with the department's inception Jan.
24, 2003, to the end of that fiscal year - Sept. 30,
2003.
The requests were diverse in nature, according
to Elizabeth Withnell, acting departmental
disclosure officer in DHS. Federal agencies are
required to make frequently requested documents
available in electronic reading rooms, which is
usually available on agency Web sites.
"Frequently" means at least three times, and in
2003, no DHS document met that threshold.
DHS has been criticized for the lack of
information on its Web site.
It delayed putting public comments about
rulemaking online, and when it did, it put them up
in a format that was not user friendly, said Mr.
Moulton of OMB Watch, which has made those
comments available on its Web site.
Not that there wasn't internal experience in
handling information requests.
When DHS formed, it brought together 22
federal agencies that were once part of other
federal departments. For example, what was once
the U.S. Customs Service under the Treasury
Department, is now U.S.Customs and Border
Protection under DHS. The INS was under the
Department of Justice.

Many of those agencies already had established
FOIA offices and personnel who continue to
process requests for information.
DHS agencies that have longer FOIA histories
have their own electronic reading rooms, including
frequently requested documents.
For example, some of the records posted on the
Customs Web site include contract information,
employer-sanction case information and the
documents relating to Elián González, the Cuban
boy rescued at sea in 1999.
"Our batting average has not been that good,"
said Barry Steinhardt, director of the American
Civil Liberties Union's Technology and Liberty
Program, which has requested information from
DHS regarding airport security, passenger lists and
other DHS programs.
"DHS has been largely nonresponsive. Some of
that may be growing pains."
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
FOIA REQUESTS
As a whole, DHS agencies have more than 330
full-time staff processing FOIA requests and more
than 70 staff who work on FOIA
processing parttime. The department spent more
than $21 million processing FOIA requests for
which it collected about $270,000 in fees.
A federal agency may deny a request for
information for several reasons:
x The request did not adequately describe the
records sought.
x The request was not a proper FOIA request.
x The request was a duplicate request.
x The agency doesn't maintain that record.
x The request falls under one of nine exemptions
to the Freedom of Information Act.
The FOIA exemptions specifically allow an
agency to withhold particular information in
certain instances. For example, law enforcement
agencies may withhold some information under
Exemption 7(a), which protects information that is
part of an ongoing investigation.
Two exemptions allow an agency to withhold
information for privacy-related reasons. DHS used
Exemption 6, which protects individuals' privacy
interests, and Exemption 7, which protects privacy
in relationship to law enforcement records 64
percent of the time.

