Global Investigative Journalism Conference
Copenhagen, Denmark
Session: GETTING STARTED
May 2, 2003; 9-10:30 am
Speaker: LUZ RIMBAN
Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism
A story can start from a tip, an assignment from your editor, a follow up to an earlier story or
your own idea that there's something wrong somewhere. A whistleblower or concerned citizen
may come to you with a sheaf of documents, or you may have to start from scratch. Whichever
way a story may start, here are some tips that could help launch you off on your investigation.
1. First stop: the internet. In this day and age, there's no excuse for not checking what's in
cyberspace. This is the fastest and easiest way to see what's out there, and what's been written in
the past. A check with the internet will tell you who your possible sources are, where the
documents are, and where else you need to go--the real places and not just virtual sites--for more
information.
2. Scratch the surface; don't dig yet. Do initial research to find out whether there's basis for
your hunch or tip. Determine the procedures and the possible lapses. Know the laws that apply,
(e.g. environmental laws for stories that deal with the environment, bidding laws and procedures
if you're investigating anomalous contracts). Find out which agency or people are in charge of
enforcing them. Also steel yourself for disappointment if your tip or hunch turns out to be a dud.
3. Formulate a hypothesis, if you think there's a story that should be investigated. A hypothesis
or thesis is a statement of the problem, and the premise around which your whole research and
investigation should revolve. A hypothesis will guide your research, will remind you whether
you're still on track or whether you're over-researching.
4. Draw up a plan. Formulate a strategy should help you answer the basic questions: what's
wrong, who's responsible, why should people care about this story, what can be done. List down
the human sources you will need to interview, the documents that need to be gathered, the
databases you need to access, and places or events you have to visit. You also need a strategy on
approaching sensitive sources--determine at what point in your research you will talk to them.
Also try to come up with a timetable, as well a budget. You can't take forever doing a story, your
time and resources are limited and you would like to know that your research will end sometime.
5. Make sure your editor buys your story. Armed with what you already know, your
hypothesis and your plan, propose your story to your editor and solicit his/her whole-hearted
support. Don't pursue a story that your editor won't publish; it's going to be a waste of time. He
will also provide you with the time and resources you need, so don't take him/her for granted.
6. Form a team if the workload will be too much for one person, given the timetable. If the story
will require interviewing and following the paper trail across different places, consider teaming
up with reporters or correspondents based in those areas. Or, consider also tri- or multi-media
team ups (e.g. have people from print, television, radio, or the online news sites helping with the
story). Forming a team may also mean just assigning one or two researchers to help with the
legwork. College students interns who spend their internships in your paper or network can also
help. Having a team will also mean company during the long hours poring over documents.####

