Ten Tips for
Digging Journalistic Gems out of Municipal Finance

1995 IRE Conference
Orange County Panel
David Evans, Los Angeles Correspondent
Bloomberg Business News
310-827-2348
Did your municipality win an award from the Government Finance
1.
Officers Association for excellence in financial reporting?
If not-- you may have a big story. If it did, you may have a story anyway.
The GFOA issues these awards to any municipality that hires outside auditors
for an audit that is completed within one year of the end of the municipality's fiscal
year. These are minimal standards-- Orange County's auditor's office displays a
wall full of these awards. So if your municipality doesn't rate one, find
out why. If it has won a GFOA award, you can write a story explaining just what
that means.

2.

Does your municipality mark its investments to market?
That means on a monthly or quarterly basis, it revalues its portfolio to
determine what it would be worth if its securities were sold that day. If a portfolio
isn't marked to market, it may take years, until completion of the next annual
audit, to learn which, if any, securities have plunged in value. Mutual funds
must mark their portfolios to the market every night, but municipalities only have
to perform this process once a year.
That's all that's required by the Government Accounting Standards Board, a
privately funded accounting standard-setting board based in Norwalk, Conn. (203)
847-0700. You might ask local officials why they don't think this is necessary. If
they explain that it's because they're buying inverse floaters and other exotic
instruments that are difficult to value- you've got a story. Orange County's former
treasurer Robert Citron didn't mark his portfolio to market, and it was packed with
exotics.

3. Get the latest auditor's report and read the footnotes.
It's in the fine print of footnotes in annual reports and 10-K's of public
companies that some of the juiciest morsels are often buried. Things are no

different in audits or offering statements of municipalities, although disclosure
standards are much stricter in the private sector.
For example, a footnote to a offering statement recently circulated to
prospective investors by Orange County for a proposed $325 million bond issued
cautioned the county reserved the right "to challenge, object to, seek or contend
various other matters with respect to outstanding County obligations." Not very
comforting.
4. Is there a "qualified" auditor's opinion?
Orange County received clean auditor's opinions from its outside auditors for
years. And we know during at least part of that time the county treasurer was
taking incredible risks with taxpayers' money. So if you find a municipality's
opinion is qualified, because of certain problems turned up by the audit, you've
stumbled upon an important red flag.

5. What is the auditor's relationship with the municipality?
When things get to cozy between an auditor and the municipality being
audited, financial problems can go undisclosed. See if the auditing contract is put
up for competitive bidding every three to five years. The lowest bidder, however,
may not be qualified for the job. Check out the outside auditor's history and
reputation.
6. Does the municipality use self-insurance?
Self insurance itself, for workers compensation or general liability, isn't
necessarily a bad thing. Many companies do it. But if reserves are inadequate,
self insurance can be a ticking time bomb. Find out how your municipality
determines the size of its reserves. Ideally, this should come from a qualified
outside actuary, rather than any county employee.
7. Study risk disclosures in a recent offering statement.

Like the prospectus for a publicly traded company, the risk disclosures made
to prospective buyers can be a gold mine for journalists. By packing this section
of the offering statement full of caveats make full disclosure, hoping to insulate
themselves from future lawsuits by investors claiming they "had no idea" about
these risks. Some issuers hope investors won't bother to read this section, and
most probably don't.
This is fertile territory for journalists. The risk disclosure section of Orange
County's most recent offering statement included a dozen subheadings. Example:
If voters don't approve an increase in the county sales tax, "the County will have

difficulty implementing its Recovery Plan, including paying all of its obligations."
If you know about adverse financial issues facing the municipality (i.e. a major
employer is threatening to move and decimate the tax base) and you don't find
them in the risk disclosure statement, ask questions. Needless to say, Orange
County didn't mention a few things to the investors who bought a billion dollars
worth of it's short term notes in the summer of 1994.
8. What do the credit rating firms say about the municipality?
The credit rating firms, Moodys Investors Service (212-553-0300), Standard
& Poor's (212 208-1 146) and Fitch lnvestors Service (212-908-0500) are paid by
issuers to rate their notes and bonds. These ratings include analyses of the
municipality's financial condition, generally written in non-jargon. There's
often plenty of information about the local economy and even population and
housing data. The analysts are experts in the issuers they cover, and they usually
are willing to talk to journalists.
Remember that they're not perfect. Moody's rationale for awarding its highest
rating to a $600 million taxable bond issue last summer cited Orange County's
"conservative fiscal practices."
9. Find brokers that trade the municipality's bonds and notes.
Brokers usually can't provide the detailed analysis available from analysts at
the rating firms, but they have their fingers on the pulse of the market. And the
marketplace often learns about developments before you do.
By developing relationships with brokers that trade in the municipalities you're
interested in, you can tap into this pool of knowledge that's not available from any
database.

10. Troll through a database like Bloomberg for more information.
Using the Bloomberg, for example, you can read what the credit rating firms
say about a municipality. You can learn who the undewriters are, how much debt
is outstanding, when it matures and how it's rated.

Orange County Won Awards for Financial Reporting Excellence
New York, Dec. 23 (Bloomberg) -- Guess which local municipality won
awards from the Government Finance Officers Association for excellence in
financial reporting for 16 straight years?
It's the same one that's the owner of an Award of Recognition from the
National Federation of Municipal Analysts for its commitment to the kind of
disclosure requirements that analysts like best.
Need a hint? It's also the place where the county treasurer had to resign
after losing $2 billion making bad bets on interest rates, jeopardizing the
jobs of county workers and services for county residents.
Yes, folks, it's Orange County, Calif., site of the nation's largest municipal
bankruptcy, where one wall in the reception area at Orange County
auditor-controller Steven Lewis's office is covered with plaques attesting to
the county's rectitude in matters of financial disclosure.
The award-bedecked office was a strangely discordant background when
Lewis was served with lawsuits by a process server earlier this week.
Incongruity?

:

Still, neither the organizations that bestowed the awards nor the
accountants who certified the financial statements admit to any sense of
incongruity over the county's sterling financial reports and its dismal financial
performance. In fact, the county will probably win the GFOA's award again
this year, if the county's accountants ever get around to finishing their audit.
Auditor KPMG Peat Marwick suspended its work on the county's audit for
the fiscal year that ended June 30 this year and it may not finish it until June
30 next year, said KPMG spokesman Kevin Kelly. That's acceptable under
the rules published by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board, a
privately-funded accounting standard-setting agency based in Norwalk,
Conn. Governments aren't required to publish their financial results
quarterly, the way companies are. Once a year is enough, and they can
wait a year to prepare them.
Kelly said that even though an audit is supposed to look at what
happened in the past, the audit of Orange County's 1994 fiscal year has
been suspended because of things that have happened since the fiscal year
ended: namely, the county's filing for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 9
of the Bankruptcy Code.

"The audit has been suspended in light of the bankruptcy," Kelly said.
"They have not been able to give us completed financial statements."
Lewis didn't return phone calls seeking comment.
The GFOA gave its Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial
Reporting to 2,078 of the 2,168 governments who applied for it in 1992, said
Steven Gauthier, technical director for the group. The award has been given
since 1946, and after a while it becomes a rubber stamp, he said.

Rubber Stamp
"Once you're certified, as long as you maintain your standards and keep
applying, then you get the award," he said.
The NFMA will also allow Orange County to retain its award even though
the county went bust and readers of the financial statements might not have
been completely apprised of the risks to its investments.
"The award is not for the substance of the disclosure but for the
commitment to make a disclosure," said Robert Doty, the chairman of the
certificate committee at the NFMA. "Our committee doesn't have time to
evaluate the disclosure; to double-check would take years."
That sounds like what a spokesman for the municipal-bond rating
agencies said when Orange County's losses were first disclosed: "We're not
auditors; we depend on the good faith representations of our issuers," said
Mike Dorfsman of Standard & Poor's Corp.
And the auditors don't check on the quality of the disclosure either,
KPMG's Kelly said.
"It's outside the scope of an audit to forecast investment strategy," Kelly
said. "There's no way we can forecast what bond offerings are going to be
made. The role of an accountant isn't as broad as people think."
Still, Orange County did tell potential investors that it had been audited by
KPMG Peat Marwick and that the auditors had independently determined
that the county's financial statements fairly reflected the county's financial
position.
'Based On Original Cost'
And in July, when the county offered $111 million in bonds underwritten
by Merrill Lynch & Co., the county said the balance in its County Investment

Pool as of March 31, 1994 and June 16, 1994, were $7.6 billion and $7.7
billion, respectively, "based on original cost."
That's another anomaly in the way government's account for their
finances: they report the value of their holdings at the price they paid for
them, rather than at current market value.
In fact, had those holdings been "marked to market," investors would
have known they were actually worth a lot less, since the value of the
derivatives in the pool depended on interest rates staying low. But by March
31 the Federal Reserve had raised interest rates twice since February, and
by June 16 once more.
So the market could have told Orange County, its treasurer Robert
Citron, its auditor-controller Lewis, outside auditors KPMG Peat Marwick, the
municipal ratings agencies and any government finance officer who cared to
look that the investment pool didn't have as much money in it as it appeared.
But that's not their job, they said.
"It's up to the investors to decide," KPMG1sKelly said. "For fiscal 1993
the disclosures were proper."

-- John Pickering in the New York newsroom (212) 318-2339 and
David Evans in Los Angeles lag
(For more on Orange County: Muni N CA ORA; on accounting
firms: NI ACC; on KPMG Peat Marwick: 50932 Equity CN)

Orange County Warns Potential Bond-Buyers They Mightn't Be Paid
Santa Ana, California, May 30 (Bloomberg) -- Orange County,
California warned potential investors in a proposed $325 million bond issue
that it may not be able to repay them. The warning was included in a
preliminary prospectus for the offering.
The document warns that if county voters reject a proposed half-percent
sales tax increase in a special vote on June 27, "the county will likely not be
able to meet all its obligations."
The county has committed itself to selling the bonds weeks before the
voters go to the polls to decide on the tax increase. Investors will be asked
to buy the bonds on faith that the tax increase will pass, even though a new
poll indicates it won't.
The tax proposal, called Measure R, would raise the bankrupt county's
sales tax to 8.25 percent from 7.75 percent, producing about $130 million
annually in revenue. An opinion poll printed Sunday by the Orange County
Register indicates support for Measure R is slipping.
According to the poll of 400 registered voters, 49 percent oppose it, with
37 percent in favor. A poll taken in March found 48 percent in favor and 45
percent opposed. The most recent poll had a five percentage point margin of
error.
The $325 million "certificate of participation" issue would be used to
repay $255 million to participants in the county's failed investment pool by a
June 5 deadline. The issue would replace a proposed $275 million bond
issue, to have been insured by MBlA Inc., which was held up when the
county was unable to meet the terms of the insurance policy.
In the COP issue, the bondholders's principal and interest payments
would come as lease payments by the county on 13 of its buildings,
including offices, courts, jails, even juvenile hall. The county will lease the
buildings to a trustee and then lease them back. The payments would be
backed by the county's share of state motor vehicle license receipts.
Full Faith Missing
The prospectus warns that the bonds aren't backed by the full faith and
credit of the county or the state of California. It also cautions that the county
carries just $30 million in earthquake insurance on the buildings, with more
insurance "not currently available."

If the county defaults, the trustee isn't allowed to sell the county buildings
to raise money to pay off the bondholders. Instead, the trustee would be
limited to trying to find a new tenant. And that's assuming the tenant, Orange
County, could be evicted. "Portions of the leased facilities may not be easily
recoverable," warns the prospectus. It notes that jails and courts "could be
of little value to others."
Should the county declare bankruptcy for a second time, the prospectus
warns that bondholders "could suffer a substantial loss."
The COPS haven't been rated by any credit-rating company, and there's
no assurance that a resale market will develop for the bonds. "If a market
for the certificates does develop, the certificates could trade at a substantial
discount from their face amount," warns the prospectus.
Default
The prospectus informs prospective investors that the county filed for
bankruptcy on Dec. 6 after its investment pool lost $1.7 billion in wrong-way
bets on interest rates. The county is in default on "a number of its debt
obligations" -- including its existing COP bonds.
Meanwhile, the county is seeking to roll over $1 billion of notes coming
due this summer. The prospectus acknowledges that no rollover agreement
with bondholders as been reached.
There are no current audited financial statements for Orange County in
the prospectus.
The county's last audited annual financial statement was for the year
ending June 30, 1993. An unaudited county financial statement for the year
ending June 30, 1994 is included with the prospectus. It includes the
following caveat:
"Material adverse changes have occurred in the financial condition of the
county.. .since June 30, 1994."

- David Evans in Santa Ana (310) 827-2348 through the New York
newsroom (212) 318-2300 lag
(Story illustration: To see descriptions of series B notes,
: taxable notes, Teeter Plan notes, pension obligation bonds and
certificates of participation, type the eight digit Cusip, then
<Muni> DES; the Cusips for the issues are: 684201EL, 684201EM,

68428LAN and 68428LAK;
(For more company news: SB US, AGE US, 19032, MBI US <Equrty>
CN; To find information on Orange County: 4duni> N CA ORA. For the
Orange County Transportation Authority: <Muni> N CA ORATRN; For
information on San Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor Agency
bonds: <Muni> N CA SJHTRN. For more news on municipal finance:
<Muni> N; For more on derivatives: NI DRV; For more news on
California: NI CA.)

Orange County Starts Road Show for New Bond Issue (Repeat)
Santa Ana, California, June 4 (Bloomberg) -- Orange County, California,
officials will criss-cross the nation this week hawking a new $325 million
bond issue even as the county edges closer to defaulting on $975 million of
existing debt.
William Popejoy, the bankrupt county's chief executive officer, will meet
with investors in New York tomorrow, Boston on Tuesday, Chicago on
Wednesday and San Francisco on Thursday.
"lt's incredible that they think somebody will buy this,"declared a senior
executive of a major financial institution that's a large holder of the county's
existing notes. "lt's unbelievable that they think they can issue non-rated
debt during a bankruptcy while they're simultaneously trying to repudiate
(existing) debt."
It will be a tough sales job for the underwriters, Goldman Sachs & Co.
and A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc.
"From our standpoint, it's debt to be purchased by someone who's a
risk-taker," said Mary Francoeur, an analyst with Moody's Investors Service,
which hasn't rated the issue.
The new bond issue's preliminary prospectus paints a bleak picture of the
county's situation.
"The county is currently in default under the terms of a number of its
debt obligations," it cautions.
The prospectus warns potential investors that the county may not be able
to repay the debt. The county filed for bankruptcy on Dec. 6, after its
investment pool lost $1.7 billion on risky, highly leveraged investments made
by former Treasurer Robert Citron, who pleaded guilty to six felony charges
stemming from his conduct.
Rollover, Default or Repudiation
On Friday, the county filed a plan with the bankruptcy court to roll over
$975 million in debt coming due this summer for one year because it lacks
the cash to pay them off when due. Many investors consider the rollover a
cramdown, tantamount to default.
"This is as dishonorable as anything Bob Citron did," said the senior
executive, whose firm vows to refuse the rollover."lt's a fraud on the
investors."

The county has threatened to default on its repayment obligations to
noteholders that don't accept the plan by July 7. It will default on all the
notes unless the rollover is accepted by holders of more than 50 percent of
the notes.
"The county's strategy has been to hold investors hostage in negotiating
a settlement," said Hugo Quackenbush, senior vice president of Charles
Schwab Co., which holds $41.5 million of Orange County taxable notes.
Schwab, too, has refused the rollover.
Under the rollover agreement, holders of $975 million of county notes
maturing this summer wouldn't get their principal back until June 30, 1996.
Until then, the county would pay about 74 percent of the regular interest
payments, in monthly installments. The unpaid interest would accrue and be
paid in a lump sum with the principal next year, along with a one-time bonus
interest payment of 0.95 percent of principal.
Orange County specifically reserves the right to repudiate $600 million in
taxable notes under the rollover agreement. The agreement states the
county may claim these notes "do not constitute allowed indebtedness of
the county or must be subordinated."
The county plans to fully redeem $175 million of Teeter notes on
schedule June 30, although they are covered by the rollover plan. It seeks to
float another new bond issue to refinance the Teeters, which are backed by
delinquent property taxes.
Deadlines Tomorrow
Tomorrow is the deadline for filing objections to the Teeter redemption
with the bankruptcy court. Some creditors are expected to challenge the
redemption, arguing it would give Teeter-holders an unfair priority over
others.
Officials on the four-city tour will be talking up a $325 million "certificate
of participation" bond issue. It would permit the county to make good on a
$255 million repayment promised to the 200 schools, cities and agencies
that invested in its failed investment pool.
The county had promised to try to make the payment in the form of
"recovery notes" that would be "good as gold" by tomorrow -- a goal that
won't be met.

Pool participants have already gotten back about 77 cents on the dollar
in cash. The $255 million would bring schools' cash return up to 90 cents on
the dollar, and other participants to 80 cents.
The new issue's prospectus cautions that if county voters reject a
proposed half-percent sales tax increase in a special vote on June 27, "the
county will likely not be able to meet all its obligations."
The county has committed itself to selling the proposed bonds weeks
before the voters go to the polls to decide on the tax increase. Investors will
be asked to buy the bonds on faith that the tax increase will pass, but a
recent poll shows voters oppose the tax increase 49 percent to 37 percent.
The tax proposal, called Measure R, would raise the bankrupt county's
sales tax to 8.25 percent from 7.75 percent, producing about $130 million
annually in revenue.

Under the certificates of participation, bondholders' principal and interest
payments would come as lease payments by the county on 13 of its
buildings, including offices, courts, jails and even juvenile hall. The county
will lease the buildings to the Orange County Public Facilities Corp. and then
lease them back. The lease payments would be backed by the county's
share of state motor vehicle license receipts.
The prospectus warns that the COPs aren't backed by either the full faith
and credit of the county or the state of California. It also cautions that the
county carries just $30 million in earthquake insurance on the buildings, with
more insurance "not currently available."
If the county defaults, the trustee isn't allowed to sell the county buildings
to raise money to pay off the bondholders. Instead, the trustee would be
limited to trying to find a new tenant. And that's assuming the tenant, Orange
County, could be evicted. "Portions of the leased facilities may not be easily
recoverable," warns the prospectus. It observes that jails and courts "could
be of little value to others."
Should the county declare bankruptcy for a second time, the prospectus
warns that bondholders "could suffer a substantial loss."
The COPs haven't been rated by any credit-rating company, and there's
no assurance that a resale market will develop for the bonds. "If a market
for the certificates does develop, the certificates could trade at a substantial
discount from their face amount," warns the prospectus.

Reserving Rights
The prospectus informs prospective investors that the county is already
in default on "a number of its debt obligations" -- including its existing
certificates of participation. The county withdrew $16.8 million from COP
reserve accounts to meet current obligations and didn't replenish them as
required.
Few prospective investors will find comfort in the county's reservation of
"any rights it may have to reject leases or to challenge them as disguised
loans, including county leases with respect to which certificates of
participation are outstanding."
There are no current audited financial statements for Orange County in
the prospectus, and the county is currently without an outside auditor.
Orange County's last audited annual financial statement was for the year
ending June 30, 1993. An unaudited county financial statement for the year
ending June 30, 1994, is included with the prospectus. It includes the
following caveat:
"Material adverse changes have occurred in the financial condition of the
county...since June 30, 1994."

-- David Evans in Los Angeles (310) 827-2348 through the Princeton
Newsroom (609) 2794000/chd

(Story illustration: To see descriptions of series B notes,
taxable notes, Teeter Plan notes, pension obligation bonds and
certificates of participation, type the eight digit Cusip, then
<Muni> DES; the Cusips for the issues are: 684201EL, 684201EM,
68428LAN and 68428LAK;
(For more company news: SB US, AGE US, 19032, MBI US <Equity>
CN; To find information on Orange County: <Muni> N CA O W . For the
Orange County Transportation Authority: <Muni> N CA ORATRN; For
information on San Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor Agency
bonds: <Muni> N CA SJHTRN. For more news on municipal finance:
<Muni> N; For more on derivatives: NI DRV; For bankruptcy news:
BCY. For more news on California: NI CA.)

