Below you'll see the original
story text, followed by
explanations of where the
material came from in italics.
Paris, Aug. 25 (Bloomberg) -- Francois
Pinault has never seemed more successful.
His personal fortune is worth $12.8
billion, according to a July estimate by
French magazine Challenges.
Published while researching the story. Keep
scanning the competition!
His holding company, Artemis, has assets
totaling $17 billion.
Artemis annual reports are not public – but
through sources, I met another source who
had a couple, and photocopied them. I also
asked Artemis officials for copies so they
would not know I had another source.
His public company, Pinault-PrintempsRedoute -- with revenue of 124 billion
francs ($20.5 billion) last year -- owns
some of France's biggest retailers,
including Le Printemps department stores
and the FNAC chain of book and record
stores. PPR also has a 42.5 percent stake
in luxury goods company Gucci Group.
At last, some public info – I read five
years of PPR annual reports.

Pinault, who's a connoisseur of fine art,
paid $1.4 billion in 1998 for 100 percent
of London auction house Christie's
International. He also owns the Chateau
Latour Bordeaux vineyard and 67 percent of
his hometown soccer team, Stade Rennes.
This was all contained in the Artemis
annual reports. To be sure I understood the
reports, which detailed complex holding
structures, I took a financial specialist
to lunch and went over the documents with
him.
Tip: You don’t need to be a financier, but
you need to know one.
Yet Pinault, 65, has reason to be uneasy.
In France,magistrate Eva Joly is
investigating allegations of criminal fraud
at a former Pinault furniture subsidiary,
Lafa.
The case was already known and I met the
plaintiffs, a French minority shareholders
association. Media access to case files of
ongoing judicial investigations is banned
under French law, so I will not claim that
I consulted those files. I can safely say
that I did not photocopy them.
Tip: Be prepared to copy by hand crucial
documents.
In the Netherlands, rival Bernard Arnault's
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton and Rob

Mok, solicitor general at the Dutch supreme
court, are challenging Pinault's $2.9billion Gucci acquisition. They're trying
to undo the deal or force Pinault to buy
the rest of the company.
Parties to the case furnished copies of all
relevant legal documents.
Tip: Always start with the plaintiffs.
Potentially the most expensive legal
action, which could cost billions of
dollars, is in California.
This is where the story really began. The
French press reported the filing of a
lawsuit in California. I called the
California Attorney General’s office, who
directed me to their lawyer. My first
request was a copy of the complaint – a 70
page document that contained numerous
detailed points of information that could
be verified.
Tip: Don’t believe everything in a
complaint, but use it as a guide for
further research...

