SEEING RED
HOW TO EXPOSE REDLINING PRACTICES
IRE95
Sunday, June 11, 10:30-noon
Penny Loeb
U.S. News & World Report
(202) 955-2640
Redlining exists in just about every city in the country.
It takes different forms. Sometimes loans will
be more difficult to obtain in poor and minority
areas. Sometimes banks will be scarce there.
Sometimes homeowners will be denied full-coverage
insurance. Look and you will probably find some form
of this financial discrimination.
Here are some sources of data and records and
suggestions on how to use them. There is also a list
of community groups and experts, as well as
descriptions of the key laws that apply.
1.LOANS
The basic source of data on mortgage loans by
banks and mortgage companies is the Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act. This is released every Fall, usually
in October or November. It gives information on
conventional and government-insured loans for
purchase, improvement and refinancing. The sex, race
and income of the applicant are listed. The census
tract of the property is also listed. All banks and
some credit unions and larger mortgage companies are
included. You can order the HMDA data for your area
by calling the National Institute for Computer
Assisted Reporting (314) 882-0684. The cost is
minimal.
When this data first became public five years
ago, journalists usually looked at denial by race.
Academics and federal bank regulators consider this
too superficial. There are many reasons why someone
is rejected that aren't contained in the data you
get.
A more comprehensive data analysis can look at
where the loans are made. You can easily join census
demographic data to the loan data. Then you can look
at how many loans are made in minority areas, in

majority black areas or majority Hispanic areas
compared to how many loans are made in white areas.
You should use a ratio of loans per 1,000 houses when
doing this because some tracts, especially minority,
may have a lot of apartment buildings. Since the home
category on HMDA includes one to four family
buildings, you need to add up the numbers for each
category on the census data to get a total house
count.
You should also compare the rates of loans
granted by the income of the applicant. We got the
median income for the Metropolitan Statistical Area
from HUD. Then we looked at applicants of different
races who made above or below the median income. If
above median income minorities are denied at a much
higher rate than above median income whites, there
may be some sort of discrimination.
You should also compare rates of loans in lowerincome areas to upper income areas. The Community
Reinvestment Act does not specify race, but does
require loans be made to applicants of all incomes.
Another comparison is of percent of loans given
to the different races compared to the percent of
that race in the community. The same can be done for
low-income applicants.
Another telling factor about a bank is how many
applications it has from minorities. If it has a lot
of applications, that means it is trying to market to
minorities. It may have a high denial rate, but
should be given credit for its outreach efforts.
2. EVALUATIONS AND RATINGS
Under the Community Reinvestment Act, banks are
evaluated on their lending performance approximately
every two years. They can get one of four ratings. At
least 97 percent of the banks get the two top
ratings, so the ratings are virtually useless.
However, banks must give you their evaluation
reports. These can often be quite revealing. Some
evaluators go so far as comparing the percentage of
minority population to the percentage of loans to
minorities. Evaluators sometimes comment on a bank's
poor lending performance even though they give
satisfactory ratings.
We obtained the ratings of most banks nationwide
from Inside Mortgage Finance (301) 951-1240. It was
provided on disk.
3. BANK BRANCH LOCATION
This data is available from at least two
sources: Shezunoff Information Services (800) 4562340. This has bank branch location, deposit amounts

and census tracts. It is fairly expensive. However,
there are at least 10 percent erroneous census
tracts. It varies by city. We had to use the census
Tiger maps on CD-Rom to verify addresses. In some
cities, a lot of tract extensions were wrong. In
others, counties were incorrect. Anyone using this
data should probably verify the tract for all
addresses with the Tiger file. One Tiger CD-Rom,
which covers all or part of a state, costs about
$250. They are also available at libraries that are
government document depositories. Some libraries have
trouble loading the data into the computer, though.
The other source is the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation file of all banks insured by
FDIC. This omits a few banks and all the credit
unions on the Shezunoff file. It also does not have
census tracts. The data is cheaper, but you would
have to input the tracts yourself.
You can use this data to compare the number of
branches in minority areas to the number of branches
in white areas. You should use a ratio of banks per
10,000 or 100,000 people. If you are particularly
ambitious, you could look compare branches now to
branches in 1970. However, you should use 1970 census
data since population could have changed radically in
25 years.
4. INSURANCE
Discrimination in home insurance is the current
hot topic in redlining. There are presently
complaints against several major insurance companies,
including Nationwide and State Farm. Homeowners in
inner cities have to pay more for insurance and often
cannot get full-coverage, which will pay to replace a
home.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development
held hearings around the country last year as it
formulated guidelines for insurance discrimination.
HUD believes the Fair Housing Act gives it
jurisdiction over this type of discrimination.
Naturally, many insurance companies disagree.
Testimony from these hearings are a good source of
studies and people stories. Call Peter Kaplan's
office (202) 708-2904 to find how you could obtain a
copy of testimony for your area.
Also last year, the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners completed a lengthy study of
insurance discrimination. It found that, even after
adjusting for mitigating factors, insurance
discrimination still exists. NAIC collected data on
urban insurance from 33 metropolitan areas in 20
states. Last Fall, six states agreed to release data
through NAIC: Washington, Texas, Missouri, Maryland,

Michigan, and New Jersey. New York released data
directly. California expected to release it sometime
this year. Wisconsin will also release data directly,
I believe. Some states, like Illinois, are more
secretive.
The data permits you to calculate the percentage
of homes with full coverage insurance. The data is to
the zip code level. So you can buy the CD-Rom of
census data for zip codes and join it to the NAIC
data. NAIC can be reached at (202) 624-8824. The data
is at the Kansas City office, Dan Atkisson (816) 3747237.
Insurance is not regulated by the federal
government. However, under the Clinton
Administration, the Justice Department and HUD have
been taking an aggressive stance against
discrimination. States regulate insurance to varying
degrees. Some like Missouri, Texas and California
have done extensive studies, which are helpful.
5. THE LAWS
Four laws govern banking practices related to
discrimination.
The first is the Fair Housing Act, passed in
1968 at the height of the Civil Rights movement. This
law makes it illegal to deny loans because of a
person's race.
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act passed in 1974.
It was followed in 1977 by the Community Reinvestment
Act. CRA is based on the view that banks have an
underlying charter obligation to serve the banking
needs of their local communities. The public
obligations form a quid pro quo for the extensive
government backing, such as federal deposit insurance
and access to the Federal Reserve System's lender of
last resort facility. CRA does not specify
minorities. It does require banks to serve the needs
of their entire communities, including low and
moderate-income areas.
The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act was adopted in
1975 to provide citizens and public officials with
sufficient information to enable them to determine
whether depository institutions were serving their
communities. Amendments in 1989 required disclosure
of race, gender and income of applicant as well as
whether the loan was granted or denied.
6. COMMUNITY GROUPS
A key result of the Community Reinvestment Act
was a tremendous growth in the number and power of
community groups. It was an outcome largely
unforeseen by the original drafters of the bill. CRA

permits citizens to protest a bank's lending record
when it applies for a merger. Community groups have
done this repeatedly and often won agreements with
the banks to do a better job of lending to minorities
and lower-income people. The agreements have not come
from the regulators, but from the banks themselves.
The banks don't want negative publicity and don't
want any obstacles to their mergers. During recent
hearings in Congress, bankers and some members of
Congress said CRA has been allowing community groups
to hold up banks unreasonably. Whatever the case,
there are community groups in many cities who are
great sources on what is really going on with
financial discrimination. The best way to find them
is to call the national offices. Here is a list:
ACORN (Association of Community Organizations
for Reform Now) (202)547-2500. ACORN is active in
both bank and insurance redlining issues. It has
issued several large reports on lending and insurance
discrimination. The insurance study included results
of test calls for insurance quotes in various parts
of major cities. In cities like Philadelphia where
ACORN has been active, it has won agreements with
banks. ACORN can help you find people who have been
turned down for loans.
CENTER FOR COMMUNITY CHANGE (202)342-0519.
Allen Fishbein is one of the longtime activists in
this area. He has written a number of articles and is
very articulate. The Center can give help you locate
community groups around the country.
NATIONAL COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT COALITION
(202)986-7898. The largest CRA organization with 440
member groups. It uses HMDA data to do detailed
studies of banks. Early this year, it issued
"America's Worst Lenders!" an analysis of lending in
the nation's 20 top cities. Banks were rated in three
areas: denials by race, lending in each city compared
to the industry average, applications in each city
compared to industry average.
NATIONAL FAIR HOUSING ALLIANCE (202)898-1661 A
national network of fair housing groups. Does
widespread testing for discrimination, both lending
and insurance. Conducts research on discrimination in
lending and housing.
NATIONAL PEOPLE'S ACTION (312)243-3038
Chairperson Gail Cincotta, a single mother of six
from the South Side of Chicago, was a major force
behind the original CRA legislation and is still very

active. This is perhaps the most radical group. When
public officials appear reluctant to help minority
and low-income neighborhoods, group members will
demonstrate at the officials' homes or offices. The
central office can give you names of groups around
the country.
7. EXPERTS
John Caskey, Swarthmore College, (610)328-8128.
Caskey has done several studies on location of bank
branches. He recently published a book on fringe
banking (check cashers and pawn shops).
Mortgage Bankers Association of America
(202)861-6568. Monitors federal legislation and
regulation and collects statistics on lending.
National Association of Realtors (202)383-1000.
Sets standards of ethics, monitors legislation and
promotes research.
Gregory Squires, University of Wisconsin in
Milwaukee. He has recently been a special assistant
at HUD assisting on writing the insurance
discrimination guidelines. He has studied financial
discrimination for nearly two decades. He recently
wrote a book Capital and Communities in Black and
White.
Ken Thomas, a Florida based banking expert. He
recently wrote the definitive book on the Community
Reinvestment Act. He examined numerous bank
evaluation files and detailed the strengths and
weaknesses of the law.
Ronald Wienk, now a Washington, D.C., based
consultant, was a special assistant on lending
discrimination for the Comptroller of the Currency.
He has done numerous studies using HMDA data and is
conversant on its drawbacks.

