Dicar’s article archive and data library
What a good story! – But how did it come into existence and what elements would have to be considered if
the story was to be angled otherwise?
Chances are good of getting answers to this kind of questions. Dicar has built up an article archive including
descriptions of working with articles that build upon investigative and computer-assisted techniques. Any
basic research should include a visit to the article archive in order to ascertain whether a previous attempt has
already been made.
The archive provides the user with a study of the journalist’s methods. Furthermore, it includes information
on, e.g. the problem which the story was to illustrate, any possible use of databases, sources – written or oral,
any possible problems encountered by the journalist, expenditure of time, results of the story and ideas for
others.
The archive will most likely provide a link for the article itself and, when possible, it will link the user to any
electronic versions of broadcasted features. In case of extensive explanations, these are provided by means of
separate handouts, which are also available from the article archive
The article archive holds a number of handouts on a number of specific topics of which many derive from
conferences (e.g. Global Investigative Journalism Conference 2003), seminars and educational material.
Some are in Danish and some are in English. The archive may also be used for searches in either one or both
languages.
Access to the article archive: http://dicar.politiken.dk/dicarengelsk/forside.asp

Dicar’s data library is available on our homepage, however, for the moment the library is available in Danish
only.
The database contains a rapidly growing collection of data, which is ready for the use of journalists as it is
supplemented by specific ideas for stories. The data are updated continuously and are divided into subjects
such as crime, health, trade, regional conditions, etc. For the time being, access to the database is unlimited.
The data may derive from either journalists, who have obtained them as part of their research. Subsequently,
colleagues may have access to the data by way of the database. Many journalists use the database as a source
of inspiration. As a general rule, the data are available in either Excel spreadsheets or Access databases.
As far as possible and in order to make the database easily accessible for journalists, the documentation of
each set of data is structured according to the same principles.
Some sets of data derive from Dicar. The data may already have been available, however, in a format, which
did not immediately allow for an analysis. Other sets of data are achieved by means of the right of access to
documents. Subsequently, Dicar releases the data at a pre-announced time allowing the media equal access to
utilizing the data for stories.
Access to the database: http://www.dicar.dk/research/databank/oversigt.htm

Dicar – Danmarks Journalisthøjskole, Olof Palmes Alle 11, DK-8200 Aarhus N
Phone: +4589440492, fax: +4586168910, e-mail: dicar@dicar.dk web: www.dicar.org

CAR: Blending it
with traditionel
investigations
Tommy Kaas, editor, Dicar
tommy.kaas@dicar.dk

Current status
n Growing number of CAR stories in the

media
n Several types of media are currently
working with CAR
n Increased level of integration in day-to-day
journalism
n Advanced possibility for data

Five years ago
n Only few media employed CAR
n Limited number of experienced CAR

journalists
n Focus on large-scale CAR projects
n Hardly any deadline CAR
n Few data available
n Lack of confidence in the authorities

Development since then
n Less CAR ”projects”
n Increased level of CAR in everyday stories
n More journalists know CAR
n Improved co-operation between media

and authorities in order to gain access to
data

A positive circle is turning

More
knowledge

More
stories

More
data

What did we do?
n Training
n Data
n Software
n Exchange of experience

Training
n In-house training (320 journalist in 1 year)
n Free media training
n Seminars on
¨ Internet
¨ Spreadsheets
¨ Database managers
¨ Mapping, statistics, web-surveys…

Data
n Data are recycled
n Dicar’s data library
n Assistance in getting started
n Assistance in making use of the right to

access to documents
n More data available

Software
n System for source sharing at media
n Web-surveys
n More to come…

Exchange of experience
n Showdown with prejudice against

competition
n Journalists helping journalists
n Method description included in the article
archive
n Mailing list
n Continued competition for the best stories

Case: Nordjyllands Radio
(Danish Broadcasting Corporation North)
n All 35 employees attended seminar
n No more than one week’s training
n Aim: to strengthen and qualify journalism by

strengthening the educational level of all
employees within CAR techniques

Demands placed on the employees
n Before: Employees being able to manage

word, sound and picture processing and
similar computerised tools
n Now: Employees being able to utilise the
potential of the Internet and spreadsheets
for research purposes

Form
n Seminars at the work place
n Seminars during work hours
n Training by Dicar instructors and work

place super users

Contents of training
n Experienced learners: One day’s Internet

training, two days’ spreadsheet training
and two days’ database training
n Less experienced: Two days’ Internet
training and two or three days’
spreadsheet training
n Educational material based upon local
examples and data wherever possible

Embeddedness
n Journalists must publish a certain number

of CAR stories after seminar
n Data are obtained and calculations made
for stories
n When releasing the story, the data are
published on the website
n CAR is a regular item at editorial briefings

Regional solo stories

”The senior executives of the municipalities get
the best wage advances. Since 1998, their
wage advances have been twice the size of
that of regular clerical workers.”

Health politics
n Danish

hospitals do not comply with
government’s electoral pledges of
waiting lists of no more than two
months. According to calculations
made from data from the Danish
Ministry of Health, the average
hospital waiting list is of at least
ten weeks for more than 50% of all
types of surgeries.
The Danish News Agency /ritzau/ 2 June 2002

www.venteinfo.dk

The website of the Danish Ministry of Health
containing information on waiting lists for
surgery at Danish hospitals.

Biker crime
n

According to Ritzau’s calculations made on
the basis of data received from the Danish
Police Forces, Randers is the most
afflicted police district in Denmark when
it comes to crimes committed by bikers.
When compared to population, twice as many
unravelled biker crimes are committed
within this police district as opposed to
the rest of the country.
The Danish News Agency /ritzau/ 27 September 2002

”Bikers ravage the Southern part of Denmark”

Level of security in the
Copenhagen area

Danish Broadcasting
Corporation Copenhagen

Standard of living

Police officers take part in politics
A very large number
of police officers take
part in politics – local,
regional or national.
Compared to the total
amount of employees
in the police they are
more active than the
typical part-timepoliticians – the
teachers and farmers.
Fagbladet 30. april
2003

New types of data form the basis of new stories

“An attempt of securing a school road had the
opposite effect – an increasing number of
heavy vehicles especially during morning traffic
when the children are on their way to school”.

Accessible health data
n According to data from the Patient

Insurance Association, since 1998 the
mistakes of obstetricians and midwives
have caused compensation of more
than DKK 50 mio. to be paid to children,
who were injured during birth.
Dagens Medicin 24 October 2002

The authorities do speak

New
perspectives
Information on former members
of the trade union for
professional journalists were
compared with information on
diseased Danes from the
authorities’ registers. We
asked: ”How many former
journalists had died, when and
from what?”
Result: Journalists live for just
as long as other occupational
groups.

