A CAR Software Sampler:
Boxplots, Crosstabs, Maps, Data Warehouses and the Internet
Your guide: George Landau of the SL Loub Post-Dbpatch (314-340-8296,glandau@pd.stlnet.com)

This session is meant to be a casual and cursory romp through a variety of software tools that can make
computer-assisted reporting more effective, in terms of both data analysis and distribution.

SPSS 7.0:
Version 7.0 of the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) is an awesome tool for data analysis. You don't have to
know hard core statistics to make use of its elegant tools for exploring your data. The tools include easy-to-generate boxplots, histograms
and crosstabs. If you happen to know some statistics, you can also easily perform regressions. AH of these tools allow you to see the
trends in your data and look for relationships among variables. SPSS also excels at recoding numerical data into ranges for easier analysis.
Venion 7, which runs only under Windows 95 or NT, represents a major upgrade from prior SPSS versions. This one has an excellent
interface for quickly reviewing the results of your exploration and an unsurpassed pivot table feature for playing with crosstabs. Because
SPSS works only with flat files, you'll still need Access, Approach or FoxPro to join relational data into a single table for analysis (SPSS
can open and save data in dBASE and Excel formats.)

AGERANGE ' RACE Crosstabulation
% within RACE

I
~ t i t K a ~ t i t cnlla

I

mid adul
older ad
young ad
Total

RACE
I3

1Y.lU/o I

19.1%
50.0%
11.8%
100.0%

W

II

Total
5.yU/o

5.ZU/o I
26.5%
58.6%
9.8%
100.0%

26.0%
58.1%
9.9%
100.0%

Histogram
For RACE= I3
20 T
100'
80 '

eu'
40 '

20 '

Std. Dev = 2561
Mean =St7
N-llam
0.0 10.0 20.0 30.0 40.0 50.0 60.0 70.0 80.0 90.0
5.0 15.0 25.0 35.0 45.0 55.0 €5.0 750 85.0

AGEUNITS

:

II.

RACE

*T
110
8

w

1041

Sample crosstab, histogram and boxplot

Atlas GIs 3.01 :
GIs stands for Geographic Information System, and Atlas GIs is one of +AVO poplular software packages that allow you to map
your data on a PC. 'The other is MapInfo. Both products have similar features, allowing you to make thematic maps that assign colon to
geographic areas based on the data you're mapping. For example, if you had a computerized map of census tncts for your city and you
linked those tracts to some census data, you could assign various colon to indicate the median household income in each tract. Beats
using crayons. f i e other big chore for which you can use a GIs is geocoding, in which you take a database that contains addresses and
assign precise latitude and longitude coordinates for each address that the software can match against its street database. This is handy if
you want to pin map, say, burglaries, or if you want to view all the vehicle registrations within a certain political ward or neighborhood.
(Sample map on next page)

State Boundaries
Braincancen

rmple mapfrom Atlas GZS showing geocoded addresses of brain cancer deaths in the St. Louis region
The fate of Atlas G I s is uncertain, although it may do quite well under its new owners. The company that created it. Strategic Mapping
Inc., was recently bought and dismantled by Claritas, the market research company. The Atlas G I s product \\.as sold to ESRI. the
company that makes ArcInfo. ArcInfo is the king of the GIs realm - it's what the Census Bureau and US Geologic Survey use - but
it's regarded as a hard-core product mainly for the Unix platform (too expensive and complex for us journalists). The hope is that ESRI
will develop and market Atlas GIs as an ever more-powerful and easy-to-use mapping product. Keep your fingers crossed and watch for
the 32-bit version (Version 3.01 runs under Win 95 and NT, but the code is still 16-bit).

Microsoft SQL Server + Internet Information Server +
Internet Database Connector (+ Windows NT Server):
The combination of these four products - a clientkerver database, a Web server, a gateway between the nvo, all running only
under Windows NT - provides a powerful, secure and surprisingly easy way to build a CAR data warehouse. You can store all of your
databases safely on one server, making that data available for routine queries through a web browser and for fancier analysis through any
database manager that supports ODBC (stands for Open DataBase Connectivity; Access, Approach and FoxPro 3.0 all have it).
You can build this whole setup for around $5,000, including hardware and software. The Microsofr Web server (called Internet
Information Server, or 11s) and Internet Database Connector can be downloaded free from Microsoft's web site. but run only under the
Windows NT 3.51 operating system. The NT operating system will set you back around $800 with a bunch of client licenses, and the SQL
Server (version 6.5 is the current one) should cost about $1,000 with enough licenses to support several simultaneous connections.
NT Server looks and feels like Windows 3.1 (a Windows 95 interface is due soon in NT 4.0), but it's fully 32-bit and extremely
stable. It differs from NT Workstation in that it allows you to run services that become shared resources on !our nehvork. One of those
services can be SQL Server, which is just a clientkerver version of a relational database like Access or FoxPro. The idea behind
clientkerver is that the client (working at a desktop PC or laptop) connects to the server over the network. You can connect using
Microsoft Access or with tools included with SQL Server. When you submit a query to select or modify the data just tile SOL command
is transmitted over the network to the server. The server executes the command locally, reading the data from its speedy hard drives, and
returns only the result set to you, the client. This is radically different from using a database on a lowlyjilesen.er. in which case your
software has to read the entire table (or index, or part of a table) over the slow, congested nehvork.
If you keep your databases in SQL Server, you or your colleagues can do quick, fancy analysis from a relatively poky desktop
PC, since the real work gets done on the server. And you can share them over the Web by designing HTML forms that invoke
Microsoft's Internet Database Connector. With this tool, you design a form that passes variables to a canned SQL query, which connects
to SQL Server, retrieves the requested data, and formats the results as an HTML document, to your specifications. For this to work, you
need to be running.Microsoft's Web server on your NT server (it just runs as another service, like SQL Sewer).

To learn more about NT Server and the Web server and SQL server than run on it, check out Microsoft's NT web
site at http://~vww.microsoft.com/NTServer.

