Grantor

Legal Description

Grantee
\

526 PROPERTY AND TAX RECORC
Allen Pusey, Dallas Morning News

Signee

\

Providence 96

Acreage
Financing
Lender

VolumelPage Location
Date of Filing

The 1-30 Property Research System
Assign a single 3 X 5 card to each transaction.
Place the name of the grantor (seller) in the upper left hand corner.
Place the name of the grantee (buyer) in the upper right corner.
In the lower left corner, print the legal description (lot and block, abstract, etc.), Just enough
to be able to distinguish one piece of property from another.
In the lower right corner, write the location of the deed record and the date of filing. Place
beside it some designation describing the TYPE of record ("WD"for warranty deed, "DT"
for deed of trust, whatever).
In the center, note any other kinds of information about the size of the property, the amount
of the transaction, the name of the lender.
Note signatures with slashes (/ 1) on either side of the name. That distinguishes the signee
from the legal names in the transaction.
Compare real estate prices on the basis of dollars per square feet. Use the equation:
Price per square foot = Price / (acreage x 43,560 sq ft)

Hints On Property Searches
1. Use 3" x 5 " file cards for each transaction. They are portable. They'll fit in your pocket.
They can be collated quite easily. They can be used for data entry. In short, they are a lot
easier to use than computers or notebooks.
2. Take the time to learn the standard forms and procedures for property transactions . Know the
difference, say, between a warranty deed and a deed of trust.

3. Start with what you know. If you know the name of the owner, start with that. If you only
know the address of the property, look at tax records. That will give you a name to start with.
4. Be orderly. Title chains can turn complex pretty quickly. If you don't know where you're
going, you can get lost pretty fast.

5. Read original documents. Don't try to put together a chain of title fiom an index, no matter
how complete it seems to be. An index is NEVER complete, nor is it a legal document. The
story is almost always in the detail.
6. Pay close attention to signatures on a document. For many kinds of real estate transactions,
everybody involved (not just a corporate officer) has to sign. Even the position of the
signatures will give you a clue as to the structure of the deal.
7. Look at the notarizations. It will tell you in what county and state the document was signed.
That may help you to identi6 andor locate involved parties.
8. Note where the completed document was mailed. Sometimes there are surprises.

9. Read the boiler plate stuff, as well as the fill-ins. Often, particularly with the benefit of
computer-generated forms, critical information - buy-back agreements, hold-harmless
clauses, etc. - are contained in the small print.
10.Search for the extra transaction before and after any "hit." The property may have been
purchased fiom someone of interest to you, or it may have been sold. Either way, you need to
know.
11.If you find liens on property, for back taxes or contract work or court judgments, be sure to
look for releases. It can save you some embarrassment.
12.Make friends with title company employees. They sometimes have access to information not
generally available to the public (contracts of sale, appraisals, etc.). More important, they can
help you translate the sometimes contradictory paper work you come across.
13.Know the property you're dealing with. Make a visit. You don't have to be a real estate
appraiser to know that 60-foot high tension wire towers or a nearby landfill do not enhance
values.

Property Records Glossary
Business Types:
Sole Proprietorship - An unincorporated business individually owned and, usually, individually operated.
Corporation - A state-chartered entity whose existence recognized, under the law, as separate from its
ownership. A corporation (through its directors and officers) can make its own contracts, purcllase its own
property, assume its own debts.
Partnership - A relationship between two or more owners, whose interests are defined by contract.

-

Limited Partnership A partnership consisting of two classes of partners: 1) limited partners. whose
interests and risks are defined and limited by contract, and 2) general partners, who have defined
ownership interest, but also voting and management powers.
Joint Venture - A partnership in which all interests are contractually defined, but each partner is liable
("jointly and severally") for all the partnership's debts.
Non-Profit Corporation - A corporation formed for some public purpose, owned by the public and
usually regulated by the state attorney general..

Document Types:
Deed o r Warranty Deed - A legal instrument conferring title to real property from one owner to another.
Filed by law in the county where the property resides.
Deed of Trust - A legal instrument assigning provisional ownership of real property to a lender. Filed by
law in the county where the property resides.
Special Warranty Deed (sometimes with Vendor's Lien) - A transfer of real property ownership, usually
by some means other than sale (exchange, option, etc.). Usually refers to some other document or
transaction (e.g. will, probate judgment, exchange deed).
UCC - A federal declaration of lien interest in personal property (office furnishings, boats, cars,
computers, manufacturing equipment, etc.). Filed by lenders under the Uniform Commercial Code with the
secretary of state or at the county where the property resides.
Assignment of Rents - A legal instrument assigning to a lender, or lenders, rents collected on commercial
property.
Abstract of Judgment - A declaration of financial interest filed against real or personal property as the
result of an adjudicated legal claim. Cites the cause number, date, and county where the judgment was
taken.
Release of Lien - A statement releasing a mortgage interest in a piece of property, usually because a loan
has been paid or transferred.
Transfer of Lien - Exactly that.

Agencies/Filings/Sources You Might Overlook
State Banking Board/Commissions - Regulate state-chartered institutions. Their regulation cwerlaps
federal deposit regulation, but often a good source for ownershiplcharter information.
State Securities Board/Commission - Companies deemed too small for oversight by the Securities and
Exchange Commission are often regulated by state boards.
State Insurance Board/Commission - Insurance companies, even if they are national companies, are
usually regulated (however poorly) by the individual states. Most states, despite poor enforcement, do
require significant disclosure concerning investments and assets. These are usually found in the company's
annual report.
State Public Utility Board/Commission - If the company is involved in any regulated facet of the utility
industry, chances are it has been required to file extensive information about itself to the state utility
board/commission.
Secretary of Statelstate Corporation Commission - Has basic charter and ownership information about
corporate organizations. Records also include limited partnerships, trademarks and trade names. A good
first stop.
HUD Regional Offices - Banks, savings and loans, and real estate mortgage operations often apply for
HUD coinsurance programs. These programs require modest amounts of disclosure. Recipients of these
programs (HUD coinsurance, Mod Rehab, etc.) are required to disclose ownership. This is a good source
for slum ownership.
UCC Filings - Mortgaged personal property (which includes ofice furnishings, boats, cars, computers,
etc.) are filed by lenders to protect their interest under the Uniform Commercial Code. They are filed in the
countylparish where the property is held, or in the state capital. These are clumsy filings that are, however,
sometimes rich in detail.
County ClerWRecorders - Usually cany multiple business filings which include: assumed (business)
names; propertylmechanicltax liens; partnerships; powers of attorney; deeds of all kinds; marriage licenses;
military discharges (diminishing in value).
DistrictIState Court Clerk - Always check lawsuits, divorce actions, injunctions, etc. Be sure, as well, to
check criminal records (misdemeanorlfelony)just for the heck of it. Businesses get sued all the time. Often
the suits don't mean anything. But often enough...
Post Office - If a post office box is being used for a business, you can get access to the name and address
of the person(s) who rented the box. Be prepared to show evidence that the box is being used in some
public manner.
Public Contracts - Depending on nature of business, check various political entities (cities, counties, state,
and federal) for any contracts for goods or services. Even bid proposals must include background
information about the company. Don't forget such political entities as Municipal Utility Districts, Road
Improvement Districts or other political entities that utilize tax-funded bonds. Ask for performance and
fmancial audits. They happen all the time. You can fmd the names of special tax districts from your...
Tax Office - Taxes must be collected for public entities. Tax districts have the names of those entities, as
well as valuations for properties (both real and personal).
Competitors - It's a dog-eat-dog world.

