537 OIL SPILLS AND LAX REGULATION

Eric Nalder, Malcom Spaulding and
Tom Mooney
Providence 96

THE IBIDCK&.
PIIBE O@THE WATEIB

Phone: (206) 464-2056
Email: enal-new@seatimes.com

"No machine has ever possessed the incredible mass, momentum, and physics of a modern oil tanker, and
few other machines are capable of such environmental damage.
Like clockwork a crude-laden colossus sails half-hourly into an American port. Worldwide, there are
billions of gallons of oil afloat on the oceans: water and oil -- two incompatible fluids separated by a membrane of
steel. Mathematicians say the ode-on likeliest sites for the next major American spill are the waters around the
common tanker destinations: New York, Philadelphia, Houston, Long Beach, San Francisco Bay, or the Strait of
Juan de Fuca. But don't count on it. Computers have never found a pattern to the tanker disaster, just a guarantee
that another one will plague us before the year has passed ....
A world that guzzles thirty thousand gallons of oil a second makes no peace with any shoreline."
-- Tankers Full of Trouble, Grove Press, 1994

THE PLAYERS:
International treaties are drafted and approved by The INTERNATIONAL MARITIME
ORGANIZATION (IMO), based in London. This is considered by some to be a toothless
organization, heavily influenced by shipowners. It sets the rules, but enforcement is left
to national governments and -- more importantly -- to non-profit owner-operated
organizations known as classification societies.
Contact: Roger Kohn, public relations. Phone: 01 1-44-17 1-735-7611
The U.S. COAST GUARD is the primary enforcement organization in the U.S. Most
ship safety, inspection and enforcement duties fall to The OFFICE OF MARINE
SAFETY . The operating officer is the CAPTAIN OF THE PORT. The regional OMS
and the captain of the port should be your first contact. Look them up in the phone book
under U.S. Coast Guard. Some say the primary weakness of the Coast Guard is the fact
that uniformed personnel change jobs every three years. Other than a few civilians, there
is almost no institutional memory. The U.S.C.G. is widely regarded as one of the most
enthusiastic enforcement agencies in the maritime world, and in some cases it has done a

M

m

good job of analyzing the industry, but it suffers from a shortage of merchant marine
experience. The Coast Guard has a database, MSIS, which has fairly detailed historic and
inspection information on individual vessels (U.S. and foreign-flagged).
Contact: Public affairs at headquarters (try your local office first) Phone:
(202) 267-0932
Contact: Admiral Robert Kramek, commandant. Phone: (202) 267-2380
Contact: National Strike Force Coordination Center, headquartered in Elizabeth City,
N.C. Phone: 1-800-424-8802,1-202-267-2675, 1-919-33 1-6000
Contact: Daniel Sheehan, director, National Pollution Fund Center, very knowledgeable
and experienced civilian. Phone: (703) 235-4700
Look beyond the OIL COMPANIES when you are hunting for the entity to blame for an
oil spill. FIFTEEN OIL COMPANIES own only 198 tankers worldwide, which
represents only six percent of the total. Twenty years ago, it was 19 percent. Fifty-five
governments own 900 tankers. The remainder -- about 2,300 -- are owned by 450
independent tanker owners. But don't forget to look at the oil companies, even if they
don't own the ship. OIL COMPANIES, OIL TRADERS AND GOVERNMENTS hire
the majority of tanker CHARTERS. Chartering contracts vary. Some companies require
safety standards when they charter, others look the other way. When you are writing
about a spill, check into the charter contract and find out who owns the oil. However,
keep in mind, U.S. law specifically says the person responsible for a spill is the registered
OWNER of a ship. Oil companies do not own ships in part because of that requirement
The oil companies that aperate tankers are represented by the OIL COMPANIES
INTERNATIONAL MARINE FORUM in London.
Contact: OCIMF Phone: 01 1-44-171-828-7696
INDEPENDENT TANKER OPERATORS own the majority of the world's tankers
(2,300 out of the 3,500 tankers that are larger than 10,000 dwt). As the name implies,
they are an independent lot and don't like interference. Their off~cesare in England,
Greece, Hong Kong, Singapore, the U.S., Denmark, Norway. Some own one tanker and
have been in business one year. Some own 50 tankers and have been in business 150
years. An independent guide to ownership (with ratings for quality) is kept by Arthur
McKenzie at the Tanker Advisory Center, (212) 628-7686. He is not associated with any
tanker owners. The independent tanker operators are represented by INTERTANKO ,
Contact : Dagfim Lunde managing director of INTERTANKO. Phone: 0 11-47-22 12 26
40 fax is: 41 Press Person: Sibyl Gosselin
Intertanko; P.O. Box 75 18, Skillebekk N-02705 Oslo, Norway
CLASSIFICATION SOCIETIES range in stature from top-rank outfits like the
American Bureau of Shipping and Det Norske Veritas down to what one Coast Guard
admiral called "tinkertoy" organizations. They are non-profit organizations, but in many
countries they are the only agencies that inspect ships. The primary job of a classification
society is to designate ships in "class". That means they virtually certify them. The
society will inspect the vessel, examine its blueprints and keep track of its history. If a
ship is not in class, it will not likely be chartered. However, classification societies are

entirely financed by, and run by, the shipowners. They compete for business. One way
to attract new customers is by offering less stringent inspections and easier rules. Check
out the classification of your battered ship. If a ship has switched classification societies,
from a relatively good one to a bad one, it is indeed a bad sign.
Contact: ABS: Frank Iarossi (formerly with Exxon), president. spokesman: Thomas
Tucker Phone: (212) 839-5153.
Contact: Det Norske Veritas, 70 Grand Avenue, River Edge, New Jersey 0766 1,
Phone: 20 1-343-0800
The MARITIME UNIONS are often described as weak and disorganized. Many
companies like Arco and Exxon have their own company unions; one for the officers and
another for the crew. When an accident occurs, however, you should contact the unions
because they can quickly put you in touch with crew members. Keep in mind that if you
are writing about a U.S. flagged ship, the crew will (by law) be composed of U.S.
citizens, who are registered by the Coast Guard (registration documents are available on
request). If you are dealing with a foreign-flagged ship, you may have crew members
from a variety of nationalities.
Most ships have licensed crew members, who are officers, and unlicensed crew members,
who include able-bodied seamen and enginemen . The crew is also divided into the deck
crew (which includes the officers and unlicensed crew members who navigate the vessel
and take care of the cargo) and the engineroom operators
Contact: Kenneth Palankas ,assistant to the president, National Maritime Union, 30
Montgomery, Jersey City, N.J. 07302 . Phones: (210) 332-7070.
Contact: Seafarers International Union of North America,
Phones:
Contact: MEBA Dist 1 (Marine Engineers Beneficial Association) (Officers and
Engineers) ,444 N Capitol St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20001-15 12 Phone:
(202) 638-5355
Contact: Masters, Mates and Pilots Union (deck and engine officers, as well as pilots)
(affiliate of International Transport Workers Federation). President Timothy A. Brown.
Secretary-Treasurer, James T. Hopkins, Jr. Headquarters: 700 Maritime Blvd. Linthicum
Heights, Md. 2 1090-1941. Phone: (4 10) 850-0973.
Contact: International Transport Workers Federation. ITF House, 49-60 Brough Road,
London, SEl IDS, England. General Secretary David Cockroft. Phone: 0 11 44 171 403
2733
FLAG STATES are countries that register ships. Maritime nations like Sweden, Norway,
Denmark, U.K and the U.S. were at one time dominant. However, a number of countries
have offered their flags for a price, and it has been convenient and profitable for owners
to use them because their regulations are more lax and the taxes are lower. Of the 3,400
tankers in the world, 1,900 are registered with flag-of- convenience ("open registry")
countries. Some open registry countries (Liberia and Bahamas) do a better job of
inspecting and controlling their fleets than others, and as a result their loss statistics are
commendable. Some of the others, like Cyprus and Malta have dismal loss records, and
do not pay the same amount of attention to safety. By the way -- don't look for the
Liberian registry office in Monrovia, Liberia.. Try Reston, Va.. And do give them a try,

because the Liberian registry office has some pretty good accident reports and some folks
who are outspoken..
Contact: Liberian Services Inc., Reston International Center, Reston, Va. 22091
Phone: (703) 620-4880 (International Registries) extension 3 16 is the chief of
inspections, or (703) 620-4766
TRADERS (there are 160 in the world) are companies that trade oil and charter ships.
They often do not take delivery of the oil; they simply buy it by the shipload and hope to
sell it promptly for a slight profit. It is a tight world; everybody knows everybody else .
The big ones include Japanese companies like Mitsui and Mitsubishi, and Sanyo. They
range downward in size to wealthy individuals. Some care about safety, some do not.
THE WATCHDOGS: Probably the best contact is Arthur McKenzie, of New York, who
has been in the tanker business 61 years, starting with Exxon in 1934. He publishes each
year The Guide for the Selection of Tankers, wherein he shows the casualties that each
tanker has had, and the demographics of each ship (age, who has chartered it during the
past five years, size, etc.). In addition, he rates each ship. The price of the book is $650,
but he has been known to help newspaper reporters for free.
Environmental organizations have not paid much attention to tanker or barge safety.
Some information is available fiom the Water and Coastal Program, Natural Resources
Defense Council in New York.
Contact: Arthur McKenzie, Tanker Advisory Center, 10 East End Avenue, New York,
N.Y. 10021. Phone: (212) 628-7686
Contact: William 0. Gray, Gray Maritime. Excellent source with a bias in favor of the
tanker owners. Consultant for Intertanko. Gray Maritime Co., P.O. Box 1691,43 Cedar
Gate Road, Darien, Ct. 06822. Phone: (203) 655-1778.
Contact: Walter Parker, former chairman of Alaska Oil Spill Commission, (907) 3335 189.
Contact: Sarah Chasis or Peter Lehner, Natural Resources Defense Council, 40 W 20th
St. New York, N.Y., 10011.
The NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL in Washington D.C. has done a number of
studies on ship safety and oil spills.
Contact : Charles Bookman, director of NRC marine board. Phone: (202) 334-3 119
CLEANUP TECHNOLOGY AND COSTS: The Coast Guard's national strike force
keeps track of cleanup equipment, and techniques. Tanker operators are supposed to have
a plan on board each ship prescribing the immediate response to any spill (including the
people to call). Each port is required to have a plan as well. You can obtain these by
FOIA. The people who provide equipment and expertise for major cleanups will come, in
the first wave, from two types of industry-financed cleanup organizations. One is the
local cleanup consortium and the other is the nearest representative of the national
Marine Spill Response Corporation (MSRC). Overseeing any major cleanup will be a
Coast Guard on-scene coordinator and, supposedly, someone representing the spiller.

Various cleanup experts are also located at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) office in Seattle, and at various universities.
Contact: National Strike Force Coordination Center (see Coast Guard above)
Contact: Merv Fingas, chief of emergency science division, Environment Canada.
Ottawa, Canada. Phone: (613) 998-9622
Contact: Gene Johnson, president of the Association of Petroleum Industry Coop
Managers (cleanup consortiurns). He is with the Delaware Bay and River Cooperative,
Lewes, Delaware 19958-0624. Phone: (302) 645-7861
Contact: Elliot Hurwitz, public affairs, National Ocean Service (NOAA). Phone (301)
7 13-3066.
Contact: Jerry Galt, NOAA Seattle, (oil spill trajectories and general information). Phone:
(206) 526-6323.
Contact: Dave Kennedy, director of hazardous materials response and assessment
division, NOAA, Seattle (general information). Phone: (206) 526-6464..
PILOTS: Harbor pilots guide ships into ports, and are often a factor in accidents. Your
first contact would be the office of your local pilots' association. You might also check
on the regulatory agency in your state that oversees the pilots. Oversight is spotty, but
you will have no trouble, at the local level, finding outspoken and very knowledge pilots.
Contact: Capt. Jack Sparks, president of American Pilot' Association, Washington D.C..
Phone: (202) 484-0700.
ESCORTS: Tug escorts are required in some U.S. waterways. Two big companies are
Foss Maritime and Crowley Maritime.
VESSEL TRAFFIC SYSTEMS: Some U.S. ports have Coast Guard-operated vessel
traffic systems (VTS), which are the rough (very rough) equivalent of air traffic control
systems. Radars keep track of the ships, and operators sitting at computer screens advise
ships about the traffic around them. Notice I used the word "advise". VTS operators do
not "control" ships the way air traffic controllers control airplanes. They advise the ship
operators. Ship captains are notorious for their reluctance to take directions from anyone
on shore. By the same token, you should in your examination of any oil spill look at the
system -- or lack of system -- of traffic control in the area where the spill occurred. Ports
differ a great deal in their safety standards. U.S. ports are notorious for poor enforcement
of traffic standards, and for poor traffic control systems.
MARINE SURVEYORS: Independent consultants who inspect ships. Look in the yellow
pages under Surveyors-Marine' '.
"

MARINE INSURERS: The major companies located in New York and London. Their
lawyers are sometimes quite knowledgeable.
PUBLICATIONS: Tradewinds (English language publication from Oslo, Norway); Oil
Spill Intelligence Report; Marine Log; Marine Safety Newsletter (Editor: Cheryl
Robinson, published by USCG Marine Safety and Environmental Protection Directorate;

(703) 235-1604); Tanker Register (very expensive but very detailed. published by Lloyds
Press in London; Lloyd's Maritime Information Service is at 203-359-8383); The Guide
for the Selection of Tankers (see McKenzie under watchdogs category above).

...........................

GENERAL INFORMATION ON TANKERS AND BARGES
1 barrel of oil equals 42 gallon
1 ton of oil equals 7.4 barrels (if it is crude oil ...varies with the density)
A tanker's size is usually expressed in deadweight tons, which is essentially the amount
of oil it can carry, in tons, fully loaded. The largest tanker in world is the Jahre Viking,
which is 565,000 deadweights (the forward deck covers seven acres).
Double hulls were mandated for ships visiting the U.S. under the Oil Pollution Act of
1990 (OPA 90) but the schedule gives owners many years to comply. The requirement is
generally based on the age of the vessel. The International Maritime Organization has
international requirements as well, also based on a fairly lengthy schedule. A ship with a
double hull will have an outer skin of steel, a void space, and another skin of steel
between the oil cargo and the sea. The void space might be six to ten feet wide.
Some tankers have segregated ballast tanks (tanks that are empty when the ship is
carrying oil and filled with water when the tanker is empty). The segregated ballast tanks
are located outside some cargo tanks to protect them from breaching.
Double hulls do not prevent all spills. The Exxon Valdez would have spilled oil with or
without a double hull. In most collisions, the impact will be great enough to breach the
double hull.
Not all tankers have double hulls. Many barges are single-hulled.
Some barges are 450 feet long and carry millions of gallons of oil. The tugs that power
them are poorly often manned, and -- compared to the better tankers -- the safety
standards and equipment are minimal. Varies with the operator. Regulation is spotty.
Tankers and barges do explode. They are most vulnerable to fire and explosion when the
tanks are empty, containing fumes rather than oil. To prevent explosions, the exhaust
h e s from the tanker's engine are cooled and pumped into the sealed, empty tank s to
displace the oxygen. This inert gas greatly lowers the chance of explosion, but it does not
eliminate the possibility altogether. The machinery that cools and cleanses the exhaust
fumes, and then pumps them into the tanks, is known as the Inert Gas System (IGS). All
large tankers today are required to have IGS, but some small tankers do not. Barges do
not have IGS systems, either (though it would be easy to equip them with inert gas
generators) . Barges are more dangerous to work on because of the lack of IGS. Tank

barges frequently operate with open tanks. That means crew members must work around
noxious fumes.
Tanker operators are not required to pump inert gas into the void space of a double hull,
and many are not doing so. Some experts believe this poses a great danger in the future
where fumes will leak into the void space and a spark will cause an explosion.
Tanker operators have been known, for expedience, to turn off IGS systems. Tanks have
also been known to explode, even when it was they were inerted.
Cargos vary. A tanker or barge might be carrying crude oil or some kind of refined
product (i.e. refined gasoline, diesel, bunker fuel, jet fuel, etc.) Some tankers are
designed to carry oil on one voyage and bulk cargo (grains, steel pellets, etc.) on another.
The effects on the environment will differ with different oil products Keep in mind that
crude oil contains all the usual distillates, so when crude oil spills it is the worst of all
possibilities. The characteristics of crude oil will vary depending on where it was
obtained. Crude oil from Norway is relatively light, and when it spills it is more likely to
disperse in the ocean than heavier crude oil from Indonesia and Alaska. Some of the
heaviest stuff, bitumen, must be carried in ships that have heated tanks because the stuff
would become too thick if it cooled in the tanks.

GENERAL INFORMATION ON CLEANUP TECHNOLOGY:
Skimmers are machines, on a floating platform, that scoop up oil. The most common ones
use an absorbent surface that oil will sticks to. As the oil is pulled aboard, it is scraped
off. Another type uses a weir to collect the oil and water. The water is then pumped
away. Skimmers are the most popular tool for removing oil from the water surface.
Skimmers vary, however. The one that is designed for heavy oil and heavy seas won't
work well in calm harbors with light oil.
Dispersants are chemicals, similar to soap or shampoo, that convert an oil sheen into
small droplets (which will float or sink). These chemicals are less popular now. The only
country in the western world that uses them to any great degree is Great Britain. The
problem is public acceptance and effectiveness. To some, using dispersants is simply
sweeping the problem under the rug. And on heavy oil, they are virtually ineffective.
Another method is to burn the oil on the water, or in some cases (in the Arctic) on the ice.
A big advantage with burning is that the cleanup crews don't have to dispose of the oil
and oil-cleanup wastes. It is frequently the only way to attack a spill in areas where there
is ice. A disadvantage, however, is the fact that you must get at the spill quickly. The oil
must be a minimum thickness to burn.. And to keep it the right thickness, you must
contain it with fire proof boom. Another problem, of course, is the possibility of
blowing up the ship. And yet another problem is air pollution, though studies have

indicated it is not as great a problem as once believed. "In situ burning" is being used
today in Canada, Sweden, Norway, Russia and Alaska..
A shoreline cleanup is still largely done by hand, however better techniques are being
developed for flushing with pumps and hoses without doing the environmental damage
such techniques caused in Prince William Sound. There are biological agents that can
basically eat the oil, but it takes a long time and you are left with the heavier parts of the
oil still in place. The natural action of the ocean is capable of cleaning up a spill much
faster than once thought (one example is the Shetland spill).
There are a variety of other chemical agents that have been tried or experimented with,
but they have all experienced problems. Elasticizers, for instance, convert the oil to a
material similar to Seran wrap. But the stuff gums up the machinery that is used to pick it
up. Solidifiers can make the oil into a solid material. But why do that? It is harder to pick
up than a liquid.
You have to keep in mind, as well, that oceans and waterways vary. If a tanker crashes
in cold Arctic waters the oil will act differently than it does in the warm Persian Gulf. Oil
spilled in the middle of the ocean might not be noticed for weeks, until it drifts to shore.
Recently, Environment Canada analyzed oil found on Vancouver Island and found that it
was identical to oil found in California. Scientists believe it was oil six months earlier in
the area of Singapore or Indonesia. Some marine environments are more sensitive to oil
damage than others. Dispersants might help in some places and do great harm in others.
Some oil spills are noticed simply because they occur in a place the media cares about
(Example: a disaster in Alaska got much more attention than one on the east coast of
Africa). Spills happen regularly. News reporting on spills is spotty.
No matter what cleanup technology is employed, the chances of recovering more than a
small percentage of a spill are slim. Of the world's largest off-shore spills for the past 20
years ,the at -sea recovery rate has averaged 10 percent. The greatest amount ever
recovered was about 50 percent (the Argo Merchant was zero). At the same time, about
30 to 40 percent of any crude oil spill will evaporate, and about 20 percent will be
dispersed into the ocean. The rest will eventually up on somebody's shoreline.
Cleanup technology does not advance rapidly. Money flows after well-publicized spills
and then dries up.
CONCLUSION:
An accident is usually caused by a series of mistakes, a "cascade of errors.". To
understand the cause of an accident, you must examine related events . And that doesn't
mean you only look at the immediate events. A decision made in London ten years ago
will affect the actions a sea captain guiding a vessel into the Strait of Juan de Fuca. today.
Accidents are the result of a system . . . the failure of a system. To understand the system,
you must comprehend the conduct of politicians and lawmakers, regulators, diplomats,

ship designers, oil breders, ship owners, VTS operators, pilots, tug escort captains,ship
masters, mates, deck CrCwmen, chief engineers, engine officers, crgkmen and the
COwho buy oil.
Human enor is the most fitqumtly-cited msm for tanker and barge accidents and spills.
But what does that mean? We should ask more questions: Who was in charge of the
humans who made the enors? Who was q p o s d to regulate them? How were they
trained? What kind of equipment were they workiag with? What kind of prearsures were
they operrrting under? Were they restad? Were they stressed? Were they getting along
with each otber, aad did they speak the same l8nguag~?

