559 CONCEPTUALIZING THE STORY
Dennis Cauchon, Dean Starkman,
Eric Nalder

Providence 96

L O O S E N I N G

L I P S

The Art of the Interview
Eric Nalder
Seattle Times
(206) 464-2056

THE SET UP
RESEARCH: The best questions are informed questions. Whether you have
five hours or five days, gather clippings and court records and talk to
the subject's cohorts.
TACTICS: Make a tactical plan and discuss it with a friend or colleague.
Whenever possible, I interview people close to the action, while they
are doing whatever it is I am writing about. However, whistle-blowers
and reluctant targets are best contacted at home. Take nervous people
for a walk. And if you arrange a lunch appointment you can force a busy
person to spend at least an hour with you.
ORGANIZE: Write single-word clues on the flap of your notebook to remind
you of issues you want to cover. Organize paperwork so you won't fumble
with it as you talk. Begin with softball questions (i.e., a
chronological life history), but prepare a comprehensive all-purpose
question for cases where the door might slam in your face.
INNER INTERVIEWING: As a warm-up (maybe during your morning shower),
imagine a successful interview. Reporters who don't believe they will
get the interview or the information usually fail. As far as I'm
concerned, no one should ever refuse to talk to me. It works.
THE OPENER - - The techniques of "inner interviewingIf continue. Never
approach your subject as though they seem menacing or likely to clam up.
Appear innocent, friendly, unafraid and curious. If you are a hardboiled, cynical reporter who talks out of the side of your mouth, you
will need acting lessons.
PAY ATTENTION TO DETAIL: Inventory the room thoroughly and in an
organized fashion. Look at the walls, read the top of the desk and study
the lapel pin. You'll get clues and details for your story. Make notes
on what you see.
LOOK FOR OTHER SOURCES: While at the interview, meet the secretary and
the other co-workers and make note of details about them. This will come
in handy as you turn them into sources.

RELUCTANT PEOPLE
KEEP IT GOING - - When the door is closing on your face, find common
ground. "By the way, I notice you've got a poodle. I've got a poodle.
.
As a person hangs up the phone, I
Weird dogs. Just the other day
quickly say I only want to explain what I am working on and they should
at least know that. (They usually comment once they hear what I am
doing). On one occasion I inadvertently repeated something that was
inaccurate and a cop dragged out a report I wanted to see just so he
could show me I was wrong. You've got to be quick, sincere, kind and
courteous.

.

."

IT'S NO BIG DEAL - - Respond to the "I can't comment11by saying I1You
don't have to worry. Heck, you are just one of several people I've
talked with. It's no big deal. Here's what I understand about the
situation. Let's talk about this part a little bit
(and then
start talking about the information you want to confirm).11 Notice that
I avoid a debate over the reasons they don't want to talk with me.
You'll lose that debate 9 times out of 10. Keep the conversation
rolling.

....

SYMPATHY - - Respond to the "I'm afraid to comment11with a little
sympathy and a lot of reassurance: "1 understand your concern. These are
tough times for your agency. But a lot of folks talk to me in situations
like this, including people you work with. Let me at least cover a
couple of things with you, it would help me a lot.I1 Give glancing
recognition to their concerns, but try to move right on to the point of
the story.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR OTHER BIG SHOT - - Respond to the "no commentttfrom an
"importantu person or bureaucrat by saying: ItYou know, I feel bad about
just putting a 'no commentf in this story since the readers will think
you are7hiding something. Let's find a way to talk about this. Tell me
about this, for instance
l1

. . .

DOOR NO. 1, OR DOOR NO. 2? - - As a last ditch method with the reluctant
public official or big shot, I say, "Look, whether you talk to me or
not, I'm going to do a story on this. So you can have it one of two
ways: Either I do a fair story that says that you refused to cooperate,
or I do a fair story that has your point of view in it. Now which do you
want?" They usually choose Door No. 2.
DETOURS - - If a person won't talk, go to others in his or her office or
to associates. You will get more information, and by doing this you will
loosen them up.
RATCHETING - - If a subject insists on talking "on b a ~ k g r o u n d ,take
~~
notes anyway. At the end of the interview, pick out a good quote in your
notes that isn't too damning and say: "Now what about this thing you
said here. Why can't you say that on the record?t1If they agree to put
that comment on the record, go to another one in your notes and say:
"Well, if you can say that on the record, why can't you say this? And so
on. I have gotten an entire notebook on the record this way. If they
insist on anonymity, however, you must honor it.

ANONYMITY - - Don't accept information "on backgroundI1 without a fight.
Even if it means going back to them several times, try to convince
people to go on the record. (Absolutely "off-the-record" information is
useless, since you can't use it under any circumstance. Avoid it. It's a
waste of time.)
FOR THE SAKE OF CLARITY - - There are cases where someone tells you part
of a story and then balks, or you already know part of a story and can't
get the rest. Try saying, "look, you've already told me this much (or, I
already know this much). You had better tell me the rest. I mean, you
don't want me to get it wrong, do you? For instance, what about this
(refer to something in your notes)."
part here

...

PLAY LIKE YOU KNOW - - Ask the official WHY he fired the whistle-blower
rather than asking WHETHER he did the deed. The question presumes you
already know even if you don't have it confirmed. They'll start
explaining rather than denying.
THE STATUE OF LIBERTY PLAY - - Emphasize that people are more believable
when they put their name behind what they say. It's the American Way: A
robust public debate.
LOST REPORTER - - It doesn't hurt to say you need the person's
is going to explain this to me if you don't?"

help. "Who

TRY AGAIN - - When the door is slammed in your face, try again a day or
two later. People change their minds.

GETTING ALL THE GOODS
CHRONOLOGY - - Take the subject through his or her story chronologically.
You will understand the tale better, and you will spot gaps in the
timetable and logic.
HOW AND WHY - - When a person says something important, ask the key
question: I1How do you know that?" It sheds light on credibility,
extracts more detail and is a door opener to other sources. Also, ask
people why they do what they do, rather than just asking what they do.
SLOW MOTION - - When people reach the important part of a story, slow
them down so you can get it in technicolor. Ask where they were
standing, what they were doing, what they were wearing, what was the
temperature and what were the noises around them? Then switch to present
tense: "What are you doing now? What is your friend saying?" If your
source starts talking in present tense, you have arrived at the past.
You and the interview subject can re-enter the scene and walk through it
together. If this fails, tell them it is not working. llI'm trying, but I
just can't picture it yet. What did it feel like?" This is how you get a
story, not a bunch of facts.
TELEPHONE - - Ask people on the phone to describe their surroundings (the
plaque on a man's wall became a key detail in one story, after I had

independently verified what it said). Get people to tell their stories
in three dimensions (see the "slow motionl1 advice above).
USE YOUR EARS - - We talk too much during interviews. Let the other
person do the talking. After all, you can't quote yourself. And check
your biases at the door; listen with an open mind.
GETTING THE CONFESSION - - Ask the subject for the names of people who
support him or her. Then ask for the names of people who would
criticize. Then ask what those critics are likely to say. This will jar
loose uncomfortable information and tips. Ask whether the person has
ever been disciplined or fired on the job or in school, charged with or
convicted of a crime, arrested for drunken driving, sued, testified in
court, etc. Since all this stuff is on a record somewhere, people are
reluctant to lie about it.
LIARS - - If you know someone is lying, allow the liar to spin his or her
yarn. Don't interrupt except to ask for more detail. Deceivers
frequently provide extensive detail because they think a very complete
story will add to their credibility. Listen and take good notes. When
the lie has been fully constructed - - down to the last nail - - go back
and logically de-construct it. Don't be impatient. The fabricator is now
in a corner. Keep them there until they break.
LIFE STORY - - Get the life story, even in cases where you don't intend
to use it. Even when I interview a lawyer about a case, or a bureaucrat
about a government policy, I get the life story if I have time. I get
useful information and ask better questions as a result.
DON'T JOIN - - Be sympathetic in manner, but don't join sides with your
interview sources. ~on't get sucked in by the embattled congressman who
seems so cooperative when he grants you an interview and says, "1 don't
believe in taking money from those guys." You should say, "that may be
true, but I'm asking you whether you took the money, not whether you
believe in doing so."
ASK AGAIN - - Sometimes it pays to interview a person two or three times
on the same subject. One public official gave me four different and
conflicting explanations for the trips he took at taxpayer expense.
REVIEW - - Go back over your notes with people. They will fill in gaps
for you, and in doing so give you more information.
INNOVATE - - If an outrageous question comes to mind, ask it, even if it
is terribly personal. There are no embarrassing questions, just
embarrassing answers. Your chisel-like questions should chip away at all
sides of an issue.
DRAIN THEM - - People aren't aware of how much they know. You must lead
them through their memory. Visualize your subject as a bucket full of
information and empty it.
HONESTY - - Don't pretend to be someone else and don't lie. You can
certainly omit information, but the more you can reveal about the nature
of your story, the more comfortable and helpful your subject will be.

BE THE DIRECTOR - - A great interview feels like a conversation but moves
relentlessly toward the information you need. Keep control, but do so
gently.
DON'T BE UNMOVABLE - - You may know what your story is about, but don't
get stuck. A great interview will change your story.
PERSONALITY - - Let your personality shine through (if you have a good
one) Don' t be a blank wall.

.

OPEN-ENDED QUESTION - - Near the end of an interview, ask the person what
else our readers might be interested in. Sometimes people have more than
one newspaper-worthy story in them.
CHECK BACK - - After the story runs, call the subject for his or her
reaction. You'll get additional stories and tips this way.

Eric Nalder
Seattle Times
Phone: (206) 464-2056
Fax: (206) 464-2261
Internet: enal-new@seatimes.com
enever we conduct a newspaper investigation - - whether the
is inspired by a tip, an event or just a suspicion - - we
follow certain steps:

MAKE A TACTICAL PLAN: Once you have some grasp of your subject,
sketch out a plan, even if it is only in your head. Who are you
going to interview and in what order? Sometimes you must catch
certain people quickly before they are scared off. Other times
you must circle them, talking to their friends and associates,
before you get to them. You must also decide where you will
interview people. It is frequently best to talk with them at the
place where they are doing the thing you are writing about. But
sometimes you might want to surprise them at home, where they
are likely to be more candid. Talk over the plan with your
editor and your fellow reporters.
I

CREATE AN ASPECTS LIST: As you are gathering information,
organize the best stuff on a computer. I create a database for
list (for aspects of a
each story that I call an "aspects"
story). The information I put into the aspects list is labeled
by category. For oil tankers, for instance, I set up categories
like "crew training, double hulls, enforcement of rules,
and so on. While I read clippings, examine
engines"
documents and review interview notes, I enter, under the proper
category, any quote, fact or idea that seems useful. To properly
identify each item, I label them with an asterisk followed by a
key word that designates which category it falls under. (i.e.

...

*training for crew training, *double for double hulls and so
on). By using an asterisk, I have created a very handy search
word. I can search very quickly for the entries that relate to
each category of my aspects list. At the end of each entry, I
note where in my paper files or in my database I can find the
original source of the information. An aspects list helps you
better understand your subject, and, more importantly, it is
tremendous guide while you write.

EXAMPLE :
Here is an example from an aspects list on our crime lab story:
*budget, 1. Chief Bjork requested two additional forensic
scientists supervisors and told the Washington State Patrol he
would spend $70,248 in fiscal year 1992 and $150,096 in fy 1993.
His bosses turned him down. (see documents in file B,1)
*budget, *training 2. Training division asked for $173,000 per
fiscal year for training and they got turned down. (b,1,9)
*budget, Things were no better many years ago. Budget in 1977
was $1.5 million, and they were saying they needed at least
$250,000 a year more just for staff, plus an immediate infusion
of $500,000. No luck. (see clips on budget)

CREATE A CHRONOLOGY: On a computer, create a list in
chronological order of the relevant events you learn about as
you are researching your story. Your chronology should include
insignificant as well as significant events because you will be
looking for patterns and for storytelling methods.

Here is an example of a chronology from our recent stories about
an arson-murder suspect and sometime actor named Martin Pang who
dodged the cops and fled to Brazil:
Jan. 5, 1995: Date of the fire. Martin is at Frank Wilson's
apartment when Frank arrives home around 9:45 p.m.. Helping him
move to another unit. Pang has watched a movie that Frank rented
called "Sugar Hill".
Martin is on the phone with someone.
Jan. 6, 1995: Approx. noon. Martin and girlfriend Alaine arrive
at Pang's parents' house on Mercer Island after flying from
California.
Jan. 8 (Sunday), 1995: Martin Pang flies back to California, and
goes to girlfriend's house in Irvine.
Jan. 10 (Tuesday), 1995: Martin Pang drives back to Seattle,
driving all day and all night in a pounding rainstorm. The
federal authorities watch him all the way.

Jan. 12 (Thursday) (early a.m.),, 1995: Martin Pang arrives at
parents' house, and is seen by a neighbor.
Jan. 12-17 (approximately), Police lose track of Pang, even
though he is prime suspect in murder of four firefighters.
Jan. 17
gone.

Pang leaves Seattle on a train. Police don't

know he's

Jan. 20

Police discover from friend of Pang that he is gone.

Jan. 30 Pang buys ticket to Rio de Janeiro. Walks into
Brazilian consulate in L.A. and asks for a visa.

CREATE A LIST OF SOURCES: On a computer, create a single list in
alphabetical order of every source that you come across. Include
the address, office and home telephone number as well as other
relevant information like date of birth, social security number,
job title, expertise, etc. The more people the better. Don't
rule out anybody who might have information that you need. Pick
names from newspaper clippings and documents. Ask everyone you
talk to whether they can think of other people you should
approach. Every time someone says something significant, ask the
question "How do you know that?" because when people answer
that question they often guide you to other sources. Whenever
you start an investigation of a company or an agency, ask for
their phone book. Every organization has one. The phone book is
a handy map to the '*people trail" you must follow to get your
information.
GET GOING: Don't waste time. Don't slow yourself down worrying
that the people in charge of some agency are going to discover
that you are working on the story and that they will shut down
your sources. Your best bet it to get to people quickly.
DO LIBRARY RESEARCH: You will write with greater authority, and
conduct better interviews, if you broadly research your subject.
Don't stop at the clippings you find in your newspaper morgue.
Try the university and government libraries. Look for technical
as well as popular articles. Use databases like Nexus and
Compuserve. Read books.
DO DOCUMENTS RESEARCH: Early on, find out how the agency or
company you are investigating keeps its records. Visit the
records office and ask someone to give you a tour. You need to
understand how the system works. In interviews, ask questions
like: "When something goes wrong in your agency, where do you
write it down?" That will tell you the kinds of documents you
need. Ask the agency whether they conduct audits and, if so, who
does them. Contact the people who do the audits and get to know
them. Quite often they are concerned about the problems they

have discovered in their agency and they will leak information
to you. Check local libraries. Sometimes they keep government
documents on file. And whenever you are walking through a
company, or a government office, make it a point to get to know
the clerks and workers. They can often be your best sources for
documents.
WRITE YOUR REQUESTS EARLY: Write to the government agencies
early in the process and ask for the documents that you need.
(See my handout on public disclosure requests). Then, while the
agency is deciding whether to honor your request, get to know
employees who will leak the documents to you.
BE THERE: If you are writing about train wrecks, go to train
wrecks. If you are writing about crooked cops, hang out with the
cops. It pays to be on the scene. The best interviews are
conducted with the eyes, as well as the voice and ears.
FIND YOUR SOURCES: Sometimes the most important interviews are
with people who are difficult to find. Here are some tips on the
art of "skip tracingr' (finding people): When telephoning the
operator to find a person's number, list several cities as
possibilities rather than one. This will force the operator to
search an entire area code rather than looking in one city. A
lot of computer databases are now available with on-line
information providing all sorts of public records. Consult with
your library or ask advice from a good private investigator. A
handy internet site for nationwide telephone and address
listings is www.switchboard.com. It's free! In interviews with a
person's associates, learn all you can about the target's
habits. If they drink a lot, check the bars near where they
live. If they are an avid skier, inquire at skiing organizations
or ski shops. Use your imagination. I also use birth
certificates (to get names of parents and other relatives),
marriage records, driving records, car licensing records,
professional licensing records, divorce records, real estate
transactions, records on lawsuits and criminal records. Ask your
local public library whether they have a biographical file on
the person. Go to the person's school and ask for the student
annual (this will give you names of schoolmates). Obtain a
telephone company reverse directory and it will give you the
names and addresses of neighbors. These are also available on
line. Other possibilities are property tax records, military
records and, of course, newspaper clippings. While you are
looking for this person, keep detailed and chronological notes
of everything you do on a computer, so you don't get lost
yourself in your search.
PERSIST: Don't give up if you are refused an interview or a
document. Wait a day or two and try again. Then wait a week and
try again. Eventually, you will get what you need.
FOCUS: Decide what the story is. The worst investigative stories
wander all over the map. The reporters have gathered great

stuff, but the reader doesn't
Write clearly with focus.

know it. Don't

confuse the reader.

WRITE WITH AUTHORITY: If you cannot write with authority, then
you are not ready to write. Do some more reporting.

A 12-STEP PROGRAM FOR USING PUBLIC DISLOSURE LAWS
Eric Nalder
Seattle Times
(206) 464-2056

1. Don't be shy about submitting public disclosure
requests, or asking for documents. If you are
curious about something, pursue it. Don't assume you
can't get it.
2. Let the government agency cite the exemptions.
Don't second guess your right to a public document.
My belief is that everything should be available to
me.

3. Find out how a government agency keeps its
records before you request them. Ask questions like:
W h e n someone complains about wrongdoing in your
agency how is that complaint recorded, what is the
name of the document and where is it kept?"

4. It helps to understand how an agency works before
you write your reGest. For example, good questions
include: W h o does your audits, how often are they
done and what is covered in the audits? What other
kinds'of investigations - - besides audits - - does
your agency conduct?"
5. Find out ahead of time the name of the person who
will respond to your public disclosure or FOIA
request. Telephone that person and go over your
request with them before you mail it. Be courteous
and tell that person that you appreciate their
effort to get the information to you quickly. Be as
forthcoming as you can be about the nature of the
story you are working on (but keep in mind that
agencies do try to hide things)

.

6. The written public disclosure request should be
both specific and general at the same time. Ask
first for the specific documents and then request
"any and all other records thatw (mention, pertain
to, would discuss) the subject at hand. It is
frequently better to ask for the information on
computer disc, if the agency stores it that way.
Government agencies are more accustomed now to

releasing information that way. You can then load
the data into a personal comuter and analyze it.

7. Organize your request so that each item is listed
separately. Write the request letter as clearly as
possible. Be sure that you specify the time period
you are covering in your request, and that you give
the agency a good idea of the type of information
you are seeking. Have your editor review the request
for errors before you send it.

8. It's often convenient to ask an agency for
photocopies of documents. However, if you have the
time, getting access to the original files is
better. Combing through an agency's file cabinets
allows you to discover other things, and at the same
time you can chat with the people who keep the
documents.
9. If the agency doesn't respond, regularly
telephone the person handling your request. Be
courteous, but escalate your impatience and firmness
as time goes on. If you don't get what you want,
don't hesitate to telephone the agency head. I
remind government bureaucrats that, as a writer, I
often reflect the response time and the general
attitude of the respondant in my stories.
10. Don't rely on a written request as the sole
method for getting documents. While the public
disclosure requestxor FOIA is winding its way
through an agency, see if you can find a friendly
mole who will simply obtain the stuff you want for
you. Secretaries, clerks and others in lower levels
can b e helpful here.

11. Documents can lie or mislead you, so don't
on them as your only source of information.

rely

12. If you don't get what you want, follow up your
first letter with a second one, and a third one,
etc. A letter from our lawyers can sometimes break
the logjam.

