$56
3Fp

A Brief Guide to Common Public Records
-

Telephone Dircctory/Reverse Phone Directory Not really a public record, but the first plact you
should look for personal information. Remember, most libraries and polia statious have reverse dbectorics for their areas.

-

Voter Registration Records -- (County level in California, aty Iml in some states) Index includes
name, address, prior addresses, date of birth, state of birth, date of registration, affiliarian and af6davit
number. Affidavit can include phone number, occupation, prior &davit number, height, social security
number (varies by year of issue). Other county indices indude occupation and/or phone number.
ALo,registrar keeps track of contributions to candidates, political action committees and ballot issues
for areas that aoss aty lines (some school boards, county-wide elections, state o h and some federal
campaigns). Ask for any file and see who's getting how much &om whom.

--

City Elections OtXice (City Clerk) Here's where you'll fmd contributions to dty (and some school
board) races. Ask for information by name of candidate, k u e or major contributor. Also ask the aty
derk for Statements of Economic Interest for candidates, incumbents and high-level appointed city of- 3
iiaals.
Assessor (County level in California, aty level in some states)
A Secured Property (land and buildings) - Usually indexed by assessee's name, situs addres,
Map book-page-&-parcel number (called Assessor's Parcel Number APN in LA County) and
sometimes by tract name or number. Actual assessment rolls indicate assessed taxes, exemptions, and
assessed value. Also might include document number (deed) as recorded with the County Recorder.
Property description, square footage, room count, year built, zoning, trust deeds, sale price and usage
also available in some counties. **
B. Unsecured Property -- Airplanes, large boats, expensive and large equipment, etc, is also
assessed for taxes. This is a bit more complex to check out, but you can run a name and then get doc.
ument numbers that relate to Tax Collector's records of payment

-

-

County Recorder
A. Yital Statistics -- Birth, mamage and death certificates. Marriage and death records may
be viewed in Los Angeles County, but birth records can only be ordered for $11 per ccrti6cate. Next
day delivery available. All three types of records provide various forms of names, maiden names, parents' namy addresses, a g y occupations, witnesses, docton, cleria, churches, h o q h l s , descriptions,
education level, numbers of marriages, indications of divorces, e t c
B. Grentor/Grentee This is where other documents am reeardcd (oopisd anto microfilm)
to s e m as a permanent legal copy for future use. Usuany indexed only by tbe names d the partics
giving the documents (grantors) and by the rtceiven of the doamtntr -1.
Doiarhdt
deeds, grant deeds, quitclaim deeds, trust deeds,
m c d d d liear, tax km,powen d
attorney, some contracts, abstracts of judgments, fintndne sh&mmts a d m d o ~
0 ~
t h dOQ)DOLI
filed at the whim of individuals or corporations (militupdWwp
otc.).

-

--

County avk
A Marriage Licenses In Los Angcles County the indiar am aa 6k k a deordc Tbt actual hard copies of the licenses are kept only for one year. h b s prwide orrwr d both p.r(itf their
ages at the time, date of issuana and document number. Actual
conhins maU d the information that will eventually be on the marriage d c a t c . Remember
people take oat Jicenscs but never gtt married.
B. Fictitious Name Statements If an individuat, carporrtioa or pdnedip cboo#s to do
business under a name other than the l e d name, it must filc a hctitious name statement (Joe Jones
does business as ABC Diaper Service, Pacitic B d docs bushms as The Phone Stare,Jot Jones and

-

-

-

Fred Smith do business as 5th Street Partnership all must file statements). Usually filed by the name
of the filer (Joe Jones, Padfic Bell, etc) and by the fictitious name (ABC Diaper, The Phone Store,
etc). Both reference a case number. The case usually consists of the original form filed and a copy of
the newspaper announcement required by law. Form includes n a m y a d d r w s y titles, type of entity
and fictitious name.
C. Superior Court Clerk Curator of civil, divorce, probate and criminal court cases (all
public record) as well as Reciprocal Enforcement Support Law (RESL) case files. Civil cases give
identifying information regarding both parties, names of attorneys, other victims or enemies, addresses,
some financial information and much more. Divorce fdcs identify both parties, children, finand information, property owned and sometimes great dirt on either or both parties. Probate filw include
wills, financial and property information, lists of next of kin, Lists of daims against the estate, personal
information about the dead person and a breakdown of who got what. Criminal cases provide identification of suspect, details of the alleged crime, occasional police reports, occasional aiminai history
records, probation reports (public record for first 30 days or after later charges are filed) and record of.
all proceedings and incarcerations. RESL filesexist when one party of a dissolution leaves the county
of the court and either owes or is owed child support or alimony and someone isn't paying. The district
attorneys in the two counties get together and collect, transfer and disburse moneys owed. At each end
there's a fat filc containing information about both parties and information about all the children.
Look for addresses, fmancial information, employment information and vehicles owned by all parties.

-

Municipal Court Clerk -- This is at a civil level, but administered in California by county-level employees. Civil, criminal*, small claims and traffic court information available without question to anyone
who asks. Municipal Criminal Courts are a good place to look for search warrants. Search warrants
are usually submitted to a municipal court judge along with an affidavit in support of the search warrant. If judge buys the argument for violating someone's right to privacy, he or she wiU sign it. The
server of the warrant must return these two documents as well as the Return (list of what was taken) to
the clerk within 10 days of service. Unless it's sealed (BOO!), it's public record. The affidavit includes
more information about the investigators, suspects, witnesses and investigation than you could wish for.
No one will know you're looking.
U.S. District Court -- Civil, criminal and bankruptcy cases are fded and heard here. Civil and criminal
(including search warrants) are similar to those at the county level. Bankruptcy will provide lots of information about an individual or corporation. Look for financial information and tists of debts and
debtors.
Secretay of State
A Corporation Information -- In most states you can phone directly for corporation information. IF you know the corporate name or number, you can get the exad name, address, corporate
number, status (good standing, suspended, dissolved, etc) date of incorporation, state af bnpmtion,
president or chief executive officer, agent for service of process (and thew addresses) and statement of
officers number. In California, you must write in for the statement of officers and the rstidsr of kporation.
e-..
.
B. Umittd Partnerships Prior to July 1, 1% limited partaen ann -Wa&tbe
county level as a fictitious name
Since then, the @pvbPwr ore an mC af tLq -.of
State's office. Limited partners are no longer rquircd to be list&.
C. Notary Public Track down the notary publie listed on any rcavded &a d the
specific line items on his or her log are public record. Often times you a n find other t m n s d a ~
involving parties in whom you have interest
D. Uniform Commercial Code When someone b o r r m money and urtr
otbtr
than real property (land) for collateral, they may have to file a hnaoa'mg statement a~nqrdrtd by the
UCC. You have to do thii in person in Sacramento or through the mail. Lkthgs h e n d
l show you
from whom someone is borrowing money and what is put up as collateral. A good ptra to lurn
someone's social security number or a company's federal identitication number.

-

--

-

Jkprtmentof Motor Vehiclw - If you're not a law enforcement person of an employee of a newspaper,radio station or TV station with a prepaid account, ignore the following, because you can't get it
over the phone:
A M e n License Information - Provide exact name and either a good address or date of
b i and you can get License information. Includes name, address, effective date, prior addresses and
names,date of b i height, weight, eye and hair color, class of license, expiration date and the all important abstracts. Always ask for abstracts. They include traffic citations (ask for violation date, conviction date, section violated, court number, docket number and vehicle license number), failures to
appear and traffic accidents (usually only naming the city, the date and a file number). News media
people, you can also buy a photo of anyone you can prove is dead. Usually it requires the county coroner to verify.
B. Vehicles -- Provide a name or license plate number and get registered and legal owners and
their addresses, make, model, vehicle identification number, date of transfer, date first sold and even a
complete vehicle history. Also, motorcycles, trailers and smaller boats arc registered here. Remember, if you don't have an account, you can't get information this way.

Building Pennits -- Find them at the city level (County Engineer for unincorporated areas). Permits
for demolition, grading, concrete, plumbing, electrical, carpentry, air conditioning, e t c here. Look for
contractors' names, fees paid, descriptions of work done, names of persons authorizing work, e t c Ask
to see actual plans on fde. Same office may also have inlormation about abandoned property and slum
lord property.
City Business Licenses -- Three types of information are usually available: name of company licenses,
address of company licenses and name of person or corporation who requested the license (owner of
business). Ask for any one of these items and get the other two.
Department of Consumer .Afhirs -- Open up the white pages of your telephone directory and look under the words "Consumer Affairs". Listed there you'll find the phone numbers for the regulating agencies, boards or commissions for just about any type of professional, traderman or technician who requires a License. That includes physicians, dentists, hair dressers, plumbers, electrical contractors, private investigators, security guards, automobile repair shops, etc. For lawyers, check with the local or
state bar association.
Federal Aviation Administration -- The kind folks in Oklahoma City will provide you with information
about any pilot or any plane (including owners, wing numbers, aircraft history, etc.).

-- Any company that sells st& openly to the public or is privately
owned and very large must fde various reports with the SEC. Sometimes volumes of information is
available including the salaries of the top executives, what the corporation owns and who owns large
blocks of the stock.
Security and Exchange Commission

-

US. Postal M a Post ofice box applications are not public u d a 8 the brakrtGJ b&&q bUiness through the mail Show the postmaster or bax seetiolr chief tbrt the bao is k.;rruiLep a d
certain information is a d a b l e off the application & as name d b d d h q rddrssli 4phoae
number. You might also talk them into letting you have thc drivers lkmc number d the boddder.
G i it a try.

-

--

Stated& Vital Statistics -- Every state has some statewide system d h q b g track d birthr, marriages, divorces and deaths. In California, it's part of the state H d h r)cprrbwdhorn
* state to state, but you can always chat with them on the phone f a poCbdpJsr
*J
. ';
2"

Don Ray has some or all of this index on micra6icbe
*.Don Ray has this on computer data

base.'

