Hand out:
How Dicar works for changing and improving access to data and documents.
By Henriette Schjøth
Dicar focuses specific on electronic access – electronic documents, databases and direct (on-line)
access – and in general upon an improved Access to public Administration Files Act (or FOIA).
One of Dicars biggest strengths is our awareness on the importence of cooperations among
journalists, journalists and press lawyers and if it is possible between Dicar and the civil authorities.
It leeds to the best results in getting access to data and documents.
Dicar works on 4 levels:
1. As observer
i. Monitoring the direct (on-line) access to public documents within the Danish civil administration,
primarily counties and municipalties.
Particularly in regard to:
§ On-line lists of daily incoming and outgoing mail
§ Agendas and reports of council meetings.
Results:
Publicized lists on which counties and municipalties that offers on-line access and which that don’t.
Links to the ones with on-line access, www.cfje.dk/mediejura (only in Danish, se under elektronisk
aktindsigt)
Publicized reports on status and developments, http://www.dicar.dk/aktindsigt (only in Danish)
ii. Describing the legal framework on public access to documents and what it means for journalists
Results:
Publicized reports, http://www.dicar.dk/aktindsigt (Danish), http://www.dicar.org/acc/index.htm
(English)
2. As applicant (complainant)
Handing in applications requesting electronic data and documents and when refused, complain
about it to a higher instance, in selected cases as fare as to The Ombudsman.
Results:
Good knowledge about culture and arguments on openness of the civil administration,
Wining cases and thereby push the limits on openness and access in practical life,
Getting the ombudsmans interpretation on the legal provisions on access to documents, especially
with great benefit regarding electronic access.
3. As educator
Offering courses to journalists on CAR-training:
§ Attaining and handling electronic data and documents
http://www.dicar.dk/unv/index.htm (Danish), http://www.dicar.org/exercises/index.htm
(English)
§ Teaching jounalists how to turn data into stories.
Results:
Slowly but succesfully promoting computer-assisted reporting in Denmark.

4. As adviser (persuader)
i. Cooperation with local and central authorities on access to databases.
ii. Rendering written reports on know-how, experience and legal insight about electronic access and
access to documents to legislative bodies: Ministries and political parties in parliament. Dicar is in
contact with The Committee on Openness (Offentlighedskommissionen), which at the present time
is working on a new Access to public Administration Files Act, http://www.dicar.dk/aktindsigt/
(only in Danish)
Results:
Spreding knowledge, getting heard

