HANCHETTE'S HALF-DOZEN HELPFUL HINTS
FOR REPORTERS

1. Read Your Eyes Out: Whether print or online, get in the habit
of reading everything you can. Books, magazines, papers, Internet,
the printed word ...y ou'll find out about stuff you never dreamed
existed. Usually, it will stick in your brain longer than if you see
it on the tube or hear it on the radio. Besides, you can make copies
or print it out or capture it in reachable files, written or
electronic.
2. Human Sources Are Still Coin of the Rea-:
Data base reporting
is fine and greatly advances the art, and it's commendable to surf
for story ideas, but you need expert breathing contacts to tip you
to timely stories, explain nuances, point you toward the documents,
focus your field of inquiry, describe repurcussions, warn against a
goose chase, and in general help you cover whatever it is you report
about.
3. Listen to the Crazies: About one in ten have a legitimate, if
complicated, story they're pushing. Hear them out. Listen for the
ring of truth and don't take on the dead-end stories you know can't
bc researched, even jf they are tempting. Give no legal advice
unless you are an attorney.
4. Keep the Editor or News Director On Board: Sometime during
your career, you will encounter a serious jerk who is also your
boss. You still must sell the story idea, get enough time to report
it, and obtain the needed space or time. Try to develop a working
relationship. Only go over your direct supervisor's head if it's the
last chance to save a story you really believe in. It works abodt
twice a career.
5. Learn Your Own Body Clock: This is important. Most reporters
are adrenalin freaks, waiting until deadline to prepare their best
stuff. Events intervene. stories die. Ulcers blossom. Delegating
time is not only for management experts. Write the top of the story
in your head on the way back to the office in the cab. Another tip
is to anticipate the need for followup stories that will be required
long after your initial effort. Develop a filing system, folders or
print piles or electronic or whatever you're personally comfortable
with, to retain crucial information. It's not always in Nexis or on
your favorite website.
6. Learn How to Learn: This is the secret of lawyers. Often, they
have no idea about the subject they're litigating. But law school
taught them how to find out how to find out. That's what good
reporters do. Often, a lawyer will have been there before you in an
investigation. Figure out which side he's on before calling. Your
inquiry could result in boxes of documents, or legal action to kill
your piece.

A FEW SIMPLE PRINCIPLES -- PHILOSOPHICAL AND OPERATIONAL
David Burnham, Co-Director, TRAC

I've been an investigative reporter and writer for too long. This
longevity, I am afraid, entitles me to just a little bit of preaching. The rule
here is that every geezer has his day. So very briefly, I hereby propose four
basic principles, two philosophical in nature, and two operational.
PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLE NUMBER ONE -- Few individual criminals have
the potential impact of a large established bureaucracy. A corollary to that is
while individual crimes sometimes are unbelievable horrible, they usually
touch only a few individuals. The basic lesson: investigating the operations of
a careless, callous or corrupt bureaucracy often has a far bigger payoff than
the investigation of an individual criminal.
This first principle holds true at the local, state and federal levels of
government. Though investigating large private bureaucracies like HMOs
obviously present special hurdles, as we heard this afternoon, it is not
impossible. This is true partly because private bureaucracies like
corporations, pension funds, etc often are required to file reports with the
public ones.
One perhaps obvious example of what I am talking about. You are assigned to
cover the police department in your town. You hear about an individual
officer or a group of officers who has taken a bribe. The traditional news
report would focus on the corrupt individuals. The less obvious approach is
to investigate how the institutions in your city that have the legal
responsibility for controlling police corruption are functioning.
A number of years ago, of course, I took that second root in New York City
and eventually wrote a series of articles about how Mayor Lindsay, his
closest assistant, the police commissioner, the deputy police commissioner,
the city's five district attorneys and the city's investigations commissioner
had all declined to deal with specific cases of police corruption when
brought to their attention.

Because it was in New York City that corruption story became pretty well .
known. But the basic idea of focusing in on the institutional failures, rather .
than individual ones, holds true everywhere. It offers great rewards.

OPERATIONAL PRINCIPLE NUMBER ONE -- Reporters are under constant
pressure to produce daily stories for their papers and television stations that
by definition end up being focused on individuals. This is partly because the
economics of the news business demand that the machine be fed on a daily

basis. The superficial approach also may fit the social and political agendas of
the owners and some editors. If you are running around all day chasing gnats
there will be no time to look for dragons.

I s there a way to get around this problem, at least in part? When
assigned to the police beat, or the education beat or the medical beat,
accept the fact that the machine in fact requires frequent feeding. Become
adept enough at your job so that you can meet those daily or weekly quotas
without consuming your total workday. Without telling your boss, use the
minutes or hours that you have scooped out of the day to learn about how the
bureaucracy actually functions. As your expertise grows the big institutional
stories will slowly become obvious to you. This is not something that
happens in a week or two.
PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLE NUMBER TWO.When covering an institution,
keep asking yourself one key question: What habits and procedures of the
bureaucracy prevent it from achieving its publicly stated goals? What do
I mean by this question? Almost all bureaucracies have printed goals, either
in the legislation that created them or their budget requests or their annual
statements. The police, for example, claim they are being paid to protect
the public. But, a s I found in New York, hundreds of police officers are each
night sleeping on the job during the midnight to 8 AM shift they clearly are
not protecting public. And, for another example, when a substantial majority
of police officers are accepting bribes from both business officials and
criminals not to their duty, they clearly are not protecting public safety.

This particular formulation has several advantages. Perhaps the most
important is it helps you keep you eye on the ball. Virtually every single time
there is a serious failure in government -- the top ranking government
officials -- President Clinton or President Reagan or your local police chief -will fall back on the failure of that infamous person -- "the occasional rotten
apple in the barrel." The misuse of the FBI files in the Clinton White House,
for example, wasn't the result of flawed FBI and White House procedures
and processes and demands that have existed for many decades - -but that of
the sacrificial lamb --the occasional rotten apple. Very frequently, however, a
rotten apple suggests a rotten barrel or at least a rotten stave.
Curiously, I believe that the frequently cited saints of investigative
journalism, Woodward and Bernstein, went down the wrong path because of
thelr faith in the rotten apple theory. Yes Richard Nixon was a very big and
important rotten apple. But by focusing on him alone, Woodward and
Bernstein and most of the rest of the Washington press corps ignored the
point that the institution of the presidency under Franklin Roosevelt, and
Harry Truman, and John F. Kennedy and Lyndon johnson and Jimmy Carter
and Ronald Reagan had some very serious flaws.

