Allen Pusey
The Dallas Morning News

Agencies/Filings/Sources You Might Overlook
State Banking BoardICommissions - Regulate state-chartered institutions. Their relylation
overlaps federal deposit regulation, but often a good source for ownershiplcharter infixmation.
State Securities Board/Commission - Companies deemed too small for oversight by the
Securities and Exchange Commission are often regulated by state boards.
State Insurance BoardlCommission - Insurance companies, even if they are nationid
companies, are usually regulated (however poorly) by the individual states. Most states, despite
poor enforcement, do require significant disclosure concerning investments and asset;. These are
usually found in the company's annual report.
State Public Utility BoardlCommission - If the company is involved in any regulated facet of
the utility industry, chances are it has been required to file extensive information about itself to
the state utility board/commission.
Secretary of Statelstate Corporation Commission - Has basic charter and ownership
information about corporate organizations. Records also include limited partnerships, trademarks
and trade names. A good first stop.
Federal Communications Commission - If the company owns even a small interest in a radio
or television station, they are required to file extensive disclosure statements involving
ownership, organization, financing, and other important information.

HUD Regional Otfices - Banks, savings and loans, and real estate mortgage operations often
apply for HUD coinsurance programs. These programs require modest amounts of di:;closure.
Recipients of these programs (HUD coinsurance, Mod Rehab, etc.) are required to dirdose
ownership. This is a good source for slum ownership.

Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas - The source of liquidity for banks in Texas. Controls their
daily transactions. Ask for the FR Y-6, which is the annual report of bank holding companies. A
good source of information about bank ownership and insider loans.
UCC Filings - Mortgaged personal property (which includes oflice fhmishings, boats, cars,
computers, etc.) are filed by lenders to protect their interest under the Uniform Commercial
Code. They are filed in the county/parish where the property is held, or in the state capital. These
are clumsy filings that are, however, sometimes rich in detail.
County ClerWRecorders - Usually carry multiple business filings which include: assumed
(business) names; propertylmechanic/tax liens; partnerships; powers of attorney; deeds of all
kinds; marriage licenses; military discharges (diminishing in value).

DistricffState Court Clerk -Always check lawsuits, divorce actions, injunctions, etc. Be sure,
as well, to check criminal records (misdemeanor/felony) just for the heck of it. Businesses get
sued all the time. Often the suits don't mean anything. But often enough ...
Federal Courts/Bankruptcy - Check lawsuits, criminal filings and bankruptcies. M~crofiche
can be ordered showing all cases filed for a particular district.
Foreclosures - Check state laws on disclosure of foreclosures and trustee sales. The). vary
radically from state to state. Some states provide for notification prior to sale of interested parties
(including reporters). Texas requires that foreclosures be posted at the resident counp
courthouse.
Post Office - If a post office box is being used for a business, you can get access to tlie name
and address of the person(s) who rented the box. Be prepared to show evidence that tlie box is
being used in some public manner.
Public Contracts - Depending on nature of business, check various political entities (cities,
counties, state, and federal) for any contracts for goods or services. Even bid proposals must
include background information about the company. Don't forget such political entitics as
Municipal Utility Districts, Road Improvement Districts or other political entities that utilize taxfunded bonds. Ask for performance and financial audits. They happen all the time. You can find
the names of special tax districts from your ...
Tax Office - Taxes must be collected for public entities. Tax districts have the name:; of those
entities, as well as valuations for properties (both real and personal).
,

State/F'ederal Licenses - Find out what licenses your target company needs to conduct its
various operations (import/export; environmental; transportation; building permits; zoning
requests).
IRS - Believe it or not, tax returns are available for non-profit entities and corporations. Such
organizations must make available to you their application for tax-exempt status (Form 1023)
and their last three years' of tax returns (Form 990). Caution: Churches don't have to file annual
reports. Tax returns (and/or financial statements) for individuals and businesses ofien show up in
law suits.

The Telephone Book - Commercial listings and Yellow Pages can be extremely helpful in
identifying locations, product lines, and ...
Trade Publications - Good public libraries include all sorts of trade publications. Often their
stories about industry topics or controversies include information too arcane (but nonetheless
important) for the popular press. Check them out.

1

Competitors - It's a dog-eat-dog world.

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF USEFUL RESOURCES
The Bankers by Martin Mayer - Great primer on banks and banking.
The Banking Red Book- In Texas and other states, directory of bank officers and directors, as
well as financial data, listed geographically.
Best's Insurance Reports- An industry standard. Rates and describes insurance companies and
their investments.
Business Organizations and Agencies Directoly- Gives lists of trade associations (Read lobbies).
Useful for development of sources.
Consumer Sourcebook -(Waseman-Siegrnan)
Directory of Corporate Afiliations - Shows who belongs to whom.
Directoly of Investment Research - Gives names and numbers of analysts who study specific
companies. Good place to start.
Encyclopedia ofAssociations- Identifies various trade groups (read lobbyists), who ciin be
helphl in researching industry data, licensing requirements, research on business personalities,
or just plain industrial gossip.
Everybody's Business, An Almanac: The Irreverent Guide to Corporate America- Good overview
of what corporate America really does for a living.
International Directory of Corporate Afiliations- Shows who belongs to whom worldwide.
International Trade Names Dictionary- Links specific product with the company that makes it.
Million Dollar Directoly- Thumbnail lists of corporations, including officers and directors. Also
cross references managers, directors.
Moody's Bank and Finance Manual - Lists corporate histories, subsidiaries, main businesses and
financial data.
Polk's Bank Directoly - Lists directors and managers of banks nationwide.
Reference of Corporate Managements (Dunn & Bradstreet) - Lists and cross references officers
and directors of companies.
SheshunoffBank Quarterly - Shows basic financial condition of banks.
Standard & Poor's Corporate Records - Gives annual shareholder reports and financial data on
the nation's major publicly-traded companies. Good place to start. Includes briefs on inajor SEC
filings.

Standard & Poor's Security Dealers ofNorth America - Lists stockbrokers.
Who's Who - Vanity directories that include basic biographical information about well-known
people.
World Directory of Multinational Enterprises - Exactly what it says.

SEC DOCUMENTS
Form N-SAR:Annual report of unit investment trusts filed each year. Shows names of
companies providing services to the investment company, as well as information about sales of
shares, financial information, etc.
Prospectus: Contains the basic business and financial information on an issuer with respect to a
particular securities offering. Often called a "red herring" prospectus, it can be amended before a
"final prospectus" is filed with SEC. Must, by law, include disclosures of substance concerning
lawsuits, pending investigations, etc.
Form 6-K:Filed by foreign issuers to furnish information disclosed overseas. This is the only
information furnished by foreign private issuers between annual reporters.
Form 8-K: A so-called "current report" used to report the occurrence of any material events or
corporate changes which are of importance to investors or security holders. Must be filed within
15 days of any event specified in the form.
Form 10-K: This is an annual report filed with the SEC. Of SEC filings, this provides the most
comprehensive overview of the company, it's ownership/management and it's basic b~siness.
Form 10-Q: A quarterly report. Often interesting, but unaudited.
Schedule 13D: Discloses beneficial ownership of certain equity securities (usually stock), or a
group of persons who acquire ownership of more than 5 percent of any class of registered equity
securities.
Schedule 14D-1: Discloses any tender offer that is intended to result in more than 5 percent
ownership of any class of stock. Filed in takeovers.

bet)t.baf Governors of the Federal Reserve System

I/c?&/

Annual Report of Bank Holding Companies-FR

Y-6

Report at the close of business as of the end of fiscal year
This Report is required by law: Section 5(c) of the Bank Holding
Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1844) and Section 225.5(b) of Regulation Y [12 CFR 225.5(b)].

Tnis report form is to be filed by all bank holding companies.'

NOTE: The Annual Report of Bank Holding Companies must be
signed by one director of the bank holding company. This
individual should also be a senior official of the bank holding
company. In the event that the bank holding company does not
have an individual who is a senior official and is also a director,
the chairman of the board must sign the report.

The Annual Report of Bank Holding Companies is to be prepared
in accordance with the instructions provided by the Federal
Reserve System.
Public repomngburcm for UIIS ~nformauon
CollmOn IS esurrur.d m v u y from
1.3 10 101 hours p.r resDorw. witn an avemge of 8 hours per mswnse.
incluelng bma to p m a r ma mainfain Cam m ma rwutnd form an6 to rwlm
insrrucsonsmdcomplete tm infomuam ~2lle%n.Commano ngleimu
bumm esficirmte or m y m a r u#e.of mi$ infomuwn conwanan. inchrding
suswmom for ndueng tm burdm. may k rant to Senary. Boud of
Govwmn of fJw Fodwnl Rwsowe System. W a s m g m . O.C. 20551. anci
Otk. of Intomumon and Rogulrtoy Aftairs. Omca ot Matugomrm and
8udg.t. Wuhin*.
O.C. m 3 .

have reviewed the Annual Report of Bank Holding Companies
filed by the namedbank holdigggompany(s)and have transmitted

Date of Report (bank holding company's fiscal year-end):

12-31-93
Monm IDay IY a u

March 28, 1994
Dare of Siqutun

Return to the appropriate Federal Reserve District Bank the
original and the number of copies specified by that District Bank.

:

1 :.;=*;4-; ,; $!". :!
E3:= ;:gi;,
;,1a
;;.; 2

;:.&
;+. . 3 +.:-

.*+-I

:

iIr!
.:.: . .

. ..

$
$?
C.I. p
:;. . y p ,
. . .;?

x..;

~

;.,.-.

...

~

?._

r.,

; 3

.. .

:.;:?[

b

&

i-'

,,$
:

.;

j

Tiered bank holding companies mus: use the supplemental
cover page to list the names of subsidiary bank holding companies that are included in the FFI Y-6 filed by the top-tier bank
holding company.

b:

~

,.-:-

;i ,;:

Li

C o l o n i a l Bancshares o f G r e e n v i l l e
~RMofBuuH~MingCunpwy

P. 0. Box 8099
(MulingADd~0ffJwBMknoWngCompuy)SantIP.O.~

.

3&

Person to whom questions about this report should be directed:
~

~

"

Gary T r a m m e l l / S e c r e c a r v
Name 15-

s--

DATE

BY

1. Bank holding companies that am "qualified forsign bankingorganization

as defined by Sechon 21 1.23(b) of RequlanonK 112 CFR 21 1.231bl).

Records Glossary
Business Types:
Sole Proprietorship - An unincorporated business individually owned and, usually, individually
operated.
Corporation - A state-chartered entity whose existence recognized, under the law, as separate
from its ownership. A corporation (through its directors and officers) can make its own contracts,
maintain its own credit, assume its own debts.
Partnership - A relationship between two or more owners, whose interests are defined by
contract.
Limited Partnership - A partnership consisting of two classes of partners: 1) limited partners,
whose interests and risks are defined and limited by contract, and 2) general partners, who have
defined ownership interest, but also voting and management powers.
Joint Venture - A partnership in which all interests are contractually defined, but each partner is
liable ("joint and several") for all the partnership's debts.
Non-Profit Corporation - A corporation formed for some public purpose, owned by the public
and regulated by the state attorney general..

Document Types:
Deed or Warranty Deed - A legal instrument confering title to real property from one owner to
another. Filed by law in the county where the property resides.
Deed of Trust - A legal instrmment assigning provisional ownership of real p r o p e p to a
lender. Filed by law in the county where the property resides.
Special Warranty Deed (sometimes with Vendor's Lien) - A transfer of real property
ownership, usually by some means other than sale (exchange, option, etc.). Usually refers to
some other document or transaction (e.g. will, probate judgment, exchange deed).
UCC - A federal declaration of lien interest in personal property (ofice furnishings, boats, cars,
computers, manufacturing equipment, etc.). Filed by lenders under the Uniform Commercial
Code with the secretary of state or at the county where the property resides.
Assignment of Rents - A legal instrument assigning to a lender, or lenders, rents coilected on
commercial property.

Abstract of Judgment - A declaration of financial interest filed against real or personal property
as the result of an adjudicated legal claim. Cites the cause number, date, and county where the
judgment was taken.
Release of Lien - A statement releasing a mortgage interest in a piece of property, usually
because a loan has been paid or transferred.
Transfer of Lien - Exactly that.

hop* ( i r l d ~ n l m yimparmW:

.

W

m DEED WlTH VENDOR'S LIEN

C c d h m h : TEN lcYD W01100 DOLURS and l note of even d a t a t h a t l a I n
t h o p r i n c i p a l a ~ o u n tof OWL UONOUED TWHIY TIIOOSWDWD 101100 WLUU
($110,000.001 a n 1 1. executed by Grantee, w y a b l e t o t h e o r d e r of
e n d e n tBark.-Rocknll,
~ockwmll,
Tera..
The
note i e a e c u r d
b~ yn d e pvendor'a
l i e n r a t a i n dn.h.,
i n favor
of Independent
Bank-Rockwall
W.L.. Rock*all, Texa., i n thi. deed and by a d e d of t r u a t of eve:
d a t e f r c u Granter t o Paul S. Lokcy, Trustee.

h l l t h a t c e r t a i n l o t , t r a c t o r p a r c e l of l a n d a i t u a t d i n l o c k w a l l
County, Texas, and b i n 9 d l of Lot. 14, 11 and la, lock h, of Sarbor
Landinq, Phame One, an a d d l t i o n t o t h e City of Rockr.11. Rockwall
County, Tera.. accordinq t o t h e p l a t of .aid a d d i t i o n , of record i n
S l i d e B, Page 362. Map o r P l a t Record. of ~ o c k w a l lCounty. Te=**-

rua*
4. vimibl. and apparent eamarent. on o r acrome a u b j e c t p r o p e r t y , t h e
u l e t e n e e of which do n o t appear of record.

G n n a . f ~ o l l h ~ m ~ a d I Y b p l m O r ~ ~ * ~ h I k m d c ~ r r p k m ~ ~ r v n n q . - . &
d n a r ~ y n m G M n c * ~ n l . ~ t r i A J l a d i ~ u l u h r t l C ~ a d g p n - k ~ m . ~I.
~ ~ ~ v b . ~
h a w e d hold IWGmnY. G-i
kin.ra.Mon.dminiumm. .-a
or lvi'n f-.
G r v l a kmby
Grvna d G m a 5 kin. r n s u m . e4miniulM. ad u r s m~.~mn
ad 1&Id
d ad J.
hr
*
-q
106rvllu
dGnrm's kin.r m m . hiaiumw. ~-,&nu'[os.
aw.iqp-W
I l ~ b l l ~ c Y n u ' n [ ~ m r 1 . i m c k u m w . n ~ p n ~ ~ , e ~ ~ Y I O d r ~ v i D n h a n a d r ~ ~ m 1 ~ .

&

DEED OF TRUST

:

Independont Fa&-Rockwall, U . A . , Rockwall, Taxam. a t Grant....
r q u o w t , haw p a i d i n cawh t o G r a n t o r t h a t p o r t i o n of t h a prrehaao
p r i c o of t h a p r o p e r t y t h a t i m r v i d e n c c d by t h a n o t 8 d a a c r h d . m a '
vendor'. l i e n and superior t i t l o t o t h a propwrty a r o r e t a i n d f o r t h o
bsnef i t of Independent Bank-Rocknll, U . A . , Rockuall Texaa, and ar.
t r a n a f a r r d t o t h a t p a r t y without racourmo on

ran to:.

Paul I. ~ o k w y

7-:

LWLUO INDEPENDENT BAVK-ROCKWALL, N . A .

.
STATE Of TEXAS
COU hm ff

Sand

L,

Drr.

Novanbr

A-n

ONE HUNDRED rWBNlY TROOSMD AVD NOllOO DOLLARS ()110.000.00)

LI.LC,

RUPB

M.

1988

auL

F 1 ~ 1 M . t u r ~ l r D y .on

damand but i f no demand on o r b f o r e *k ( 6 ) month8
f r m d a t a haroof.
Am p r w i d a d i n t h a Not..

T8mrdh,mnrop~*ull:

m p n r I ~ l r l u l an)
q mprsrrma.)

A l l t h a t c a r t a i n l o t , t r a c t o r p a r c e l 01 :and a i t u a t d i n Rockrail
County, Taxam, and h i n g a11 of Lot8 14. 1 7 and 18, Block A of Ilarbor
Landing, Phama Ona, an a d d i t i o n t o t h e C i t y of ~ o e t m l l &kw.ii
record i n
County, Taxam, according t o t h a p l a t Of maid a d d i t i o n .
s l i d . 8 , Pago 161, Map or P l a t Record8 of Rockwall County, ~ e x a a .

&

A ~ ~ U E C O ~ DhIE%X n N m :

~ D A I I L D IW m~uw

0n-mor:

Appointment of Substitute Trustee
(And Acceleration of Maturity)
THE r n E OF TExA.5
COVhlT
-FO

~

m4J.S MORTGAGE U S A . INC..
h a .~ L K e t t l~e t o n tompany
~

~

-

CT*)

Dennlm I(. Cartin

l)u. hrwna n m w h l r d p C Mom n m tlr L
&d
t), A s s i m t a n t Vice Premldenc A
*S
IRC.mbtnUddCorpman.
A

-t

'

.

l9%.
W R K A G E . VSA.

l

~

September 7, 1994

BY FAX

Linda Edwards
Public Information Officer
Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services
Austin, Tex.
Dear Ms. Edwards:
This request is made under open records section of the Texas Open
Government Act, Title 5 of the Government Code, Section 552 et seq.,
which guarantees the public's access to information i.n the custody
of governmental agencies. In accordance with Sec. 552.221 of the
law, which requires that, "the officer for public records of a
governmental body shall promptly produce public information for
inspection, duplication, or both, in the offices of the governmental
body.', I respectfully request copies of, or access to, the
following information:
A record of all payments made to vendors operating foster homes,
theraputic foster homes, or residential foster homes
whether
licensed and operated by individuals or corporate entxties. The
information should include, but not be limited to, vendor name,
vendor number, vendor address, region of care, the amount of
payment, date made, and level of care represented.
It is my understanding that these records are preserved internally
in digital form. And in the interest of expediency, we are willing
to accept this information in any accessible computer format (i.e.
EBCDIC, COLUMNAR ASCII, DELIMITED ASCII, DBASE, etc.). If the volume
of data merits it, nine track tape is an acceptable medium.
Likewise, it is my understanding that the vendor names, addresses,
etc. are kept in a database separate and distinct from the record of
payments. Delivery of the data in separate data files is acceptable,
as long as identification fields (vendor numbers, for instance) are
contained in both files.
As always, we will pay for any reasonable expenses associated with

this request. However, if you anticipate that they will amount to
more than $150, please contact me at the number listed below.

Communications Center, PO. Box 655237. Dallas. Texas 75265, 2141977-8222

Since what we are asking for is of a type previously released by
your agency, we anticipate no claims of confidentiality. We have
enjoyed a measure of cooperation in past requests, and we are open
to discussion concerning the details of your compliance.
I shall look forward to hearing from you within the 10 days
specified in the law. Thank you for your cooperation.

Sincerely,
\

d . Allen Pusey
Asst. Projects Editor
(214) 977-8071

cc: file

The Fountains

21.519 acres x 43,560 square feet = 937,368 square feet

Original Purchase
$502,428 / 937,368 square feet = 53.6 cents per square foot
Fountains #2
2.1212 acres x 43,560 square feet = 92,399 square feet
$692,997 / 92,399 square feet = $7.50 per square fool:

CORPORATION: WAYMOND BUILDERS, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS #: 06
PROJECT: FOUNTAIN GLEN ACREAGE: 2.1582
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,705,100 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,428,320 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: WAYMOND F. SHIPP
THOMAS SCARPA
WILLIAM LITLE

CORPORATION: BIG COUNTRY BUILDERS, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS 8 : 07
PROJECT: GOLDEN MEADOWS ACREAGE: 2.1825
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,713,050 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,393,920 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: KENNETH A. SIEGEL
DALE CROWNOVER
DAVID RUTLEDGE

CORPORATION: KAZ PROPERTIES, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS #: 08
PROJECT: FOUNTAINVIEW ACREAGE: 2.2230
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,726,300 DATE: 12/08/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,341,440 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: KEITH A ZAVITZ

CORPORATION: WILDFLOWER DEVELOPMENT CORP.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS 8: 09
PROJECT: FOUNTAIN HEAD ACREAGE: 2.1830
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,713,200 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,428,320 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: GUY DAVIS
RICHARD CARVER
JOHN C. McINTOSH JR.

CORPORATION: MCKELLAR ENTERPRISES, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS #: 10
PROJECT: FOUNTAIN PARK ACREAGE: 2.137
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,698,300 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,244,160 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: D. L. MCKELLAR

CORPORATION: JAJU BUILDERS, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS P: 01
PROJECT: SILVER MEADOWS ACREAGE: 2.1207
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,692,835 DATE: 12/08/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,048,000 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: JANET M. GAST
WESLEY E. AIKEN

CORPORATION: ANGEL BUILDERS, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS P: 02
PROJECT: MEADOW VALLEY ACREAGE: 2.1212
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,692,997 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,207,040 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: THOMAS THOMPSON

CORPORATION: SATELLITE INVESTMENT CORP.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS 0: 03
PROJECT: EMERALD SPRINGS ACREAGE: 2.1212
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,692,997 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,244,160 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: BILLY RAY SHELTON
LOU MALONE
WAYLAND P. CRAWLEY

CORPORATION: DIAMOND INVESTMENTS, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS P: 04
PROJECT: HIDDEN MEADOWS ACREAGE: 2.1212
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,692,997 DATE: 12/08/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 002,296,640 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: LOUISA ENNIS
RAYMOND GEORGE

--\

-'

CORPORATION: TOM TOM BUILDERS, INC.
DEVELOPMENT: FOUNTAINS 0: 05
PROJECT: MEADOW GREEN ACREAGE: 2.1313
LAND: BELL AMOUNT: 000,696,300 DATE: 12/02/82
CONS: BELL AMOUNT: 001,923,360 DATE: 08/02/83
OWNER: KENNETH W. COX
KENNETH D'ANGELO
DONNA K. REEVES

THE FOUNTAINS
A-1260 & A-1037

10 TRACTS
TOTAL ACREAGE: 21.4993
LAND LOAN: $ 7 , 0 2 4 , 0 7 6
(BELL)
CONSTRUCTION LOAN: $ 2 2 , 5 5 5 , 3 6 0 (BELL)

FIRST TEXAS SAVINGS ASSN. to JAMES E. WARD and A A R O N WARD
21.519 a c s
10/20/82 $502,428
JAMES E. WARD and AARON WARD to
21.519 acs
12/02/82

KITCO DEVELOPERS, I N C .

KITCO DEVELOPERS, I N C . to ERNIE HUGHES, TR.
12/02/82
21.519 acs

E R N I E HUGHES, TR. t o INVESTORS
NOTES: Closing documents between Wards and Kitco Developers show
land procurement of $ 1 , 9 3 3 , 0 0 0 , but Wards maintain they received
only $ 9 3 3 , 0 0 0 .

Bama Glen #1
1.8783 acres X 43,560 square feet = 81,819 square feet
$654,550 / 81,819 = $800 /square foot

HOW TO CONNECT TO THE BBS
To connect with the BBS directly, call (512)
458-9424. Outside of Austin, the BBS can be
reached toll-free through the State Comptroller's
"Window on State Government" BBS by calling
1-800-227-8392.
After connecting to the
Comptroller's BBS, select menu option 6, "BBS
News" and follow the instructions until you are
logged on the Ethics Commission BBS.
Currently, there is no charge for access to the
BBS, other than any applicable long-distance
telephone charges. Upon connecting to the BBS,
you will be asked the following:

D atabase Searches
F iles Menu
N ewsletter
Y our Settings
S ystem Statistics
C omments to the Sysop
G ood bye
H elp
To select any of these options, enter the first
letter of the menu option you wish to view. For
example, you would enter "F" if you wanted to
view the FILES MENU.

DATABASE SEARCHES

What is your first name ?
What is your last name:)

The Database Menu contains the following
search areas:

Once you have entered both your first and last
name, you will be prompted for a password of
your choice. Please note that the password must
be no longer than 14 characters and no shorter
than 3 characters.

Password? /

/

[I]NOT AVAILABLE AT THIS TIME
[2]Lobby Registrations
[3] CandidateiOfficehnlder

Reports
Contributions, Expenditures and Loans

of

[4] Political

of

Committee Reports
Contributions, Expenditures and Loans
The Ethics Commission BBS supports modems
with speeds up to 9600 baud and follows the
most common communication settings: NO
parity, 8 datahits, 1 stopbit. FULL duplex.

MAIN MENU
The MAIN MENU of the BBS contains the
following options:

Texas Ethics Commission

,.

To select any of these options, enter the number
of the menu option you wish to select. Once
you have selected an area, you will be able to
search on any field within the area that you have
chosen. For example, you may search the
database for any occurrence of John Smith as a
contributor or for all registered lobbyists who
represent ABC Company.

P.O.Box 12070 Austin, Texas 7871 1-2070 (5 I:!) 463-5800

Department of Criminal Justice for
compensation.

NEWSLETTER
If you wish to view on-line the most recent
version of the commission's newsletter, please
choose this option.

Statutes
Files in this area contain the statutes that
the commission is charged with
administering and enforcing.

YOUR SETTINGS

Rules
Files in this area contain the rules that
have been adopted by the commission.

If you would like to change any of your settings,
such as color or black and white menus, please
choose this option.

BBS User's Guide
This guide is available under this file
area.

SYSTEM STATISTICS

Agendas
Files in this area contain the agendas of
commission meetings.
Filing Guides
Files in this area contain the filing
guides that have been created to serve as
a basic guide to a filer's requirements
under Title 15, Texas Election Code.

Instruction Guides
Files in this area contain the instruction
guides that are provided to assist filers
when completing the reporting forms
prescribed by the commission.
Filing Schedules
Files in this area contain the schedules
that are provided to assist filers in
determining their next reporting
deadline.

If you would like to view technical information
about the BBS, such as the total number of files
available, please choose this option.

COMMENTS TO THE SYSOP
If you would like to leave a message to the
Ethics Commission, please choose this option.

GOODBYE
If you wish to completely logoff the BBS, please
choose this option.
HELP

If you need general help with the BBS, please
choose this option. Please note that this option
does not provide help with any questions relating
to the data on the BBS. Those questions should
be directed to (512) 463-5800 or you may leave
a message on the BBS by selecting the
COMMENTS TO THE SYSOP menu option.

PKUNZIP
This area contains the file needed to
decompress files with a .ZIP tile name
extension. Please note that this file is
"shareware" and must be registered by
the user with the owners of the
program.
Opinions
Files in this area contain the opinions
that have been issued by the
commission.

Texas Ethics Commission

P.O.Box 12070 Austin, Texas 7871 1-2070 (512) 463-5800

FROM THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE
STATE OF TEXAS
FILING OF A CERTIFICATE OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
The Texas Revised Limited Partnership Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 6132a-1
(Vernon Supp. 1991), governs the formation of a limited partnership in Texas. The
secretary of state does not provide forms for this purpose. In view of the legal
technicalities involved, it is recommended that you consult your attorney for advice
concerning the formation of a limited partnership.
A limited partnership is defined by the Act as a "partnership formed by two or more
persons under the laws of Texas and having one or more general partners and one or more
limited partners." "Person" includes a partnership, limited partnership, foreign limited
partnership, trust, estate, corporation, person acting as a trustee or executor, or other
entity. One person may not form a limited partnership by showing only himself or herself
as both limited and general partner. The Act provides that in order to form a limited
partnership, one or more partners, including all of the general partners, must execute a
certificate of limited partnership, which must set forth:

1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

The name of the limited partnership.
The address of the registered office and the name of the registered agent at such
address.
The address of the principal office in the United States where records of the
partnership are to be kept or made available under section 1.07 of the Act.
The name, the mailing address, and the street address of the business or residence
of each general partner.
Other matters that the general partners determine to include.
If the limited partnership converted from a partnership to a limited partnership, the
statements required under section 9.01 of the Texas Revised Partnership Act.

A limited partnership is formed at the time of the filing of the initial certificate of limited
partnership with the secretary of state or at a later date or time specified in the certificate.
Two copies of the certificate shall be submitted for filing along with the $750.00 filing fee
to the following address:
Secretary of State
Statutory Filings Division
Corporations Section
P. 0. Box 13697
Austin, Texas 78711-3697
Any person may sign a certificate or partnership agreement or amendment or restated
certificate by an attorney in fact. A power of attorney need not be sworn to, verified, or
acknowledged and need not be filed with the secretary of state, but shall be retained with
the partnership records under section 1.07 of the Act.
Section 1.03 of the Act provides that the name of a limited partnership must contain the
words "Limited Partnership," "Limited," or the abbreviation of "L.P.," or "Ltd." as the

