The success of BBC's "Panorama" and CBS' "60 Minutes" has been repeated world over.
Investigative programmes are seen on television screens almost everywhere. Investigative
journalism is television whose credibility depends increasingly on showing, rather than
telling. How has the demand for pictures changed the way investigative television works and
the stories it covers?

We see excerpts showing different aspects of investigative television journalism: hidden
camera, undercover reporting, recreations, structural analyses, and, last but not least,
humour in investigative journalism.

The clips make way to discussion themes like: are we manipulating the audience, or, are we
being manipulated by political or commercial powers; pop journalism vs. journalism in
public interest.

Excerpts from the following investigative programmes: 4 Corners (ABC, Australia),
Assignment Investigate (SVT, Sweden), Vladivideos (Peru), Lifting the Bonnet (BBC, UK)
Trail of a Terrorist (CBC, Canada), Michael Moore's TV Nation (BBC, UK & Fox, USA),
Mark Thomas Product (Channel 4,UK).

Global Investigative Journalism Conference
Friday, May 2, at 1:30 - 2:50 p.m., Room: The Gallery

Investigative TV - more than hidden camera
Clips of investigative programmes round the world.
Timo-Erkki Heino, TV 1, Finland
Investigative programmes are seen on television screens almost everywhere. Investigative journalism is
television whose credibility depends increasingly on showing, rather than telling. How has the demand for
pictures changed the way investigative television works and the topics it covers? Especially when many of the
present-day issues, like finance, economics, globalization, are challenging to turn into a compelling TV-story.
We see excerpts showing different aspects of investigative television journalism: hidden camera and
undercover reporting, use of fiction recreations i.a., structural analyses, and, last but not least, humour in
investigative journalism.
The session gives no solutions but hopefully acts as a springboard for a refreshing and lively debate on what
should and can be done on television.
The clips shown are:
1.”Vladivideos” (Sold screens), Peru
They are definitely doing it themselves: the Peruvian spy chief used himself hidden camera to record himself m
bribing everybody in Peru, here television-station directors.
2. Directing traffic, 4 Corners, ABC, Australia
3. Swedish elections, Assignment Investigate, SVT, Sweden
Hidden camera is very often used to expose corrupt practices of civil servants like police officers in the Australian
example using police's own extraordinary video recording. The Swedish example shows that hidden camera can
be used also on more profound topics, like the hypocrisy of the politicians before the elections. The one television
program that changed the outcome of the Swedish elections!
4. Trail of a Terrorist, CBC & PBS Frontline, Canada & USA
5. Stolen to Order, Lifting the Bonnet, BBC, UK
The use of methods from fiction can be many fold: the Canadians use re-enactment, the BBC the whole dramatic
structure: villain, hero-journalist, chase, confrontation.
6. The Banks That Robbed the World, The Money Programme, BBC, UK
7. Michael Moore's TV Nation, BBC & Fox; UK & USA
The financial transactions are so complicated that it's very difficult to tell about them in the television, the British
example shows how difficult. Michael Moore reduces the complicated issues to a fight between bad business and
Corporate Crime Chicken. The clip is from the pre-“Bowling for Columbine”-fame, a collector’s item from the
poultry premiere in 1995.
8. Beans, Mark Thomas Product, Channel 4, UK
Mark Thomas combines investigative journalism and stand up comedy in a simply stunningly entertaining way.
One cannot but feel sorry that the show is now R.I.P.

