Publishing Strategy under Harsh
Environment: Courage and Wisdom
By Tamrat Giorgis
-

Know your environment: The primary task for anyone to operate
newspapers in harsh environment is to comprehensively understand the
cultural and legal environment one works in. Everybody has an interest.
Even those regimes, groups, circles . . . who appear to be one and the
same, have their own differences. They want an outlet that is considered
to be independent of them and established creditability. Often, they want
to be heard and attempt to use these outlets seeking an impact. As a result,
they protect the existence of such publication even without the knowledge
of the publishers or journalists themselves.

-

Keep Your Distance: Everything is about balance. In a midst of power
struggle, which is there in our daily encounter, we need to maintain a
certain level of distance not to be far away from those the power that be,
as much as we would not want be perceived as supportive of a certain
group. Whether it is true or not, perception is good enough for one side to
conclude that your publication is pro their foe, hence easier for them to
strike against you. As much as we don’t want to be seen waiving our tail
to one group, so is necessary for us to assert our independence in front of
those who think they are close to us or very supportive of us.

-

Avoid Appearance of Motive: Let both your foes and friends known that
you have no motive other than a good taste and passion for stories –
stories that are accurate, fair and objective. Try relentlessly to let your
readers and the public know where you stand when it comes to
controversial stories, and prove it to them by demonstrating wisdom in
fairly handling stories that expose those who are against you, and
showing courage not to compromise your integrity when the story
involves those that are perceived to be your best allies. The worst thing a
publication could bring against itself is when it publishes stories where its
writers, editors or publishers motive gets questioned by readers.

-

Establish Credibility and Integrity: There is no enough word to stress the
importance of these two concepts. A newspaper that is not credible in the
eyes of the public is easy to be a target. And those who target such
newspapers have “legitimate” reasons to strike. It is very difficult to attack
a credible newspaper, and then attempt to convince members of the

public. Don’t forget even in the ruling elite, there are few of those who
want the existence of such publications. Nor can a newspaper that lacks
integrity survive. The integrity of the publication emanates from the
individual integrity of the journalists.
-

Inspire People: Inspiring the editorial and other members of the
publication’s team is very crucial. Commitment, loyalty and hard work
are the rules of the game. It must be clear to them that wherever they go
and represent the publication, they have to demonstrate high degree of
personal integrity.

-

Acknowledge Mistakes: As easy as it may sound when said and very
painful when it is done, the long term impact of acknowledging errors,
mistakes, misconducts and publicly apologizing has a long term impact.
You may survive in the short term for covering up your faults, but sooner
or later the public would know about it where your credibility gets tested.

-

Become Institution: There is no any easier target than a small publication.
The more institutional you become, with many people becoming part of
the publication as shareholders, advisory board members . . ., the better
protection we may get. The extent of violent reactions to various stories
depends on where they were published.

-

Have as Many Friends: In place like a third world countries, it is friends
and supporters that count at the end. It is hardly possible to put much
faith on the justice system. Having friends and establishing credibility
within the international community is very crucial. It is them who are
financing most of the programs and cover large portion of the budget.
Although it may sound naïve to expect foreign governments and
international finance organization to pick a fight because of you,
establishing good relationship and networking within and outside of the
country helps a lot.

-

Pray to be Blessed with Wisdom and Courage: There is no simple
formula as such to survive in a hostile environment as a publisher. Nor
any clear guideline to determine what stories are hot and those that are
OK to get published. The judgment requires wisdom not to pay
undeserved sacrifice and courage to stand for what is right, fair and just.

