THE POOR AND THE RICH:
HOW TO EXAMINE THE SPLIT IN LOCAL AND GLOBAL
ECONOMIES.

By Don Barlett and Jim Steele
Time Magazine

Introduction
Too many stories are written on the basis of broad
economic statistics -- the number of jobs created, the
unemployment rate, the Gross Domestic Product, the growth
rate, the financial success of highly visible companies,
changes in the minimum wage.
There is nothing wrong with using such data in stories,
but we need to look much deeper, to see what is happening to
the people who make up those numbers. When their jobs are
exported overseas, what kind of jobs do they find at home?
Are average salaries and wages keeping up with the cost of
living? What is happening to their pensions and health care?
What is happening to their purchasing power? How much do
they need to earn to live in a flat or house like the one
where they grew up?
We try to translate the numbers into terms that show
what the average person's wages can buy today -- versus what
they could have purchased in the past. Sometimes the big
picture doesn't tell the story of what is happening to
people.
We have done most of our work in the United States, but
our experiences are reasonably universal. The agencies we
use for stories do not apply generally to Europe or Asia,
but similar government bodies performing similar functions
do exist and could provide much of the same information. The
crucial point is to think about what data you need and try
to determine where you might be able to find the
information. That’s the challenge facing all of us.
TIPS
Be wary of economists and business-school experts. We
didn’t say disregard them; just weigh their assessments and
observations carefully. In our experience, they tend to

think in only the broadest terms -- that the global economy
overall is good, that free trade creates more jobs than it
eliminates. Although that may be generally true, it glosses
over some huge dislocations that each produces in both
developed and developing countries.
The well-paid factory worker who loses his job when the
plant is exported overseas may have to take a new job that
pays only a fraction of his former salary and offers little
or no pension. Statistically, the person is still in the
ranks of the working. But economically he is worse off.
Free trade is now having some unanticipated impacts in
the very countries it was supposed to help. A few years back
the Brazilian shoe industry helped decimate shoe production
in the United States largely because of cheap labor. Now
it’s Brazil’s turn to feel the pain. Low cost imports from
China have displaced Brazil as the number one shoe exporter
to the United States.
China provides a good example of why we always need to
look behind the statistics. Every news story you read talks
about the fast-growing Chinese economy. But behind the
overall data are millions of impoverished workers who will
toil for almost no money in today’s global economy. China
displaced Brazil as a shoe exporter because Chinese shoe
workers earn about $50 a month – less than a third of what
Brazilians earned.
If you are looking for experts on what is really
happening in the economy, talk to sociologists and social
workers. They are closer to the lives of working people than
economists or business experts. They see what is happening
to people and their families.

Resources
Most of the following are U.S. sources or databases.
But similar organizations no doubt exist at both the E.U.
level and within individual countries in Europe and Asia.
Internal Revenue Service. (IRS) Statistics of Income
(SOI).
http://www.irs.gov/
Published annually, the SOI provides a closeup view of
many personal financial and economic trends. Personal income
is categorized by income groups, from persons earning $1
million or more down to those making $10,000 or less. It
also gives a breakdown of the source of income -- wages,

stock dividends, pensions, etc. This is probably the single
most underutilized source of information on the financial
well-being of Americans by journalists. By drawing on SOI
data, we were able to calculate this comparison for one
story:
“THE GREAT SALARY GAP: Between 1980 and 1989, the
combined salaries of people in the $20,000-to-$50,000 income
group increased 44 percent. During the same period, the
combined salaries of people earning $1 million or more a
year increased 2,184 percent.”
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
http://www.dol.gov/
BLS is the one of the most important agencies tracking
the economic health of American workers. It has numerous
statistical reports on claims filed for unemployment
benefits, beneficiaries of pensions, applications for
training benefits, etc. We have long drawn on BLS data to
show employment and wages by specific industry. For example,
in a story on the impact of trucking deregulation, we were
able to show how wages for drivers and other employees
declined after the trucking industry was deregulated.
Similarly, BLS data show that factory workers earn
significantly higher wages than those who work in retail
sales.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE. Bureau of Economic Analysis and
other agencies
http://www.commerce.gov/
To make numbers meaningful, find a way to make them
relevant to a person’s life. Rather than just showing a
comparison between median family income over a 10-year
period, show what a family can buy with their current income
compared to what they could purchase in the past. For
example, in 1990, an average family used 25 percent of its
income to pay for housing; in 2000 that had increased to 35
percent. In the U.S., the Commerce Department maintains
historical tables that are accessible via the Web that
enable reporters to draw these comparisons, but any
historical economic or consumer product tables showing
prices would work.
OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCIES. A huge amount of information
can be gleaned from independent agencies that regulate the
economy. This is true in the U.S., and from what we have

seen from the European Union’s web site, also the case in
Europe.
In the U.S., we relied on data from the U.S. Interstate
Commerce Commission for the trucking deregulation
statistics. ICC numbers showed the dizzying pace at which
companies were starting up, going bankrupt and then going
out of business. The ICC has since been folded into another
agency the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
http://www.ntsb.gov/.
Another independent agency that is crucial in telling
the story of what is happening to U.S. workers is the
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC). It is charged
with protecting the retirement of millions of workers
covered by private pension plans. You won’t get names of
individual workers from their reports, but you can see the
names of companies whose pensions are in trouble, which
could then lead you to the people.
http://www.pbgc.gov/
STATISTICAL ABSTRACTS. Most large nations publish
annual statistical reviews. These publications, now all on
line, provide an invaluable resource. Each is filled with
tables and charts about all manner of activities affecting
the economic and social conditions of their countries and
people -- from health and nutrition, to home ownership, to
medical procedures per 1,000 population, to the number of
refrigerators in homes.
In the U.S. it is called the Statistical Abstract of
the United States.
http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-us.html.
Canada publishes a similar guide called Statistics
Canada. (http://www.statcan.ca/.
The Canadian site by the way has an excellent page
linking it with similar statistical web sites around the
world such as eurostat. The Canadian site is :
http://www.statcan.ca/english/reference/international.h
tm
FINDING PEOPLE. All journalists know the tried and true
methods -– talking to neighbors, families, friends, fellow
employees, townspeople. But there are many other less
obvious ways.
We are constantly reminded of the variety. We find
names for potential interviews in court records, government
regulatory filings, foundation reports, government audits,
surveys by think tanks, Congressional hearings, academic
studies, property records, to name just a few places. While

researching the impact of closed factories, we came upon
thousands of records in the Department of Labor that had
been filed by out-of-work employees seeking training
assistance to find new work. Similarly, the names of many
employees thrown out of work quite often can be found in
Bankruptcy Court records, where employees sometimes have to
turn to seek debt relief.
Again, the availability of records will differ in
Europe and Asia, but the important point here is to try to
think what might be available.

