Tracking Terror in India

62,000 lives have been lost in India as a result of terrorism or what is now recognised as crossborder terrorism. Of these, 32,000 persons have been killed in Jammu and Kashmir; 18,500 in
Punjab and the rest in the North East and other states effected with Naxalite violence.
If these figures are juxtaposed with the fact that India has one of the freest presses in the world, it
makes New Delhi one of the most exciting datelines to be reporting from.
The last few decades of sub-continental history, have, in fact, been made or marred by terrorism. In
1984, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her Sikh security guards and the reason
was their angst for her decision to send in troops to cleanse the Golden Temple in Amritsar of its
militant elements. Seven years later, her son former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was killed by a
female suicide bomber of the LTTE. He had to pay with his life for sending an Indian Peace
Keeping Force to cripple the LTTE in Sri Lanka.

His Italian wife, Sonia Gandhi now heads the Congress party and lives amidst tight security in New
Delhi.
Punjab is now relatively peaceful and the North-Eastern states simmer with intermittent terrorist
activity . This leaves the terrorist activity in the border state of Jammu and Kashmir as the most
intractable problem faced by successive political regimes including the current one headed by the
Bharatiya Janata Party. A newly-elected State Government has recently taken over the seat of
power in Srinagar and the Governments new interlocutor, former Defence Secretary N N Vohra has
begun talks in Srinagar. But the radicals of the All Party Hurriyat Conference (APHC) have refused
to negotiate even with him.
The World Trade Centre attack and the international efforts to end Islamic terrorism was a
breakthrough for India. The menace of cross-border terrorism and infiltration were now being
debated and discussed globally, forcing Pakistan to announce a crackdown on organisations like the
Jaish-e-Mohammad, never mind if the much-anticipated raids on their offices led to a recovery of
only Dollars 19 from their bank account.
The repercussions of the global war against terrorism also created ripples in the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) which recently arrested 100 criminals, many of them fugitives wanted by India.
Only a handful of them have been extradited to India but there is a clear pattern that emerges from
their interrogations — that they are the small fry, indoctrinated and tutored to have nothing away in
the interrogation chamber.
The big fish like Dawood Ibrahim---India´s most wanted criminal---continue to flourish in Dubai.
Unfortunately, the pressure proved to be temporary and this is despite the fact that Indian
intelligence agencies went on an overdrive trying to project the powerful Kashmiri militant outfit,
the Lashkar-e-Toiba as the new Al Qaida. The level of militancy is now back to what it was in the
pre 9/11 days, with 122 civilians being killed in the first three months of the year, roughly what it
was in the corresponding period last year.

Put together, the trends of the decade-long spell of militancy throw up some horrific figures---1.2
lakh Kashmiris rendered homeless, 50,000 weapons seized and 20,000 militants killed since
militancy began. Infiltration, which had come down sharply in the aftermath of the audacious attack
on Parliament on December 13,2001 is again being pegged at 250 crossings every month.

The challenge of covering terrorism in India is being able to track the trends and sift through the
figures put out by the Government. And more than the WTC bombing in New York, it was the
December 1999 hijacking of an Indian airliner IC 14 to Taliban-controlled Kandahar which proved
to be the turning point for tackling terrorism.

Almost a decade ago, the Indian Government let of militants who kidnapped the then Home
Minister, Mufti Mohammad Sayeed´s daughter, Rubiya, with disastrous consequences. Mufti
Sayeed, is the States new Chief Minister.

The kandahar hijack was the second significant occasion when the Government capitulated
completely and this time, released three major militants from its prisons for the release of IC 814
hostages. The Indian media,too, shared the blame since TV channels hour after hour, broadcast live
demonstrations of wailing relatives of the hostages and created an immense Kandahar hype.
Eventually the trio---Maulana Masood Azhar, Omar Sheikh and Mushtaq Zargar---were swapped
for the passengers. It was a decision the Indian Government is still trying to live down.
Tracking terrorism can be trying for while the fountainheads of militancy remain the same, the
groups or tanzeems keep changing . Maulana Masood Azhar returned to Pakistan a hero and formed
the Jaish-e-Mohammad, largely from the cadres of the Al Qaida. This was the same group which
executed the suicide attack on Parliament in Delhi, the closest militants have got to striking the seat
of power. And when the US Government banned the Jaish-e-Mohammad, Masood Azhar and
company promptly formed another umbrella organisation and called it the Jaish-e-Ansar.
The other militant released by India was Omar Shiekh, now charged with the murder of journalist
Daniel Pearl. When the abductors released photographs of Pearl, chained and in captivity, it was
only the trained eye which could hit upon the similar modus operandi used by Kashmiri militants. It
was in October 1994 that Omar Shiekh kidnapped four tourists in Kashmir and had released similar
pictures to the media. He was arrested after an encounter with the police and had confessed that the
kidnapping was plotted to get Maulana Masood out.
Eventually they both got their freedom after the Kandahar hijack and to journalists who were
carefully monitoring militant movements, it came as no surprise that Omar Sheikh again went
looking for a Western hostage to grab headlines. And Daniel Pearl was the one he picked.
With militants changing identities, passports and groups ever so often, investigations into their
networks and empires requires painstaking research and sharp recall. When Omar Sheikh was
linked to Daniel Pearls murder, a scrutiny of frayed court records and his own testimony for

committing the abductions could be accessed. The case also showed how slowly the Indian legal
machienary worked since Omar Sheikh had not been convicted even seven years after his arrest.
Later, in January 2002, the arrest and extradition of Aftab Ansari, a Dubai-based mafia leader
revealed how after he returned to Karachi, Omar Sheikh continued to indoctrinate militant recruits
and monitor financing of key operatives. Confessions of Aftab Ansari highlighted how Dollars
100,000 of the ransom paid by the family of businessman Roy Burman was sent via hawala to
Mohammad Atta in New York.
Like this one, Interrogation Reports (IRs) have become an indispensable tool for intelligence
agencies since raids on militant havens and hideouts often lead investigators to some wisps of
paper, hawala diaries, telephone numbers or e-mail addresses. By now, Indian agencies have
uncovered some 20 established trails of terror financing. A majority of the breakthroughs have
come from revelations made in interrogation chambers. While confessions of detained militants
should not be treated as sacrosant, they provide useful linkages and in the absence of a paper trail of
financial transactions, they form the best block of evidence with Indian agencies.
Take the developments which unfolded after the arrest of a Kashmiri militant named Imtiaz Bazaz
in May last year under the Prevention of terrorist Act (POTA), the newly-enacted legislation. His
arrest led to a money trail reaching a UK-based Kashmiri expatriate, Dr Ayub Thukar. Several
transactions were traced to the Hisbul Mujaideen and a prominent Hurriyat leader, Sayeed Ali Shah
Geelani was arrested as a result of the revelations. The British Government has started an inquiry
into his financial network but few noticed that 12 years ago, Ayub Thukar was charged as an
absconding accused in the very first case of hawala financing known as the Jain Hawala case. In
that case too, a link with Kashmir militancy has been clearly established.
Thus, while Indian intelligence had its first major lead into terror financing via hawala way back in
1991, the word entered the Western lexicon only after the WTC attack.
The work hawala literally means trust or reference and is the safest way of transferring illegal
money across the globe without leaving a record or paper trail. It works because it ensures anyomity
and the transaction takes place with little or no commission being paid. A report prepared by the US
State Department called it the most effective means of money laundering in India and estimated that
this means of parallel banking could even be as much as the countrys white economy.
The problem is that cases of terror financing traced so far are not even a fraction of the transactions
done by militants, drug dealers, expatriates and businessmen.
And the men who indulge in such large scale subversive activity roam free in Pakistan and Dubai,
with Kathmandu and Dhaka emerging as the new havens for terrorists.

