1

‘Dealing with Big Brothers – investigating Endemol’
by Margo Smit, KRO “Reporter” (Dutch public TV)
margo.smit@kro.nl
www.kro.reporter.nl
2003 Global Investigative Journalism Conference, Copenhagen
Tip sheet workshop “Media Empires: how to investigate them and stay in
business”

Media empires are like any other business empire, and then some….
1) Get your editor (and his boss, and his boss too..) to commit to your
story. This is always a golden rule, but in this case maybe even more,
since the people you are investigating are the pals of the people that
pay your salary! Do so as early in your research as possible, and with
as many arguments as possible.
2) Move ‘from the outside in’ (but avoid making the initial circle too wide).
Start with, for instance, former employees: in case of a media empire,
former employees are often easy to find since all the fall outs in these
companies are recorded in other media!
3) Go to the competitors, and the antagonists and look for internal
rivalries (like you would with any ordinary company: Get Jack Ewing’s
hand out, to see how to investigate a company!!).
4) Zoom in on the financial people and the business partners (the hardest
to talk to, but indispensable). If you don’t know how to read contracts
and billing yourself, get help from somebody who does. They are there
in your own company! If they are reluctant to help you, tell them the
company agrees on you doing the story à see tip 1!
5) When you get your hands on a contract but are not allowed to photo
copy it, ask whether you are allowed to make notes. Then ask for a
quiet place to sit and read, and use a tape recorder for making notes!
6) While writing or filming your story, make extensive use of your own
legal people! They know media law, they practice it every day, and
know the other side’s weaponry! They know where the pitfalls are, and
can keep you from stumbling into them! Again, if they are reluctant to
help you, or overly step on the brakes, tell them the company agrees
with the story à see tip 1!
7) By now (very likely) you have been insulted, yelled at, badgered, and
maybe even threatened. Still, keep the moral high ground! Let
somebody from outside read your story, and take out all the
hyperboles, and adjectives that snuck in through frustration. It will save
you a court case!

2

Brief case history
à The Dutch TV system is very complicated, with lots of separate (i.e. fairly small) network
organizations sharing air time on three different public channels. Additionally, there are
currently five commercial networks. Endemol produces TV programs for all these networks,
and is thus a big player on the Dutch TV market. The company, with its head offices in the
Netherlands, has subsidiaries and joint ventures in 22 countries, including the major
European markets, the United States, Latin America, South Africa and Australia. In the year
2001, Endemol’s turnover was 914 million Euro’s, more than 15,000 hours of television were
produced, spread over approximately 400 different program series. Endemol owns over 500
program formats (such as ‘Big Brother’, ‘Fear Factor’, ‘Spy TV”, ‘Operacion Triunfo’ (a
Spanish version of ‘Idols’), ‘Traumhochzeit’ (a Dutch and German wedding show), and many
more) and the company employs about 3,300 full-time employees. In 2000, Van den Ende
and De Mol sold their company to Spanish telecommunications giant ‘Telefoníca’ for 5,2
billion euro (approx. $5,5 billion).
à KRO “Reporter” started off researching the history of Endemol, how it began as two small
production companies (John de Mol productions and Joop van den Ende productions), and
how it, since their merger in 1993, quickly became the media giant it currently is.
Main ‘research tool’ at the beginning was talking to former and current employees (difficult
enough after the Endemol PR department declined to talk to us and issued a company-wide
ban on talking with us). A fair amount of them said having the impression that productions
were billed higher than the costs that were made. This was a claim we could not substantiate
as such. We did however find (concepts of) contracts between Endemol and the main
provider of TV facilities in the Netherlands, NOB, with curious side letters attached.
à At that point, a second ‘tool’ was needed: knowledge of billing and accounting in the TV
business. This was where (former) Endemol and NOB financial people came in. They
explained to us the workings of the side-letters: Endemol and NOB would draw up a contract,
with tariffs and rates included, and would add a separate contract that overrode the original
where tariffs and rates were concerned, with lower prices for services rendered.
à Verifying the effects of the side letters was the hardest part, for Endemol still declined to
talk to us and sent out the legal threats instead. NOB however, the other participant in the
deal, by word of its former director acknowledged that Endemol was billed less for the
facilities used. Purchasers of the TV programs (i.e. the Dutch networks) then acknowledged
that Endemol billed them the original tariffs for the NOB facilities.
à Last hurdle, since we are a TV program, was to not only get people to go on the record,
but on camera as well. Here, we really met the power of the Big Brothers, for almost no-one in
the TV world wanted to talk on camera: either afraid that they would ‘never work again’ or to
jeopardize their lucrative contracts with Endemol. So we had to rely heavily on documents,
and then confronted interviewees on camera with these documents.
à The days before the program was aired were the toughest. Endemol started to comment in
the press on the program (without even having seen it), and demanded a viewing, which they
got. They brought there lawyer, we brought ours. They still didn’t want to react on camera, but
did react in writing. We added their written statement to the program.
à The program resulted in an investigation of Endemol by the Dutch competition watchdog,
NMa. It used our documents, and spoke with people in the business. In the end, NMa
dropped the charges of unfair competition, but had to admit they never came around to
investigate the contracts and side letters, since this (strangely enough) was outside their
jurisdiction. Endemol demanded a public apology by KRO, but didn’t get it, for the gist of the
program – that Endemol was demanding discounts on facilities, but denied to forward those to
its clients – was never contested by NMa.

