1

Short of a Dream
By Tamrat G. Giorgis
Publisher/ Managing Editor, Fortune
In July 2000, something unprecedented has happened in Ethiopia’s newspaper
publishing industry. While most of us were reluctance to admit the possibility, a private
college in Addis Abeba pursued the launch of the nation’s first daily newspaper after
employing more than 150 people -somehow pouching reporters and editors from both
public and private media organizations.
It was not surprising then to observe the launch of this paper, Eletawii Addis, literary
translated to Addis Daily, sent a wave of panic and uncertainty within the country’s
private press, not only dominated by eight-page weeklies, but also under-staffed,
disorganized, poorly financed and operated by couple of individuals who normally act
like managers of family stores than big and sophisticated publishing ventures.
Understandably, they have had legitimate reasons to be worried since the emergence of
a well planned, organized and properly financed newspaper would mean higher
quality and standard of newspapers in their level that such weeklies would find it
difficult to compete with. It would simply offer the reading public the opportunity to
see the fact that what it has been provided was noting different than pamphlets.
It would have also mean that the public would learn that it deserves to get better
quality of journalism than what is actually exist - type of journalism mostly
characterized by attacks and tuned with a tone of patriotism that would not mind to
violate any form of journalism ethics so long as it serves its purpose. It would have
simply set a new standard in the market, which would ultimately decide who should
survive.
So did this paper set such standards during its existence of eight months, though too
short a time to bring any lasting change.
However and unfortunately, there were quite few people in the industry who were
experienced enough to see the launch of this daily paper beyond the panic that there
was. They were questioning - intelligently - the feasibility, durability and survival of
this paper. They had wonders on how far the paper could travel considering the nature
of investment pledged by the owner as well as the speed and structures put in place
during the launch. They had also wondered the commitment of the publisher to the
business - whether he has had undisclosed motives or he had properly realized in what
type of business he was trying to get into.
To the shock of people in the industry and the public at large, the first ever attempt of
experiment to run a daily private newspaper in Ethiopia has collapsed as a result of
differences between the editors and the publisher over a decision made by the editors to

2

cover a “political story” about a major spilt within the ruling party, while the publisher
insisted otherwise.
In 2000, the ruling party had to go through an unprecedented crack within its rank and
files, following differences on strategy in relation to the war with Eritrea. All the private
newspapers in the country focused in putting to pieces together in a bid to make sense
of it all. So was this newspaper covering all the behind-closed-door meetings and
decisions that were being made.

The publisher, claiming that he was being pressured from certain quarters ordered in
writing the editors to stop covering “political issues” all together, although bizarre it
may sound. The editors resigned in protest.
Closer looks, however, reveals that the main reason for the publisher to shutdown such
a wonderful experiment was none other than lack of finance. Insiders say the publisher
was unable to cover expenses of the paper any longer that he had to find other pretext
(latter on found to be ill advised and disastrous) to justify his acts.
And that has proved ones again to people in the industry that running a newspaper is
no fun at any rate. Neither was it as simple as opening a cafe or building couple of
floors of hotel rooms whose investment return is traditionally considered to be fast.
In fact, to get involved in a newspaper business requires more than a motive for profits.
It has more to do with passion, commitment, dedication and far sightedness in waiting
for long while one’s investment makes any return. Newspapers are - just to be a little
religious - works of call, and not strictly business per se. It is something one does enjoy
on the fly, unlike a type of trade where one puts money today and expects lucrative
profits a year after.
I often tell people that being in a newspaper business in Ethiopia is being a drug dealer
in the United States. While operating in both cases, the degree of danger one exposes
him/herself is simply too high. In both cases, the establishments do not award but keep
people involved in the trade behind bars or those who are more scared flee to other
countries in search of hideouts.
The only difference is, however, if you make it in the United States, the financial reward
is significant that you can literary be able to afford to buy an executive jet as opposed to
being successful as a publisher in Ethiopia that puts people in more trouble, if not
unable to make money to meet personal ends.
Ethiopia’s newspaper publishing industry is filled with such unfortunate stories.

3

The great optimism that had surfaced following the demise of the 17-year military
Marxist rule did not live long enough to bring any significant results. It was rather
shattered by the introduction of the 1992 Press Law by the transitional government of
the peoples’ representative council. The law has apparently too many restrictions and
penalties on both publishers and editors that has discouraged and chased away
hundreds of people who stumbled in a business of publishing at the beginning.
When I first started my career in 1992, there were number of people who were in the
business in a more organized fashion than now. There were many people who were
matured, educated, experienced and with family responsibility.
Following the clampdown of government in 1995, where many editors were arrested,
fined and sentenced, most of these people went out of the business - and some of them
flee the country - in fear of dangers to their personal life and family security. Those
businesspeople who had invested money in setting up publishing companies did backoff their interest while they see other fellows handcuffed and thrown to jail.
It is only one fourth of the 639 licensed newspapers and magazines that are operational
today, according to official sources. There are now 80 newspapers and 34 magazines in
circulation having average daily copies of 62,122 (for newspapers) and 100,000 copies
for the monthly magazines.
The picture looks even gloomier when one sees how the survivors operate today.
I would not be mistaken to say that more than 80% of these newspapers do not have
their own proper offices, let alone employ well organized staff that includes supportive
administrative members such as accountants, distributors, finance managers,
advertising executives and others.
Neither some of them are real owners of their banners. Years of harsh measures from
government has taught the press a survival mechanism otherwise known as “Tapela”, a
brand resurrected itself from the urban taxi fleet of the military regime. Back in those
dark years, where every part of one’s life is controlled, the Marxist government had
introduced a system where cabs where assigned from one fixed and particular
destination to another. To ensure that drivers are abide by such law, plates where made
on top of the cars clearly indicating the destinations.
The Ethiopian press thus adopted this system where the names written on the
newspapers according to the press law requirement, indicating who the editor in chiefs
and the editors, are not the genuine ones. They are there to only serve as a cover, as the
law is only punishing editor in chiefs and their deputies. Editors find unemployed and
illiterate people who would manage to get clearance papers from local administrative
offices. Paid a modest amount of not more than 10 USD a week, they hardly now

4

anything that they are paid to go to jail on behalf of the real editors when prosecutors
come after the newspaper.
Though sounds a cruel act to do, on the other hand the system kept the papers alive, on
the streets and in the hands of vendors. As the real editors are way far from government
screen, so to speak legally, they manage to substitute people one after another
whenever a waive of arrest happens in the streets of Addis Abeba.
On the other hand, those vendors that used to be noting more than distributors eight
years ago are now behind the scene, using other people to license publications under
their own name, but put money for print, while controlling the sales and distribution.
The 1992 Ethiopian law that guarantees the right of press freedom on one hand puts
severe punishments and applies stringent restrictions on people who would like to get
involved in media business, excluding the electronic media whose legislation has been
endorsed by parliament two years back but its application and bureaucracy has not
been furnished yet.
Only citizens of Ethiopia are allowed to involve in the media business. But they have to
go through procedures that are monitored by the Ministry of Information and Culture.
Procedures to Follow to Acquire a Press License
A press license is obtained from the Ministry of Trade and Industry like any other
business license, but it requires getting a qualification letter from the Ministry of
Information and Culture: This Ministry wants applicants to follow certain procedures
before they getting qualification letters to the licensing ministry:
- Applicants must have an office that is said to fit for a presswork. The experts of the
Ministry, who would want to ensure whether it is in accordance to their requirement,
will visit the office. The requirement includes applicants to have office furniture,
telephone/ s and other basic things that are required in any other office.
- Applicants must get a letter of agreement from the Kebele (county offices) where the
office is located stating that the Kebele officials know the existence of such an office in
their administrative locality and they do not object if the applicant use the office for
presswork.
- Applicants (publishers) must get two personals who would submit their residence
documents from their respective Kebeles (together with their latest ill cards) to serve as
editor-in-chief and deputy-editor-in-chief. Applicants must submit employment
contracts with the editors to the Ministry.

5

- Applicants must provide a letter from their respective banks that proves to the
Ministry that they have deposited the required amount of money. The amount varies
accordingly: 10,000 Birr (1,180 USD) for individual applicants and 15,000 Birr (1770
USD) to companies or organizations.
- After applicants submit all these papers and fill forms given by the Ministry, experts
from the Ministry will visit all the Kebeles to check files of the applicants in a bid to
prove that documents they obtained are genuine.
- And it is after this that applicants will get the letter they submit to the Ministry of
Trade and Industry that would ultimately issue them licenses to applicants.
- If everything goes as smooth as applicants would wish, I would say the process would
take a minimum of three weeks.
Indeed, it is a tough row to hoe, particularly in the private media where those with
money are find it too cumbersome and risky to invest in the press.
Therefore, who is left are those young, inexperienced but dedicated and committed to
bring a change having little resources at their disposal. This is why that it is too
common to disguise officials of the inspecting ministry showing them fake or borrowed
offices and facilities. Or the required amount of money that was obtained in loans thus
deposited in an attempt to fulfill unnecessary requirements by the ministry, which is
not included in the press law.
In fact, to work in this business, one needs to be not only a “survivor”, but also fiercely
dedicated and determined to keep the independent press fires burning in a hostile
environment. Ethiopian journalists have a long way to go not only in terms of steering
clear of the authorities, but in striving to practice good and solid reporting.
As a country, Ethiopia is undergoing a period of acute transformation, from a brutal
dictatorship into a more open and pluralistic society. The press, especially the private
media, has a critical role to play in this transition: In the absence of any strong political
opposition to check the ruling party, the independent press remains virtually the only
place where people can turn to get their information and channel their points of view. I
would say this is one major reason behind the survival of the private press in Ethiopia.
On the downside, however, low professional standards prevalent in the press have
compounded its difficulties in carrying out this important role. The word
“irresponsible” has been the main card the government has used to discredit the private
press. At the same time, there remain few avenues along which a journalist can upgrade
his or her skills apart from their own practice - and often painful mistakes.

6

Most of us, in fact, entered the world of journalism with little but determination,
courage and dedication to serving our society by telling the truth. Few have enjoyed
formal education, or training to become sharp and inquisitive journalists before joining
“the real world”.
This lack of opportunity and experience, which authorities like to equate with sheer
irresponsibility, is demonstrated in number of ways. The generally poor quality of
writing and editing is perhaps the major area of weakness I have perceived since joining
the ranks of the private press.
One can easily identify shortcomings in writing and editing skills that show the lack of
familiarity with basic concepts including story structure, angle, lead, language or focus.
There is also deep-rooted confusion over different approaches to and styles of
newspaper writing: breaking news, feature, commentary, editorials are often squeezed
in together without any distinction. The line between opinion and fact is often blurred leaving little room for readers to form their own judgment.
For all of these reasons, there is a general - if not passive - consensus among the press
community, as well as the international community and even the government that
training should be one of the priorities, should there be an interest to make the press a
vibrant and reliable source of information. Accordingly, international organizations
have spent considerable resources to train journalists.
True to all kinds of newspapers, I strongly feel that the fact that all our publications,
regardless of their area of interest, are unable to produce even half a million copy a
week for a population of more than 64 million - most of the newspapers’ circulation is
limited to the capital and few other regional towns - testifies that there is a long way to
go to explore the infant media growth in Ethiopia, with a lot of challenges, of course.
The challenges, from my experience, are emanated from four major areas: the prone
level of knowledge, experience and exposure of those who cover stories; the issue of
availability and access to information; the dictated relationships of the media with the
emerging corporate world as well as government; and failure of the private media from
being an institution.
As I pointed out in the beginning, Ethiopia’s dream of having a daily newspaper has
shattered in our face as a result of unrealistic ambition, if not ill advised and poorly
organized launch, so to say the least. It is also true that most of us stumbled in this craft
with mere courage and dedication, which is all the more challenging particularly for
those of us who report on a specialized interest. Knowing and having a deep
understanding of the economic functions, government policies, relations of various
groups involved in the process and explaining them to our readers is one of the major
shortcomings I have experienced in my 11 years tenure.

7

It was for these profound reasons that I tried to emphasize the importance and priority
that should be accorded to rescue Ethiopia’s press from its failure from becoming an
institution by itself. Even after 11 years of existence, it still crawling to be selfdependent. It suffers not only from poor management, but also lack of investment due
to lack of interest of those businesspeople to put their money in such a sector
considered as highly political.
I am afraid that the aborted experiment by the college will continue to shade its
negative fingerprints on those who would like to venture in similar business in the
future, if not the fact Ethiopia being named by Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) as
“10 worst enemies of the press” scares away businesspeople from involving in the
media industry.
I came to realize that dedication and commitment alone cannot be an investment that is
crucial to build the whole set up, except making the publication a one-person show as it
is evident in the output of most of our publications. My point here is, we may be able to
put out the paper for a while, but I question for how long one can do that alone apart
from that single-handedness reflects on the quality of the newspapers, hence their
reporting.
In such environment, words like well researched and investigated become totally alien
to those who produce newspapers. Neither media could thrive to become an industry
and a sector that attracts professionals or people with money, connection and profit
motive, hence guardianship the journalists working in them.

