Draft
Publishing Under Threat
Mohan Mainali
(If you have already read my paper Working Under Extreme Conditions please
go directly to the third paragraph)
Nepal has been facing the most serious violent internal conflict for last eight
years. In the conflict initiated by the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), more
than seven thousand people-innocent people, policemen, armymen and the
Maoist's fighters lost their life.
After the Maoists broke peace-talk in mid-November 2001, the government
declared the State of Emergency on 26 November 2001 which lasted for nine
months.
The state of emergency brought very conducive environment for the abuse of
human rights. On the one hand, it suspended basic human rights by disallowing
people to knock the door of the court. On the other hand, it gave immense power
to the security forces. When the security forces are given such power and the
court doesn't hear the cases of the human rights abuse it's sure that such power
is misused, innocents get abused, tortured, raped and killed.
During such time, the role of media is far greater than its role during the normal
situation. It should make additional efforts to safeguard the basic human rights.
Keeping this role in mind Kathmandu based Centre for Investigative Journalism
initiated two programmes Emergency Watch and Food Watch. These two
programmes were carried out during the state of emergency and immediately
after it was lifted.
The first programme supported by the International Media Support did not have
an ambitious goal. It has focused on the review of the performance of Nepali
media during the first six months of the state of emergency and on the production
of five print stories on human rights abuse by both sides-state and the Maoists.
The second programme was to look at the conflict-induced food scarcity in the
hills of far western Nepal. It aimed at producing one print story, one radio and
video documentary each.
Naturally, during the state of emergency the press, too, had many (too many if
the rulers are not careful) limitations. Even though, you produce very good,
standard stories it's likely that your story doesn't reach your audience. CIJ which
doesn't have a single media outlet was to face huge problems to get its stories

1

published/broadcast during the state of emergency and undeclared state of
emergency which followed the declared state of emergency.
CIJ, to some extent, overcome the problems of getting the stories disseminated.
It, however, failed in getting its widely acclaimed video documentary broadcast.
This paper tries to share the tools and techniques CIJ used while trying to
disseminate the story it produced and its failures. (This paper doesn't deal with
the problems CIJ faced while collecting information as the subject is being
discussed separately during the conference).
Selection of media
We carefully selected the media for the publication of stories. This had been
proved important for two reasons. First, to spread the message as wide as
possible. Since we had invested much creative energy and resources on our
stories we tried to ensure that the stories reach wider audience. If your story is
read by the large number of people more people are likely to follow the issues
you have raised.
Second, to ensure the safety of the journalists who produced the stories. Thula
gharako kukurko thulai chala. Nepali army often cited this proverb while
expressing their anger at and inability to take any action to the "uncomfortable"
journalists as they belong to the powerful media house. The proverb means that
the dog's strength is not determined by individual strength but by the strength of
the house it belonged to.
We had got Mritu bhanda kathor sajaya, a story on the 17 construction workers
who were killed and branded as "terrorist" by the Nepali army published in Himal
Khabarpatrika during the state of emergency. By any Nepali standard, the story
had elements that demoralised the security forces but no action was taken
against us and the publisher/editor. The only reason is that the media house was
powerful. We couldn't think of publishing the story in less influential media.
Selection of languages
Nepal is in unique position with more than 62 languages spoken by its 23 million
people. However, two languages Nepali and English language are regarded
powerful media. If you write in Nepali you reach lower-middle and lower class
urban, semi urban and rural masses which take time to react (sometimes, you
feel no reaction at all). And if you write in English, you are sure to reach urban,
high and high-middle class Nepali elite, diplomats and development industry
managers who have much more influence on Nepali polity than "sovereign"
Nepalis. Your issues are likely to be picked up by international rights
organisations.
Our story Mritu bhanda kathor sajaya was first published in Nepali language.
Later on, Unfriendly fire, the English and shorter version of the story was

2

published in the Nepali Times. It has got the attention of different kind of people
who are more vocal and active.
Similarly, our stories on the food scarcity in western Nepal's hill and eight
villagers (some of them were member of the anti-Maoist vigilant group) killed by
the army appeared first in Nepali media. Later on, they were published in English
language. We have got different actions from the stories in different languages.
Combination of different medium
If you use multi-media (print, tv, web, radio etc.) approach you are more likely to
be heard by every people. Different medium has different advantages
(disadvantages also). For example, we couldn't narrate the situation in word
when a young man stopped speaking for 20 seconds while he was talking about
his 60-year-old father killed by an army.
To exploit the power of different medium we took a video camera with us when
we went to collect information for our story Mritu bhanda kathor sajaya. We came
back with 10 hours of impressive visuals, sound bytes and silence. The materials
were so powerful that we produced The Living of Jogimara, a 38 minute video
documentary though we had neither plan nor budget for that.
And when we used that silence in our video documentary it compelled people to
share the young man's suffering.
And, in the case of story on food scarcity, we produced not only print story both
in English and Nepali language but also video and radio documentary.
Web sites are very useful in disseminating stories. When the above stories were
posted on webstie they were read by those who couldn't get hard copy because
they live far from Nepal.
Right approach
When we were planning for the story on 17 workers killed by army we discussed
with the editor of Himal Khabarpatrika who promised to buy our story and gave
us three pages of his news magazine. His condition was: the story must be good.
We went to the field to collect information. When we returned from the field we
informed the editor on the materials we have collected. He was so excited that he
killed a story to give us two more pages. Two days later when we discussed with
him on the possible outline of the story he dumped the cover story which was
nearly completed and gave our story cover treatment. The story thus got
promotion from a three-page report to a 10 page-cover story.
Reason: the story emphasized not on how the army killed the workers but on the
impact of the massacre on the family members. The story did not narrate the war
but the human tragedy which easily holds the audience.

3

We learnt a lesson from our own work that if you put human face in your story
chances of the story being published are far greater. If you emphasis on the
impact audience automatically will get angry at the wrongdoers.
Selection of words
Unlike many stories appeared in Nepali media, the story on the workers tried to
avoid explicit allegations on the army. We tried to avoid strong, provocative
words. Our lesson is: if the story itself is stronger you don't have to (mis) use the
strong word in which case you are likely to be hit back or taken to the court.
Share your materials with others
We also learnt a lesson that If don't have any option to get the information you
have collected disseminated you have to share it with those who can do so.
We reached a village in far western Nepal the next day the army gunned down
eight people. A man who had got two bullets on his head died just some minutes
ago we reached there. The dead bodies of other the six men who died on the
spot about 30 hours ago were just sent to the river bank for final rites. The body
of a tall man who was dragged away and finally killed by the army could not be
taken back to the traditional crematorium.
The whole village was shocked with the death of so many people in a single day.
We captured the event, people's anger, villagers' detail account of how they were
killed and the condition of the widows and orphans. Though we published the
story in print media in Nepali and English language it was impossible for us to get
the video reports transmitted. We shared the footage with Kathmandu based
BBC's correspondent who used it to produce a mini-documentary along with his
own footage of the Maoists atrocity.
Keeping the story alive
Another lesson we learnt is: Keep the story alive, get the story told repeatedly
until you get the desired results. It may be a follow-up by yourself or by your
friend. In case of the story of the workers, we first published story in Nepal which
created ripples in Nepali society. This was followed by the flow of letter to the
editor. Then it was the English version of the story again followed by the letter to
editor.
The story invited actions by the Nepalis living in the Washing DC, US who
collected some money and send it to the shocked families who lost their bread
winner. This event again gave us a chance to update our reader on the story so
that they don't forget the issue.
Bichalit Bartaman (Disillusioned present), an informal group of writers,
journalists, fine and play artists organised a programme to protest widespread
human rights violation during the state of emergency. The artists produced

4

paintings on the spot. Photogrphs that dealt with the violence were put on
exhibition. The photographs and paintings were auctioned. The proceeds went to
the families of the workers. This was widely covered by the media.
The video documentary which was produced almost four months later also gave
an opportunity for the press to keep this issue alive. The documentary was
selected for the screening at the Kathmandu International Mountain Film Festival.
The documentary was screened to the journalists at the press conference
organised on eve of the festival.
When the film was premiered at the festival it was reviewed by the media. The
review of the film by major daily newspaper the next day invited huge crowd to
request for the repeat screening. Here again, we had to face problem of
screening it to the public. The film was scheduled to be a concluding film of the
festival. The government tried to stop its screening. To avoid the physical
confrontation between the huge and angry crowd and the government forces we
made a compromise-- fade out the narration for 30 seconds.
The trick was a temporary success. The next day the government put a public
notice saying that film festivals require government approval and every film to be
screened must be censored by the government.
We have not been able to overcome this hurdle. We would like to know from you
how we can overcome such problems.
For more information on the print story, post production script and review of the
video documentary and other activities of CIJ please visit our webiste:
www.himalassociation.org.
This paper has been prepared for the Global Investigative Journalism
Conference, May 1-4, 2003, Copenhagen, Denmark. Mohan Mainali is director at
Kathmandu based Centre for Investigative Journalism. His address is:
cij@himalassociation.org, monali@wlink.com.np
Phone: 977-1-5542 544 (o), 4424 674 (r).

5

