2ND GLOBAL INVESTIGATIVE
JOURNALISM CONFERENCE

COPENHAGEN, DENMARK, MAY 1 - 4 2003

TOPIC: EXPOSING THE CORRUPT TIES BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS: OLD AND
NEW METHODS

By: William Nyarko
Executive Director
Ghana Centre for Public Integrity
Tel: +233-24609589
Email: wnyarko@hotmail.com
Website http://gcpi.virtualactivism.net

2ND GLOBAL INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISM CONFERENCE, MAY 1-4 2003,
COPENHAGEN, DENMARK
EXPOSING THE CORRUPT TIES BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS: OLD AND NEW
METHODS
By William Nyarko, Executive Director, Ghana Centre for Public Integrity
Introduction
‘Having been involved in exporting to various countries in the Middle East and Far East and in
Africa, I have bribed government ministers and officials of all grades, in the form of cash
payments, commissions, introductory fees, new cars, hospital treatment and so on for more than
40 years. If I were not now retired I would continue to do so. That is the way one does business in
those places….’Letters to the Editor, Daily Telegraph (UK) 26th June 2000
Corrupt ties between government and business are usually formed or created at the interface
between government and the private sector typically over procurement, which also feeds into
political party financing and bureaucratic corruption. The players are usually public servants,
politicians, business people and multinational businesses.
WHY CORRUPT TIES BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS ARE BUILT AND
SUSTAINED IN AFRICA
. Lack of effective checks on power- In some African countries, public officials who take
decisions to award government contracts have unbridled discretionary powers and because
institutions of vertical and horizontal accountability are weak coupled with the lack of proper
procurement procedures, corrupt ties are built and sustained between the private sector and
government.
In his widely published work on corruption, Robert Klitgaard argues that the phenomenon of
corruption can be analysed and remedial actions sought to deal with the canker if we accept the
formula C= M+D-A, where Corruption equals “Monopoly” plus ‘Discretion” minus
“Accountability”. In the case of procurement, corruption can occur if multiple checks and balances
to ensure accountability, are absent.
In a recent discourse on enhancing transparency and accountability in governance in Ghana, Prof.
Kwasi Prempeh of the Ghana Centre for Democratic Development noted that in less developing
economies, corruption occurs when there is Motive and Opportunity and amended Klitgaard’s
formula from the C=M+D-A to C=M x O where Corruption equals ‘Monopoly’ multiplied by
‘Opportunity’.
He argued that in developing countries in particular; ‘Corruption is a Crime of Opportunity (the
opportunity being the institutional or system deficiencies that make it easy for corruption to occur
and for the corrupt to get away with the crime) and Motive (the motive being that need, condition or
2

state of affairs that serves as an inducement, incentive or motivation) that propels or compels a
person to act on or succumb to a corrupting temptation.
§ Environment of Political and Corporate Governance Deficits in Africa
An environment of political and corporate governance deficits coupled with weak institutions of
vertical and horizontal accountability can exacerbate such situations, nurture corrupt ties and sustain
the corrupt relationship. In particular, a ‘closed’ political system which does not have enforceable
transparency enhancing legislation like Whistleblower, Assets Declaration, Freedom of Information
laws, enforceable rules and regulations on political contributions and clear rules on conflict of
interest, can enable corrupt ties to flourish.
Similarly, in an environment of corporate governance deficits where enforcing business ethics is a
real challenge and businesses know they cannot be sanctioned for engaging in unethical business
practices, this can encourage and sustain corrupt ties between government and business.
How procurement procedures are manipulated for favourites
In a seminar on enhancing transparency and accountability in Ghana recently, Prof. John Hielbrunn,
a former consultant to the World Bank identified the following manipulations in contract awards;
•
•
•
•

Eligibility requirements might be so narrowly defined as to eliminate all but one firm
Pre-qualification requirements are submitted so that the firms submitting bids are not
qualified and a preferred one gets the contract
Deadlines are publicised without enough time for firms to comply except for one that
knew beforehand of the call for tender and
Information about the other bids is sold to one firm that is able to get the contract

Additionally, ‘Transparency International’s 2000 Source Book on Confronting Corruption: The
Elements of a National Integrity System’ notes that before contracts are awarded, the purchaser can:
•
•
•

Claim urgency as an excuse to award to a single contractor without competition
Breach the confidentiality of suppliers’ offers
Take bribes

At the same time, suppliers can:
•
Collude to fix bid prices
•
Promote discriminatory technical standards
•
Interfere improperly in the work of the evaluators; and
•
Offer bribes
There are also instances where companies bidding for a contract register several companies and in a
descending order, graduate prices and specifications by a slight margin so that ‘head they win, tail
they win’!
Military procurement has also been identified worldwide as an area prone to corruption because of
the tendency of governments to raise national security issues to justify why defence procurement
must be secret. In more accountable societies, the military has found a way of limiting opportunities
for corruption in contract awards through selective tendering.

3

Tipsheet on Old and New Methods for investigating corrupt ties between government and
business
A combination of old and new methods of investigation is crucial for effective exposure of the
corrupt ties between government and business.
•

Old methods of investigating the corrupt ties between government and business have relied on
tipsters, deep throats and anonymous whistleblowers who alert reporters to look into an issue.
The investigation then begins sometimes without much preparation. New methods rely not only
on tipsters but also on the instinct of reporters who form a hypothesis, conduct background
research on the subject and begin the investigation with the end in mind. When the investigation
begins, there is clarity about what the central theme of the investigation is and room is made to
amend the initial focus of the investigation should evidence prove contrary. The investigation
also determines from the start what documents would be required, how to access the documents,
which sources can assist the investigation and possible obstacles in the investigation and how to
overcome. Once this has been done, at least 20% of the investigation would have been
undertaken on ‘paper’ and time would have been saved and the investigation expedited.

•

Under the old methods, information about a company being investigated was usually sourced
from open sources like newspapers, company’s newsletter, Articles of Incorporation, Annual
Reports, official speeches, interaction with former and current employees of the company, etc.

However, the use of computers and Internet based resources in investigations has brought new
opportunities to information gathering and has been found to be particularly beneficial to
investigative journalists in developing countries in Africa where there is hardly any transparency
enhancing legislation like Freedom of Information. Information that civil servants will not officially
make available because of the existence of an Official Secrets Act has sometimes been found on the
Internet. Computer Assisted Reporting (CAR) methods have therefore assisted significantly in
shedding light on business transactions and facilitated exposure. However, information through
CAR poses credibility challenges. Mr. Ernest Brown of the Network Computer Systems in Ghana
has developed the following steps to overcome that challenge.
(i)
(ii)

(iii)

Identify the owners and sponsors of the website by typing the URL into the search
engine www.nsi.com. Also review the site’s About Us statement.
Ascertain the credentials of the author or publisher-If the author is a dealer in ironrods and car spare parts and has written about Space Programmes, how seriously
should you take the author?
Web page accuracy-Can the information be found in a non-related website? Does the
web page give sources of information or does the web page contain grammatical or
spelling errors?

•

Team investigations-The days when the investigative journalist was thought of as the ‘lone
ranger’ are gone. The sophistication, expertise and cross-country nature of investigations
required in ensuring timely and successful investigations demand that team investigations when
appropriate, must be employed.

•

Network of local, regional and International Investigative Journalists- Membership of a network
of investigative journalists like the Centre for Public Integrity’s International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists, the Investigative Reporters and Editors global membership of
4

investigative journalists have proved useful new methods of carrying out cross-country
investigations. Join one if you’re not already a member.
•

International Conventions and opportunities for access to information: Old and more recent antibribery Conventions like the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of the United States and OECD
Convention respectively present new opportunities for exposing the corrupt ties between
government and business.
Additional tips to consider are;

•

Executive appointments: The appointments of persons without ‘known’ public political ties to
Boards of Public Corporations is good signal to unraveling Government-Business ties that can
lead to catastrophic consequences. In some cases, businessmen serving on Public Boards siphon
funds into their private companies and bank accounts abroad through dubious contract awards
and make heavy political contributions to the governing party.

•

Look for the powerpoints: Sometimes a company’s influence could be located in many
powerpoints. It could comprise a combination of centres of power in the ruling party; public
servants and even in the Executive. Conduct of an audit of the access points through discreet
talks with multiple sources in the party, government, security, opposition parties and critics has
proved useful.

•

Assess the power of those under your investigation-It is important that time is spent to assess the
influence that those being investigated have and the extent to which they can go to prevent
being exposed. Naturally, nobody, not even journalists would like to be disgraced and those
facing exposure may stop at nothing to prevent being exposed. Tactics employed could range
from bribing the investigator; using your editor or family members to dissuade you from
continuing with the investigation; telephone threats and following up on the threats by maiming
or killing the investigator. The unfortunate gunning to death in November 2000 of Carlos
Cardoso for his ongoing investigations into the theft of 144 billion meticais (about $14 million)
from the Commercial Bank of Mozambique in which ‘powerful and wealthy businessmen’
Momade Abdul Assife Satar and Ayob Abdul Satar were alleged to be involved, should provide
us with useful lessons.

•

Did the company make political contributions to the politician/political party? Finding out if a
company being investigated made contributions to a political party or to the politician who took
the final decision in the award of a contract, could deepen ones understanding and further
unravel the mysteries. Information from party insiders, political opponents and companies that
lost out in the contract bid could be very valuable.

•

Focus on the intelligence and take coincidences seriously: The outcome of any successful
investigation depends not only on the ability to gather documentary or electronic evidence but
more importantly how sometimes isolated and seemingly unrelated events can be pieced
together and analysed along with documents to provide the incontrovertible evidence. It requires
a commitment to detail and not ignoring what appears to be trivial. In the African environment,
as in other developing countries, where nepotism is a problem, it is often useful to find out (in
the case of a politician and business executive in a contract award) if they have any tiesschoolmates, family relations, workmates, old acquaintances, Church members, membership of
5

social clubs etc. This could provide invaluable intelligence to assist the investigator
contextualise the investigation.
•

What is the company’s track record? Find out if the company has executed any contract either in
the country or abroad and evaluate how it got the contract and whether it executed it
satisfactorily. Some companies have a bad reputation for paying bribes to secure contracts and
doing shoddy jobs and the company being investigated may very well in that league. Use the
public available information sources (newspapers, radio, and television).

•

How was the contract awarded? Following the trail of how the contract was awarded; whether
there was a tender; what kind of tender; (National or International, sole-sourcing or open
competitive bidding) and evaluating the reasons offered by those who awarded the contract
could be valuable. Note that not all sole sourcing contracts may be bad, it is the reasons given
by those who awarded the contract for choosing that route that must be evaluated to determine
whether it was warranted? Also if there was a board, locate and talk to individual members of
the Tender or Procurement Board.

•

Locate the companies that lost out in the tender and talk to them-Companies that believed they
put up a good bid and should have been awarded the contract would naturally feel aggrieved
especially when they have insider information that indicated that the process was ‘rigged’ in
favour of the company that won the contract. Locate and talk to them but be careful about taking
their insights as ‘gospel’ because they may just be bad losers.

•

Secure a copy of the contract document and if possible give a copy to experts to deepen your
understanding of the issues

•

Once you have completed your investigation interview those you have been investigating and
give them the opportunity to comment on the outcome of your investigation. Do not consider
this as a privilege you’re offering to them; it is their right and you must give them the
opportunity to respond to the specific allegations you'll raise against them in your report. In
writing the report, be mindful of how you package it otherwise weeks or months of your
investigation would come to naught.

•

Follow-up, follow-up, follow-up-The investigative report doesn’t end with the publication or
broadcast of the ‘first story’; it actually begins with it. Staying on top of the story and looking
for new angles as well as reporting reactions to the story are crucial to ensuring an overall
successful investigative report.

Conclusion: Certainly, the old and new methods of investigation would yield much better results if
there is an institutional and legal framework that provides for transparency enhancing legislation
which facilitates exposure i.e. a Free and responsible media, enforceable procurement rules,
Verification of Assets Declaration, Freedom of Information and Whistleblower.

6

