CYBER CENSORS & GLOBAL MUCKRAKERS:
International Investigative Reporting on the Internet
By Mark Feldstein
Associate Professor
George Washington University
School of Media & Public Affairs
805 21st St., N.W., #400
Washington, D.C. 20052
(202) 994-4632
http://www.gwu.edu/~smpa/feldstein.html
email: feldy@gwu.edu

A paper presented to the
Global Investigative Journalism Conference
Copenhagen, Denmark
May 2003

ABSTRACT:
This study examines how the Internet has changed investigative reporting around the world
both as a newsgathering tool and as a means of evading government censorship. As a tool
for data collection and cross-border journalistic collaboration, the Internet has offered
modest positive changes for investigative reporters. As a means of combating state
suppression, the Internet has on occasion allowed journalists to disseminate censored
stories on-line. Nonetheless, the overall impact of the Internet on investigative reporting
worldwide has so far been limited. In particular, many governments and some corporations
have found ways to punish or prevent on-line investigative journalism. To date, optimistic
visions of an Internet revolution in global muckraking have not been realized.
1

Introduction
Ten years ago, while working as a correspondent for CNN, I first became interested in the revolutionary
potential of international investigative reporting. At the time, I was producing a television documentary
about waste and corruption of U.S. foreign aid money in many Third World countries. While I was on
assignment in Cairo, Egyptian police suddenly seized my CNN crew and confiscated our videotapes in an
effort to censor my reporting. Our detention by authorities made headlines, reported in Arabic throughout
Egypt and the Mideast. Soon, dissident Arab journalists began passing on news leads to me, telling me
stories of corrupt Cabinet ministers and systematic police torture of dissidents. These Mideast journalists
were unable to report such scandals themselves in their own publications because of state censorship, but
they hoped that I would report these abuses on CNN. Why CNN? Because as an international news outlet
no single country could effectively censor our reports, which were beamed into Egypt and the rest of the
world by satellite.
The revolutionary potential here was undeniable and extended well beyond Egypt and the Mideast.
CNN had the ability to go over the heads of political and military leaders straight to the people. We could
expose ruthless dictators in their own countries—maybe even topple them from power. By exporting
investigative reporting abroad, CNN could show the rest of the world by example the true meaning of a free
press. It was the ultimate dream in watchdog journalism, using the power of the media for good.
But for a variety of reasons that will later become apparent, this did not happen. Still, the dream lived on
in my heart. Maybe the real difficulty wasn’t my lofty ambitions, I decided later, just the way I was trying to
achieve it—a problem of means not ends. Perhaps profit-minded multinational corporations like CNN were
the wrong vehicle for bringing such radical watchdog journalism to undemocratic countries. Maybe such
muckraking would have to come not from the top down but the bottom up.
A few years later, the rise of the Internet seemed to be precisely the kind of bottom-up communication
that could indeed bring about such revolutionary journalism. After all, the Net’s worldwide instantaneous
reach to an audience of millions is open to anyone, regardless of their geographic location. “Because of
the Internet, anybody who has a computer and a modem can be a publisher—a digital Gutenberg,” one civil
liberties group enthused. “. . . To a degree that no other technology can, it . . . eliminates barriers to the
free flow of information.”1 Creating and disseminating this information is intrinsically inexpensive, and the
Internet has essentially unlimited capacity to store it. “The World Wide Web is power to the people with a
vengeance,” British scholar Gordon Graham wrote, since “unlike the rather passive medium of television
[the Web’s] interactive character presents ordinary citizens with the possibility of exercising an
unprecedented influence on the social and political events that determine their circumstances and
prospects.”2 Most important of all for free expression, Internet technology requires no censoring
“gatekeepers” who get in the way. “Put another way,” American writer Andrew L. Shapiro noted, “if

1 Global Internet Liberty Campaign, “Regardless of Frontiers: Protecting the Human Right to Freedom of Expression on the
Global Internet,” www.gilc.org, 4-6.
2 Italics in original.

Gordon Graham, The Internet: A Philosophical Inquiry (London: Taylor & Francis Group, 1999), 38.
2

information is, as some claim, our most important commodity, what could be more egalitarian than placing
the means of production in the hands of individuals?”3
The purpose of this paper is to examine how the Internet’s revolutionary potential is currently affecting
international investigative reporting, and how it might do so in the future. Because the Internet essentially
performs two key tasks—sending and receiving information—the impact of the Internet on global
muckraking will be examined through the prism of these two technological functions. Specifically, this
paper will investigate two interconnected issues:
•

Receiving Information (Input)—How has the Internet changed the newsgathering of investigative
reporting around the world? How might this change affect the future?

•

Sending Information (Output)—How has the Internet changed the dissemination of investigative
reporting worldwide? What are the implications of this change for the future?

These issues are potentially significant not only for investigative reporters but for society as a whole. They
involve the important issue of whether the Internet can realize its democratic potential—spreading freedom
of expression throughout the globe, allowing journalists and dissidents to bypass the censorship of
repressive governmental regimes or the different tyranny of corporate control.
It should be noted at the outset that this paper is descriptive and interpretative, not quantitative. It is
based not on polling, focus groups, or other new data but on the author’s interviews, website searches,
analysis of previously published studies, and integration and extrapolation from media theory. Like all
discourse on this brave new digital world, it must be intrinsically tentative, since the rapid pace of
technological change can make even the most seemingly safe predictions obsolete.
Literature Review
Surprisingly little seems to have been published on either the current or the potential impact of the
Internet on international investigative reporting. However, a number of excellent relevant works have been
written about the Internet and other, related subjects: globalization,4 political democracy,5 privacy,6 and

3 Andrew L. Shapiro, The Control Revolution: How the Internet is Putting Individuals in Charge and Changing the World We
Know (New York: Public Affairs, 1999), 43.
4 Jerry Everard, Virtual States: The Internet and the Boundaries of the Nation-State (London: Taylor & Francis Group, 2000).
5 Peter Ferdinand, The Internet, Democracy and Democratization (London: Frank Cass Publishers, 2000); and Lawrence K.

Grossman, The Electronic Republic: Reshaping Democracy in the Information Age (New York: Viking, 1995).
6 Electronic Privacy Information Center, “Filters & Freedom: Free Speech Perspectives on Internet Content Controls,”
www.epic.org. Other good websites on this topic are the Internet Free Expression Alliance, www.ifea.net; and Computer
Professionals for Social Responsibility, www.cpsr.org.

3

obscenity.7 As for scholarship in the field of journalism, several useful how-to books give practical
instruction for using computer technology in the U.S. newsroom; but they do not discuss the larger issues
of international reporting or the possibilities for using the Internet to thwart government censorship.8
Similarly, books on international journalism have also tended to miss this issue, although one recent work
was notable for describing several instances in which foreign reporters used the Internet to defy
government censorship.9
Appropriately enough, some of the most specific and up-to-date information on the Internet and global
muckraking can be found only on the Internet itself. Numerous non-profit advocacy groups in North
America and Western Europe have established websites to promote free expression on-line. Several
reports prepared by these non-profit organizations documented cases in which the Internet was used to get
around government censorship.10
Finally, several general works on investigative reporting offered definitions of this journalistic genre
which are useful for this paper. In its classic form in Western democracies, investigative reporting is the
journalism of the exposé; the reporter acts as a watchdog alerting the public to misconduct by those in
power—“uncovering something somebody wants to keep secret,” in the words of America’s premier
investigative reporting organization.11 Northwestern University journalism professor David Protess calls
investigative reporting “the journalism of outrage . . . a media specialty that involves time-consuming
methods and potentially high-impact results.” According to Protess, it is “a form of storytelling that probes
the boundaries of America’s civic conscience. Published allegations of wrongdoing—political corruption,

7 Jonathan Wallace and Mark Mangan, Sex, Laws, and Cyberspace (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1996); American Civil
Liberties Union, “Farehnheit 451.2: Is Cyberspace Burning?,” www.aclu.org. See also National Coalition Against Censorship,
www.ncac.org; and Peacefire, www.peacefire.org.
8 The original, and classic work, is Philip Meyer, Precision Journalism: A Reporter’s Introduction to Social Science Methods

(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973). See also Brant Houston, Computer-Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide
(Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 1999); Margaret H. DeFleur, Computer-Assisted Investigative Reporting: Development and
Methodology (Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum, 1997); Eliot Jaspin, “The New Investigative Journalism: Exploring Public Records by
Computer,” in John V. Pavlik and Everett E. Dennis, eds., Demystifying Media Technology (Mountain View, C.A.: Mayfield
Publishing Co., 1993), chp. 24; Mike Berens, “Computers Help to Transform Statistics Into Stories,” Nieman Reports (Winter
2000), 57-9; and Mark Tatge, “Taking CAR for a Spin: Conventional News Gathering Goes High-Tech,” Marilyn Greenwald and
Joseph Bernt, eds., The Big Chill: Investigative Reporting in the Current Media Environment (Ames: Iowa State University Press:
2000), chp. 11.
9 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire: Independent Journalists Who Challenge Dictators, Druglords, and Other Enemies of a Free
Press (New York: New York University Press, 2001).
10 “Regardless of Frontiers,” a report by the Global Internet Liberty Campaign, gives an overview of the Internet and free

expression around the world; www.gilc.org. “The Great Firewall,” a report by the Committee to Project Journalists, is an account
of China’s Internet censorship; www.cpj.org. Two reports by Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net: The Threat to Freedom of
Expression On-Line” and “The Internet in the Mideast and North Africa: Free Expression and Censorship,” also offer good
background, www.hrw.org.
11 Investigative Reporters and Editors, The Reporter’s Handbook (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983), vii-viii.

4

government inefficiency, corporate abuses—help define public morality . . . [and] promote democracy,
efficiency, or social justice.”12
In the context of international journalism, however, the definition of investigative reporting needs to be
broadened. In many countries—especially undemocratic ones—American norms of professional journalism
simply do not apply; the line separating an investigative reporter from a political dissident or activistintellectual is blurry. For the purposes of this paper, investigative reporting should be considered any
writing that criticizes the power structure—political, religious or corporate—regardless of whether it is
written by a “professional” journalist.
Methodology
To research this topic, all relevant literature written between January of 2000 and August of 2001 that
could be located was reviewed.13 At the same time, the author searched more than 30 websites—primarily
of non-governmental organizations—that deal with censorship, investigative reporting, and international
journalism; each website’s archives was in turn thoroughly searched for relevant material.14 Finally, the

12 David L. Protess, et al, The Journalism of Outrage: Investigative Reporting and Agenda Building in America (New York: The
Guilford Press, 1991), 4-6. Other useful books on this subject are Peter Benjaminson and David Anderson, Investigative
Reporting (Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1990); and Hugo de Burgh, ed., Investigative Journalism: Context and Practice
(London: Taylor & Francis Group, 2000).
13 Specifically, the author examined numerous books written about the Internet and free speech, censorship, journalism, and
democracy; searched numerous databases, including Academic Universe, Educational Resource Information Center (ERIC),
JSTOR, Political Science Abstracts, Public Affairs Information Service International (PAIS), Social Sciences Citation Index, and
Sociological Abstracts. The author also reviewed back issues of more than two dozen academic and professional journals
housed in the University of North Carolina’s Park Library in Chapel Hill, including American Journalism Review, Brill’s Content,
Columbia Journalism Review, Committee to Protect Journalists Update, Fairness and Accuracy in Media’s Extra, First
Amendment News, Freedom Forum Weekly, International Journalist, International Press Institute Report, Internet Research,
Internet World, Investigative Reporters and Editors Journal, Journalism Communication Monographs, Media Monitor, Muckraker,
New Media, Nieman Reports, Pew Research Center News Release, Poynter Report, Wired, and World Press Review.
14 These websites included: American Civil Liberties Union (www.aclu.org); Better Government Association

(www.bettergov.org); Center for Democracy and Technology (www.cdt.org); Center for Investigative Reporting
(www.muckraker.org); Committee to Protect Journalists (www.cpj.org); Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
(www.cpsr.org); Cyber-Rights and Cyber-Liberties (www.cyber-rights.org); Declan McCullagh’s politechbot.com
(www.politechbot.com); Digital Freedom Network (www.dfn.org); Electronic Frontier Foundation (www.eff.org); Electronic Privacy
Information Center (www.epic.org); Freedom Forum (www.freedomforum.org); Freedom House (www.freedomhouse.org); Global
Internet Liberty Campaign (www.gilc.org); George Soros Open Society Institute (www.soros.org); Human Rights Internet
(www.hri.ca); Human Rights Watch (www.hrw.org); International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (www.icij.org);
International Journalists’ Network (www.ijnet.org); International Press Institute (www.freemedia.at); Internet Democracy Project
(www.internetdemocracyproject.org); Internet Free Expression Alliance (www.ifea.net); Investigative Reporters and Editors
(www.ire.org); National Coalition Against Censorship (www.ncac.org); Newspaper Association of America (www.naa.org);
Nieman Foundation (www.nieman.harvard.edu); Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism (www.pcij.org.ph); Poynter
Institute; Religious Tolerance (www.religioustolerance.org); Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press (www.rcfp.org);
Reporters Without Borders (www.rsf.org.uk); Voice of America (www.rferl.org); and World Association of Newspapers
(www.fiej.org).

5

author conducted telephone and email interviews with international investigative reporters and
representatives of the most active of these non-profit organizations.
Findings
I.

Receiving Information (Input)

So far, the Internet seems to have influenced international investigative newsgathering in mostly positive
although not revolutionary ways. At its most basic level, journalists from countries across the globe are
learning to use many different kinds of computer technology, including the Internet, to probe more deeply
beneath the surface of events. For example, Mexican reporters statistically demonstrated malfeasance by
the country’s police force after building a database from judicial records which revealed that only five
percent of all of drug arrests resulted from police investigations.15
In Third World countries, especially, even the most basic newsgathering can be difficult. As a result,
says an African Internet editor, “it is the humble e-mail service that is proving to be the most powerful
modern tool for journalists. This fast and effective communication tool, with its low bandwidth and basic
hardware requirements, makes it an ideal solution for infrastructure-poor environments like Africa. Add to
that the benefits that free Web-based e-mail services can offer—accessibility and the security of being
relatively untraceable with no incriminating copies harbored on your hard drive—and these offer journalists
here a winning option.”16
More importantly, perhaps, the Internet can allow reporters in undemocratic countries to gather
information banned by their own government. For example, when the Honduran military used the pretext of
“national security” to keep secret how much aid it received from the United States, a reporter from
Honduras easily found the information on a U.S. government website. 17 The Internet can also help
journalists outwit repressive regimes. In Nigeria, an editor whose critical reporting led the country’s dictator
to cut off his newspaper’s telephone lines discovered that he could get around this newsgathering
censorship by plugging his laptop into the phone lines of his friends; the editor simply switched to on-line
interviews to keep his newspaper afloat.18
At the same time, the Internet’s role in newsgathering has also strengthened cooperation between
journalists in different countries, providing reportorial collaboration and psychological solidarity in what can
often be a lonely and isolated undertaking. The University of Missouri’s National Institute for ComputerAssisted Reporting has trained journalists from Venezuela, Russia, Bosnia, Mexico, Finland, Sweden, New
Zealand, Argentina, the Netherlands, Norway, Brazil, and Canada.19 In addition, since 2000 more than 300
15 Brant Houston, “When Numbers Talk, Journalists Help People Listen,” The IRE Journal, (July 1999), 15.
16 Tanya Accone, “Digital Dividends for Journalism in Africa,” Nieman Reports (Winter 2000), 67-9.
17 Brant Houston, “When Numbers Talk,” IRE Journal, 15.
18 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 177.
19 Brant Houston, “When Numbers Talk,” IRE Journal, 14.

6

journalists from 47 nations have attended annual Global Investigative Journalism conferences in
Copenhagen, getting hands-on training in computer assisted reporting techniques as well as swapping
story ideas with journalists from other countries.20 “The number of ways journalists can exploit the new
technologies and gather information beyond nation-state borders is substantially increasing,” said
investigative reporter Charles Lewis, one of the speakers at the conference. “We can use computers, the
Internet, encryption, wireless and other technologies to make the world much, much smaller. And we can
network with each other like never before.”21
Perhaps the most innovative of all attempts to use this technology for global muckraking began in 1997,
when Lewis formed a non-profit group called the International Consortium for Investigative Journalism
(ICIJ). Nearly one hundred of the world’s best investigative reporters, from 45 countries, now belong to
ICIJ, which directs and funds their joint global investigative projects.22 “In an increasingly frontierless yet
complex world, there is a need for in-depth information that transcends national boundaries,” the ICIJ
website declares. “We believe that the presence of an effective networking mechanism for investigative
reporters will lead to a better-informed populace, as well as an enhanced civil society and greater
accountability among governments worldwide.”23
The consortium’s first piece of collaborative international investigative reporting appeared on its website
last year. In an ambitious three-part series that ran more 23,000 words, ICIJ’s team of reporters exposed a
worldwide, multi-billion dollar scheme by several huge international tobacco companies that used organized
crime rings to smuggle cigarettes and swindle governments out of taxes. The story was laboriously pieced
together by ICIJ reporters on three continents who analyzed 11,000 pages of internal corporate documents
that had been made public in various lawsuits but had been overlooked by other media outlets. The series
also included interviews from around the globe with high-level corporate insiders who admitted their
complicity in the complicated scheme. ICIJ’s website included links in which readers could see for
themselves—by double-clicking with their computer mouse—the actual internal documents that so clearly
implicated the tobacco giants in wrongdoing, including a “smoking gun” memo from British American
Tobacco which instructed that incriminating evidence be destroyed by “a good quality safe and shredder.”24
20 IRE Journal (July/August 2001), 5.
21 Charles Lewis, “World’s Journalists Should Collaborate in Age of Globalization,” remarks at the Global Investigative
Journalism Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark (26 April 2001), 3, www.public-i.org/commentary.
22 With an annual budget of $680,000, ICIJ pays its international coterie of reporters approximately $10,000 apiece to work on

its projects. At least one of its foreign reporters has requested that ICIJ not disclose his identity out of fear of retaliation by local
authorities. Author’s telephone interview with Maud Beelman, ICIJ, Washington, D.C. (25 Aug. 2001). ICIJ must also contend
with the complications of international libel law, which is very restrictive in some countries and may apply to anything posted on
the world wide web. Bob Burton, “Journalism’s New Standard Bearers,” The Australian (19 July 2001).
23 ICIJ also hands out an annual $20,000 reward for “outstanding international investigative reporting” and posts advice on

filing Freedom of Information Act requests on its website. The group is underwritten by various foundations but does not accept
money from corporations, labor unions or governments. David Leigh, “Global Disclosure,” The Guardian (31 Jan. 2001); Bill
Birnbauer, “Reporters Without Boundaries,” The Age, http://magazine.walkleys.com/vol 12/birnbauer.html; and ICIJ website,
www.icij.org.
24 Maud S. Beelman, Maria Teresa Ronderos, and Erik J. Schelzig, “Major Tobacco Multinational Implicated In Cigarette
Smuggling, Tax Evasion, Documents Show,” Part I, ICIJ website, 31 January 2000; ICIJ, “Global Reach of Tobacco Company’s
Involvement in Cigarette Smuggling Exposed in Company Papers,” Part II, ICIJ website, 1 February 2000. ICIJ continued to
7

Subsequent muckraking by ICIJ painstakingly reported on how U.S. aid to several Latin American
countries during the past decade—ostensibly to combat drugs—was also used to prop up repressive
military regimes linked to human rights abuses. In a six-part, 30,000 word series, the international reporting
team revealed that the CIA had funneled at least $10 million in cash to Peru’s notorious intelligence chief,
Vladimiro Montesinos, even though CIA officials themselves acknowledged that Montesinos pocketed
much of the money. Furthermore, the story reported that the Peruvian intelligence chief used the CIA’s
high-tech surveillance equipment to spy not on drug kingpins but on journalists and domestic political
opponents. 25
More recent ICIJ reports have been published in book form: Making a Killing, an 80,000-word
investigation of corporate mercenaries—private military companies and arms dealing firms that are traded
on public stock exchanges—involved a team of 36 different ICIJ reporters across the globe. Water Barons,
an in-depth look of international water privatization, involved research over a twelve-year span.26
Not only did the wrongdoing exposed by these muckrakers span the globe; so, too, did the media outlets
and the journalistic resources that were necessary to uncover the scandals. The ICIJ series was
simultaneously published or picked up by more than 40 print and broadcasting media outlets in at least ten
countries around the world; several governments began investigations as a result of the disclosures. Online technology was crucial to this success. The group’s reporting team communicated with each other
almost exclusively by e-mail that was encrypted to protect sources and sensitive information. Story memos
and drafts were also downloaded on the Internet. And the final work product premiered on-line. “The
Internet has given us a virtual newsroom in terms of newsgathering and data collection,” says Peter Eisner,
one-time managing editor of the project “These are all cyber-reports We simply could not have done this
work without this technology.”27
The encrypted Internet communication also made it easier for otherwise suspicious, lone-wolf
investigative reporters to feel comfortable sharing information on such a sensitive group project. Indeed,
America’s most famous previous joint investigative reporting project foundered twenty-five years ago when
there was no Internet technology to help the collaborative process along or guarantee publication of the
follow-up on its story over its website in the classic tradition of crusading journalism. ICIJ, “Tobacco Companies Linked to
Criminal Organizations in Lucrative Cigarette Smuggling,” 3 March 2000; Maud S. Beelman, “Philip Morris Accused off
Smuggling, Money-Laundering Conspiracy In Racketeering Lawsuit,” 23 July 2001; Duncan Campbell, “U.K. Considering Formal
Investigation Into Cigarette Smuggling,” 23 July 2001; all at www.icij.org. Additional follow-up reports were subsequently
generated when whistleblowers contacted ICIJ with additional information. Duncan Campbell, “The Multi-Million Dollar Trade
Route,” “Whistleblower Who Asked Too Many Questions Faced Company’s Wrath,” “Clarke Company Faces New Smuggling
Claims,” and “How Clarke Defended Company,” The Guardian (22 Aug. 2001), www.guardian.co.uk/ bat/article.
25 Angel Paez, “CIA Gave at Least $10 Million to Peru’s Ex-Spymaster Montesinos,” 28 June 2001; ICIJ, “U.S. Military Aid to
Latin America Linked to Human Rights Abuses,” 12 July 2001; ICIJ, “Narcotics and Economics Drive U.S. Policy in Latin
America,” 12 July 2001; ICIJ, “Fighting One Half of the Drug War,” 12 July 2001; ICIJ, “U.S.-Trained Forces Linked to Human
Rights Abuses,” 12 July 2001; ICIJ, “U.S. Shrugged Off Corruption, Abuse in Service of Drug War,” 12 July 2001; and ICIJ, “Drug
War Replaces Cold War,” 12 July 2001; all at www.public-i.org.
26 Ibid.
27 Author’s telephone interview, Peter Eisner, ICIJ, Washington, D.C., 19 July 2001.

8

journalistic results.28 With the Internet, however, the ICIJ itself can guarantee world-wide dissemination of
its reporting on its website, at whatever length is necessary, even if no other media outlets pick up on the
story.
Ironically, says ICIJ founder Charles Lewis, the same technology that furthers global muckraking is also
used by the tobacco companies and other international miscreants to further their wrongdoing—reinforcing
why such international investigative reporting is necessary in the first place. “Dramatic, almost
incomprehensible new technologies are making borders irrelevant and regulation by governments almost
impossible,” Lewis observes. Global issues that transcend geography, he says, include cloning, genetic
engineering, lethal new viruses, uncontrolled multinational corporations that exploit labor and weaken the
environment, and international crime rings “creating banks on their personal computers and using
sophisticated encryption technologies to hide their tracks. . . . Conventional journalism simply cannot
investigate or explain these and other complex, global subject adequately. The typical one-country
perspective is too narrow and misleading, and frankly, a disservice to the public.”29 Lewis’ international
muckraking team is the first step in trying to address that problem.
II.

Disseminating Information (Output)

While global muckrakers have had positive if not revolutionary success when it comes to newsgathering,
the picture is more complicated when it comes to news dissemination. Here, the data is mixed, with both
optimistic and pessimistic indications in terms of free expression. Perhaps the best way to analyze the
results is by breaking it down into positive and negative indicators.
A) Optimistic Indicators
The nature of Internet technology seems to be at the core of most positive assessments about the future
of digital free speech. From its earliest phases, the Internet was designed for the U.S. military to keep
communication alive in the event of nuclear war. As a result, the system’s decentralized “open
architecture” was deliberately constructed so that individual computers could function independently of
each other even if particular transmission stations were knocked out. “The Net interprets censorship as
damage and routes around it,” says Net pioneer John Gilmore. Indeed, the architecture of the system was
specifically designed to prevent any centralized global control. To make interception more difficult,
computer routers did not even retain the information about the packets they sent out—a further obstacle to

28 The assassination of Arizona Republic investigative reporter Don Bolles in 1976 led to the then-unprecedented
collaborative journalistic investigation called the “Arizona Project.” A team of reporters from across the U.S. descended on
Arizona to turn the state upside down to try and expose why Bolles was murdered—thereby avenging Bolles’ murder and
sending a message to organized crime that killing a reporter is counter-productive. In the end, many newspapers balked at
publishing the reporters’ collective efforts, even the Arizona Republic. However, the project led to the formation of Investigative
Reporters and Editors, an important step in training and institutionalizing investigative reporting in the U.S. Martin Tallberg, Don
Bolles: An Investigation into His Murder (New York: Popular Library, 1977). Unlike ICIJ, which is composed of elite reporters by
invitation only, the aptly named IRE is open to all; while IRE trains investigative reporters, ICIJ uses their content. Author’s
telephone interview with Maud Beelman, ICIJ, Washington, D.C. (25 Aug. 2001).
29 Charles Lewis, “Age of Globalization,” 1.

9

would-be censors.30 Yet while this structure was created for military reasons, one Pentagon official
realized early on its political implications:
The Internet is clearly a significant long term strategic threat to authoritarian regimes, one that they
will be unable to counter effectively. News from the outside world brought by the Internet into
nations subjugated by such regimes will clash with the distorted version provided by their
governments, eroding the credibility of their positions and encouraging unrest. . . . Information
about violations of human rights and other forms of oppression will be increasingly conveyed to the
outside world by the Internet, helping mobilize external political forces on behalf of the oppressed.31
Other technological aspects also seemed to bode well for a democratic Internet. It was accessible to
anyone with a computer and modem, regardless of location. It was decentralized but global, relatively
inexpensive, and utterly instantaneous. It had unlimited capacity to store data without any need for a
gatekeeper. And it allowed two-way, interactive communication. “[T]he Net’s interactivity works against
top-down attempts to control the information to which people are exposed,” one author observed. “If the TV
remote control posed a challenge to television programmers and their advertisers, imagine the problems
presented by the web, where users can, in theory, start where they like and go anywhere.”32 Unlike
television or radio, whose broadcasts disappear after being played, the Internet stores its material so that it
is continuously available anytime unless and until it is removed.33
All of this, of course, could be an enormous boon for free speech in general and investigative reporting
in particular. The Internet has “no restrictions on what can be discussed, or who can take part in those
discussion, and to a large extent it operates without being controlled by either politics or the market,” notes
one British journalism professor. “ . . . [I]t has the potential to return journalists to the pamphleteering days
of early journalists like Thomas Paine.”34 No less an old-media publisher than Arthur O. Sulzberger, Jr. of
the New York Times enthused in a speech that “there are now millions of electronic printing presses in
cyberspace. . . . [D]igital technology might be the true agent of political transformation.”35 Even an
30 Howard Rheingold, “A Case Against Censorship,” The Australian (21 June 1994), as cited in Internet Research (No. 1,
1997), 60; James T. Perry, et al, New Perspectives on the Internet, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Thompson Learning,
2001), 1.08. “The fact that messages on the Internet will be broken up into separate ‘packets’ of information as they leave the
sender, directed across various telecommunications routes, and only reassembled at the computer of the receiver, means that it
is impossible for outsiders like governments to intercept them en route without destroying most of the efficiency gains such a
technology can bring,” one scholar wrote. Peter Ferdinand, ed., The Internet, Democracy and Democratization (London: Frank
Cass Publishers, 2000), 11-12.
31 Peter Ferdinand, The Internet, Democracy, 12.
32 Andrew L. Shapiro, Control Revolution, 85.
33 Gordon Graham, The Internet, 80-81.
34 Italics in original.

Carole Fleming, “Journalism and New Technology,” in Hugo de Burgh, Investigative Journalism, 193,

179.
35 Arthur Sulzberger, “Preserving Our Reputation,” remarks to the IPI World Congress, Boston, Massachusetts (1 May 2000),
www.freemedia.org.

10

advocacy group devoted to warning of the dangers of Internet censorship is optimistic about its
revolutionary possibilities:
While the mass media usually responds to the economic and political interests of those who control it,
such controls do not presently exist on the Internet. Here, citizens from the most repressive regimes
are able to find information about matters concerning their government or their human rights records
that no local newspaper may dare print, while denouncing the conditions under which they live for the
world to hear. . . . This power to give and receive information, so central to any conception of
democracy, can be truly achieved on the Internet, as nowhere before.36
Indeed, in recent years, numerous investigative reporters across the globe have successfully used the
Internet to defy state censorship:
•

In at least half a dozen countries in the Mideast and Northern Africa, Arab newspaper reporters have
been able to thwart censors by posting their banned stories on the Internet.37

•

In Russia, the state took over the opposition magazine Itogi in April and fired its top editors to stop their
criticism of the government. Undaunted, the journalists simply distributed their dissident views on a
website that they named “The Real Itogi.”38

•

In the West Bank, Palestinian journalist Daoud Kuttab established his own website to get around the
censorship he had previously suffered at the hands of both Israeli and Palestinian authorities. Kuttab’s
Arab Media Internet Network (www.amin.org) reported exposés that other media dared not run—
including alleged torture by Israelis and Palestinians as well as corruption within the Palestinian
Liberation Organization. The website averages more than 50,000 hits a day.39

•

In Malaysia, the prime minister and his allies owned or controlled all of the country’s main newspapers
and broadcast stations while banning foreign publications as well. So Malaysian journalist Steven Gan,
who had previously been imprisoned for his anti-government reporting, started a website called
Malaysia Now (www.mayalsiakini.com). The Internet site publishes investigative articles “that could
never appear in Malaysia’s tightly controlled press,” according to an international media group.
Although the prime minister banned the website’s reporters from access to government news
conferences and official functions—“these people really behave like traitors,” he declared—the website
36 GILC, “Regardless of Frontiers,” 33.

37 These countries include Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Mauritania, Tunisia, and Turkey. At least one of the Internet sites used by
these journalists is safely located in London. Human Rights Watch, “Internet in the Mideast and Northern Africa,” www.hrw.org.;
and Tom Regan, “Technology Is Changing Journalism,” Nieman Reports (Winter 2000), 8.
38 Freedom Forum, “Shut-Down Russian News Magazine Resurfaces on the Internet,” (24 April 2001),

www.freedomforum.org.
39 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 177-80; and “International Press Freedom Awards,” Committee to Protect Journalists,
www.cpsj.or/awards96/daoud.html

11

has continued to produce hard-hitting journalism. “The government had a complete monopoly on
information,” Gan says, “until the emergence of the Internet.”40
•

In Indonesia, independent journalists used the Internet to expose the corruption of president Suharto
after the dictator shut down the country’s most important news magazines. Working out of an
underground safe house, the reporters also filed encrypted reports about the regime’s human rights
abuses. Although the on-line audience was the relatively small Indonesian elite, protesters blanketed
the streets and bus stations with photocopies of the Internet stories. “There is little doubt that the
Internet had given opposition groups in the closing years of the Suharto regime the ability to control
and direct their message internationally and domestically with far greater precision, through ‘broadcast’
to news groups and chat groups, or through ‘narrowcast’ to specific targeted individuals, within split
seconds,” two scholars concluded. “There is also little doubt that there was some overlap between the
students who used . . . [the Internet] at their universities in Jakarta and those who stormed the
parliament on the eve of Suharto’s resignation.”41

•

In the former Yugoslavia, one-time dictator Slobodan Milosevic imprisoned or shut down all opposition
journalists—except for two radio stations whose staff defiantly re-routed their broadcasts so that they
could be heard on the Internet. The intrepid broadcasters transmitted uncensored news reports from a
secret location in Yugloslavia, using a mirror website in the Netherlands and an Internet service
provider in Amsterdam that was beyond Milosevic’s reach. “At 9 a.m., the regime shut down our
transmitter,” the activist-scientist who rerouted the radio signal later remembered. “By sunset, [we
were] back on the air, not just in Yugoslavia but all around the world.” Although few citizens in the wartorn region had access to the Internet, the website received more than one million hits a day from an
international audience. Equally important, sympathizers across the world re-broadcast the reports back
into Yugoslavia on the BBC, Radio Netherlands, and short-wave radio. “The technologies were not
necessarily cutting edge,” one study later concluded, “or even that technically difficult to use . . . e-mail,
audio streaming, digital broadcast, satellite transmission.” Nonetheless, another study found, “the
existence of the Internet was the single factor that allowed certain oppositional groups in the former
Yugoslavia to maintain [contact] with the outside world.” The journalists themselves called it “the
Internet revolution.”42

40 Committee to Protect Journalists, “Acceptance Speeches of the 2000 International Press Freedom Awardees,”

www.cpj.org/awards00/awardee_speeches.html; Freedom Forum, “Malaysia Bans Internet Newspaper From Official Events,” 7
February 2001, www.freedomforum.org; Freedom Forum, “Malaysian Prime Minister Accuses Malaysiakini.com of Treason,” 7
March 2001, www.freedomforum.org; Committee to Protect Journalists, “Malaysia: Government Blocks International Magazines,”
7 March 2001, www.cpj.org/news/2001/Malaysia07 march01na.html.
41 Andreas Harsono, “Journalists’ Use of the Internet Bubbled Up From Underground,” Nieman Reports (Winter 2000), 74-6;

and David T. Hill and Krishna Sen, “The Internet in Indonesia’s New Democracy,” in Peter Ferdinand, The Internet, Democracy,
119-36.
42 Drazen Pantic email to author, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 23 July 2001; Drazen Pantic, “Internet in Serbia: From the Dark Side
of the Moon to the Internet Revolution,” www.firstmonday.dk/issues2_4/pantic/index.html; Drazen Pantic, “The Case of B92,”
home.nyu.edu/~dp51/index2.html; Reporters Without Borders, “Serbia: September-October 2000,” www.rsf.org; IPI, “Veran
Matic,” www.freemedia.org.; Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 168-77; and Andrew L. Shapiro, Control Revolution, 9.

12

B) Pessimistic Indicators
Despite these Internet triumphs, however, many cyber-journalists experience censorship on a regular
basis. “Governments around the world . . . are rushing to eradicate freedom of expression on the Internet,”
the non-profit advocacy group Human Rights Watch has complained. “. . . Restrictions on Internet access
and content are increasing worldwide, under all forms of government . . . [in] an international trend toward
censorship.” Although all advances in communication technology have historically been greeted with
censorship, “[t]he Internet, as the first truly ‘mass’ medium, is even more threatening than these earlier
media,” the watchdog group asserted. “. . . It is precisely because of the Internet’s potential for increasing
the political participation of the disenfranchised that governments are seeking to control it.”43
Governments use a variety of different methods, often in combination, to stop cyber-muckrakers from
undermining their power. These tactics span the continuum from heavy-handed violence by the state to
more subtle control through corporate intermediaries. In general, however, these varying methods fall into
one of two categories: After-the-fact retaliation against the trouble-making journalists; and before-the-fact
prevention to keep such dangerous reporting away from the public in the first place.
1. Retaliation
Retaliation against troublesome Internet muckrakers can include shutting down websites, lawsuits,
prison, and even violence.
A) Violence
•

In the Ukraine, the decapitated body of Georgy Gongadze, editor of a muckraking website that
frequently criticized the country’s president, was discovered buried in a shallow grave. The Ukranian
president himself was ultimately implicated in the assassination by tape recordings in which he
personally ordered a henchman to take the cyber-reporter and “drive him out, undress him, fuck, leave
him without his pants.”44

•

In Nigeria, when authorities learned that local journalists had purchased state-of-the-art computers to
begin on-line reporting, police set their newsroom on fire and destroyed all of their digital equipment.45

•

In Tunisia, on-line journalist Taufik Ben Brick was beaten up for his cyber-criticism of the government.46
43 Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net: The Threat to Freedom of Expression On-Line,” (1996 May), www.hrw.org.
44 Sean Ransom, “Murder Threatens Kuchma Regime,” IPI Report (No. 1, 2001), www.freemedia.org; and Adrian Karatnycky,

“A Death In Kiev: Secret Tapes, Missing Reporters,” Wall Street Journal Europe (8 Dec. 2000),
www.freedomhouse.org/media/120800wsj.html.
45 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 8.
46 Tanya Accone, “Digital Dividends,” Nieman Reports, 68.

13

B) Prison
•

In China, authorities have jailed 14 people in the past three years for distributing information on the
Internet. Half of those imprisoned were cyber-journalists, including investigative reporters who
exposed government corruption. All of them had criticized the government on-line. Some were beaten
while being interrogated by police.47

•

In Cuba, reporter Mario Veira Gonzalez was charged with “slander” for criticizing the Cuban judicial
system on a Miami-based website. Another Cuban cyber-journalist, Jesús Joel Díaz, Hernández was
sentenced to four years in prison for “dangerousness” after his reports were posted on still another
Internet site.48

•

In Turkey, the moderator of a cyber forum on one of the country’s main Internet access providers was
sentenced to more than three years in prison for “insulting and mocking institutions” by allowing stories
critical of Turkey’s human rights record to be posted on-line.49

•

In Zambia, two editors were jailed for “possessing state secrets” after their website revealed corruption
and repression by the government.50

•

In Sierra Leone, two troublesome journalists were arrested for “illegal online activity.”51

C. Shut Downs
•

In Russia, the government closed down a website called Media-Most, which was run by independent
journalists who had battled president Vladimir Putin.52

•

In Kazakhstan, officials shut down an independent on-line news service for what was called “technical
reasons.”53
47 Committee to Protect Journalists, “China: Internet Essayist Jailed for ‘Subversion,’” (25 June 2001), www.cpj.

org/protests/01/ltrs/China25jun01pl.html; A. Lin Neuman, “The Great Firewall,” CPJ Briefings, www.cpj.org/
Briefings/2001/China_jan01.html; and Freedom Forum, “China Sentences ‘Internet Dissident’ to Four Years in Prison,” (30 April
2001), www.freedomforum.org.
48 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 181.
49 Reporters Without Borders, “Turkey: The Press Still Under A Stranglehold,” (17 April 2001), 2, www.rsf. org/uk.
50 Committee to Protect Journalists, “Zambian Editors Arrested After 10 Days in Hiding,” (13 March 1996), www.cpj.org.;

Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 182-3.

51 Tanya Accone, “Digital Dividends,” Nieman Reports, 68.
52 Freedom Forum, “Moscow Court Orders Liquidation of Gusinksy’s Media Empire,” (31 May 2001), www. freedomforum.org.
53 Committee to Protect Journalists, “Europe: Press Freedom Facts 2000,” www.cpj.org/attacks00/europe.html.

14

•

In Zambia, police ordered a newspaper to eliminate from its website specific stories that had angered
the country’s president.54

•

In China, authorities have repeatedly shut down news websites and Internet forums that criticized
Chinese censorship and other human rights violations.55

•

In Tunisia, authorities not only shut down an Amnesty International website that criticized Tunisian
censorship; the government also set up its own bogus site designed to look like Amnesty International’s
but which praised Tunisia’s human rights record instead of criticizing it.56

C) Lawsuits
So far, there have been relatively few libel or other lawsuits against cyber-journalists and their websites;
the international legal system has apparently not kept pace with the rapid evolution of communications
technology. But it would seem to be only a matter of time before the targets of Internet muckrakers realize
the unique advantages such lawsuits would enjoy. Especially in authoritarian countries, where libel laws
are extremely unfriendly to journalists, Internet reporters face genuine legal exposure. “The Internet,
because it is global, will allow the laws of the most repressive nations to influence the conduct of journalists
in the freest ones,” observes the senior counsel for the New York Times. “[Although] a foreign lawsuit is
only truly worrisome if the defendant has assets at risk . . . global [media] companies have assets
everywhere, and a victorious libel plaintiff can probably collect his money not only where he won it but also
in scores of other countries that will unthinkingly honor the libel judgments as a matter of international
comity.”57

2) Prevention
Governments can prevent watchdog journalism on the Internet by using surveillance and threats, and by
directly or indirectly limiting, blocking or banning access to selective websites, ISPs, or the entire worldwide-web itself.

54 Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net,” 20; and Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 182-3.
55 Associated Press /Freedom Forum, “China Closes Internet Forums Critical of Government,” (25 June 2001),

www.freedomforum.org; Reporters Without Borders, “China: New Wave of Censorship on Internet,” (2 July 2001),
www.rsf.org/uk; and Reporters Without Borders, “China Internet: A Chronicle of Repression,” www.rsf.org/uk.
56 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 183; and Joel Campagna, “Overview of the Middle East and North Africa,” (1999),
www.cpj.org/attacks99/mideast99/mideast.html.
57 Adam Liptak, “The Internet, the Law, and the Press,” Nieman Reports (Winter 2000), 13-15.

15

A) Surveillance
According to Human Rights Watch, direct government monitoring of the Internet is common in many
countries and poses “potentially deadly consequences for those who would expose abuses of state
power.”58 Among the known cases:
•

Tunisia uses government-approved ISPs to spy on Internet users by requiring the companies to inform
authorities once a month who their customers are and what they wrote on line.59

•

Pakistani authorities directly monitor Internet communication themselves and have even forced private
ISPs to have their customers sign a contract agreeing to the surveillance.60

•

In China, security forces have installed monitoring devices on ISP servers to track individual email
accounts. They also route all international phone calls through gateways controlled by the
government.61

•

In Singapore, authorities made a public display of searching 80,000 computer files of customers from a
local Internet Service Provider (ISP). “Censorship can no longer be 100 percent effective,” the minister
of information told reporters, “but even if it is only 20 percent effective we should not stop censoring.”62

B) Complete Ban
•

In Burma, authorities literally outlawed the Internet. The only exceptions are for a few select military,
government, and government-approved corporate leaders, whose computers and modems must first
be registered with the regime.63

•

In Afghanistan, the Taliban banned the Internet in order to “control all those things that are wrong,
obscene, immoral and against Islam.”64

58 Human Rights Watch, “Internet in the Mideast,” www.hrw.org/wr2k/Issues-04.html.
59 Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net,” 2, 12, 20; and Tanya Accone, “Digital Dividends,” Nieman Reports, 67.
60 David Tortell, “Internet Censorship Report,” (April 1998), Executive Summary, 3, Canadian Committee to Protect
Journalists, www.cjfe.org/publications/internet/sum.html.
61 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 187-8.
62 Garry Rodan, “The Internet and Political Control in Singapore,” Political Science Quarterly 113, (No. 1, 1998), 187, 193.
63 David Cozac, Canadian Committee to Protect Journalists, “Internet Censorship Report: The Challenges for Free
Expression On-Line,” (1998 April), chp. 1, 2-3; and Jerry Everard, Virtual States, 32-3.

16

•

In Libya, military strongman Mu’ammar Gadhafi has kept the Internet completely out of his isolated
country.65

•

In Liberia, the government ordered the “cessation . . . of all broadcast and newspaper postings on the
Internet.” The only exception is if journalists register with authorities and provide logs of all information
that is put on-line.66

C) Blocking
• Many regimes—Abu Dhabi, Bahrain, China, Germany, India, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, North
Korea, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovenia, South Korea, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Arab
Republic, Vietnam, Yemen—block specific media websites deemed dangerous. Proxy server filters
censor writing about religion, sex, and politics, using computer technology to search for such
dangerous key words as “democracy” or “human rights.”67
•

In China, all media websites are banned. Non-media website are forbidden from carrying news from
foreign media without government permission. In addition, all portal sites must carry propaganda put
out by the state.68

•

In Syria, authorities went even farther by blocking all Yahoo and Hotmail websites to prevent any sort
of email communication whatsoever.69

64 R. Frank Lebowitz, “Taliban Ban Internet in Afghanistan,” Digital Freedom Network, http://dfn.org/focus/

afghanistan/internetban.html.
65 Human Rights Watch, “Rights Group Surveys Online Freedom of Expression in the Region,” (8 July 1999), 2,
www.hrw.org/press/1999/jul/mena-int0707.html.
66 Committee to Protect Journalists, “Liberia Bars Media From Posting on Internet,” (27 October 1998), www.

cpj.org/protests/98ltrs/liberia/27oct98html.

67 Human Rights Watch, “Freedom of Expression on the Internet,” (1999), 2, www.hrw.org; Human Rights Watch, “Silencing
the Net,” 3, 14, 16; Committee to Protect Journalists, “Syria,” (2000), www.cpj.org.; Committee to Protect Journalists, “Saudi
Arabia and Other Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council,” www.cpj.org/attacks97/ mideast/ saudiarabia.html; Reporters
Without Borders, “Morocco: Protest Letter,” (19 April 2001), www.rsf. org/uk; Roger Parkinson, World Association of
Newspapers, “Challenges to Press Freedom in East and Central Europe, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent
States,” (25 September 2000), 3, www.fiej.org/pf/eastern. europe/warsaw.html; R. Frank Lebowitz, “South Korea Moves to
Censor Internet,” Digital Freedom Network, http://dfn.org/focus/skorea/micbill.html; Andrew L. Shapiro, Control Revolution, 67,
183; and Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 187.
68 A. Lin Neumann, “The Great Firewall,” 4.
69 Committee to Protect Journalists, “Syria,” (2000), www.cpj.org.

17

D) Limiting Access
•

In Cuba, citizens must file a petition with the government giving a “valid reason” why they want to go
on-line.70

•

In Iran, authorities closed more than 400 cybercafés to “eliminate” those that did not “comply” with its
“national culture.”71

•

In China, Internet users are required to register with security forces, supply detailed personal
information about themselves, and swear not to “read, copy or disseminate information that threatens
state security.” For added measure, Chinese officials recently closed more than 8,000 cybercafés.72

E) Controlling ISPs
•

In numerous countries—including Azerbaijan, Botswana, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Saudi
Arabia, Turkmenistan, Vietnam and Zimbabwe—the state exerts direct control over the Internet by
outlawing private service providers so that only the government can provide on-line connection. (In
case that wasn’t enough, Iraq’s government also banned all modems and officially denounced the
Internet as “the end of civilizations, cultures, interests and ethics.”)73

•

Other regimes—like China and Singapore—maintain control over private ISPs by requiring them to be
licensed by the state. In Tunisia, ISPs are required to have “constant oversight” of ISP servers “to
insure” that nothing “contrary to public order” is ever posted on-line.74

F) Threats
•

In Laos, authorities threatened to prosecute or expel journalists who “use the Internet in the wrong way”
by writing “misleading news stories to create . . . doubts among the public, at home or abroad.”75
70 Reporters Without Borders, “Cuba: Cyber Dissident Sentenced to Two Years’ Imprisonment,” (14 June 2001), www.rsf.org.
71 Freedom Forum, “400 Cybercafés Closed in Tehran,” (15 May 2001), www.freedomforum.org.

72 Anthony Collings, Words of Fire, 187; and Reporters Without Borders, “China Internet: A Chronicle of Repression,”
www.rsf.org/uk.
73 Leonard R. Sussman, “Digital Time for Censors,” Presstime (October 2000); Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net,” 20;
David Cozac, “Internet Censorship Report,” chp. 1, 3; CPJ, “Press Freedom Facts 2000,” “Asia 1999,” “Europe 2000,”
“Turkmenistan 2000,” “Iraq 2000,” “World Report 1998,” www.cpj.org; and Roger Parkinson, “Challenges to Press Freedom,” 3.
74 Tanya Accone, “Digital Divides,” Nieman Reports, 67; and Human Rights Watch, “Internet in the Mideast,” “Silencing the

Net,” 2, 12, 20, www.hrw.org/hrw/advocacy/internet/mena/liability.htm.
75 Committee to Protect Journalists, “Laos: Government Issues Strict New Internet Regulations,” (27 October 2000),
www.cpj.org/protests/00ltrs/Laos27oct00pl.html.

18

•

In Turkey, the state has threatened to fine websites up to $85,000 for posting “untrue news, insults and
similar material.”76

•

In Senegal, journalist Daniel Bekoutou received death threats after posting an on-line article about
government involvement in torture. He had to flee to France for safety.77

Analysis
All of these methods of censoring Internet journalism, however troubling, must be viewed in context. So
far, the evidence suggests that these various obstacles to cyber-muckraking have actually been no more
restrictive—and in a number of cases have been less restrictive—than what non-Internet journalists have
also suffered in these countries.78 Indeed, most of the regimes that have clamped down on on-line
reporting regularly engage in torture and other, far worse human rights violations.79 More to the point,
despite this cyber-censorship, the Internet overall has increased rather than decreased free expression
throughout the world—even in the most authoritarian of regimes.
China, for example, has imprisoned more on-line journalists than any other nation, part of an Internet
crackdown that has often been compared to its ancient, unsuccessful attempt to block barbarian invasion
by erecting the “Great Wall” around its borders. Yet even the Committee to Protect Journalists
acknowledges that “China with the Internet is certainly a freer place than China without the Internet,” if only
76 Freedom Forum, “Turkish Parliament Passes Laws Restricting Internet, Broadcast Freedoms,” (8 June 2001),

www.freedomforum.org.

77 Tanya Accone, “Digital Divides,” Nieman Reports, 67.
78 In the Mideast, for example, Human Rights Watch found that “[m]ost countries that have allowed Internet access have
tolerated freer expression online than is permitted in the local news media. Kuwait, Morocco, Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, and
Lebanon have all permitted relatively unfettered online speech for the thousands of users in each country, even as they enforce
press laws against print periodicals that publish ‘objectionable’ material.” Human Rights Watch, “A Cautious Start,” The Internet
in the Mideast, 2, www.hrw.org. A study by Freedom House of 131 countries worldwide reached a similar conclusion: “Perhaps
surprisingly, many traditionally authoritative countries now permit relatively unrestricted use of the Internet by citizens, while
several of the most democratic states attempt to impose restrictions on the Internet in the name of protecting national security
and public decency.” However, these Internet restrictions in democratic countries as a rule are far less draconian than in
authoritarian ones, whose uncharacteristic hands-off policy toward the Internet may be less a function of liberalism than elitism;
in poor countries, the Internet isn’t even an option for the overwhelming majority of the population. See Appendix for a worldwide
breakdown of Internet access. Leonard R. Sussman and Kristen Guida, “How Free? The Web and the Press,” Freedom House,
www.freedomhouse.org.
79 For example, in the Mideast, even Human Rights Watch acknowledges that “in a region where torture is commonplace and

free elections the exception, the issue of Internet speech may seem low on the human rights agenda. It may also appear to be
an elitist concern in countries where illiteracy is rampant and the cost of a personal computer and perhaps even a telephone is
beyond the reach of most households. But it is arguably in less-developed and more repressive countries that the Internet can
have the greatest impact.” Human Rights Watch, “Introduction,” The Internet in the Mideast, 1, www.hrw.org.
19

because the total amount of information available is still greater than it was before the Internet, whatever
the new technology’s limitations might be.80
Why has free expression increased even in countries that have cracked down on the Internet? In part,
because there are limits to what any of the most authoritarian regimes have been able to do to stop it.
China’s “Great Firewall” against the Internet, for example, has been easily penetrated by many Chinese
who gain access to forbidden websites by dialing into servers located in other countries, thus avoiding
Chinese proxy servers and their censoring software.81 Other creative strategies abound: using a
pseudonym to send e-mail anonymously from a randomly chosen Internet café; using encryption to create
special untraceable “tunnels” to banned websites; having foreigners establish “mirror sites” that are
untouchable to local authorities; using pay telephones or wireless technology, which are more difficult for
the government to trace; and changing website addresses to confuse the bureaucrat-censors.82
Of course, the technology can cut both ways. Repressive governments can use it to create new ways to
spy on citizens, to spread fear and intimidation, stifling dissent and free expression.83 Less overt
censorship is already taking place by corporations using search engines that systematically exclude
specified websites; so-called “stealth” filters surreptitiously block access to certain sites while falsely
blaming the censorship on technical difficulties.84 As Internet scholar Gordon Graham points out, whether
the censors or the public will win in the end
must turn in part on factual questions—questions about what is and what is not technically
possible. These are not questions that can be answered once and for all, however. We know that
what is technically impossible, even inconceivable, at one time, can become utterly commonplace
at another. It would be foolish therefore to let anything important turn on a question of technical
possibility. This is especially true of the Inernet which . . . is only at the start of its development.
Who knows what means may develop by which states, alone or in concert, or society more
generally perhaps, are enabled to control and regulate the activities of the individual on the
Internet?85

80 A. Lin Neumann, “The Great Firewall,” 4.
81 Ibid., 4.
82 GILC, “Regardless of Frontiers,” 10; and Philip J. Cunningham, “Coffee and Copy at Asian Internet Cafés,” Nieman

Reports, (Winter 2000), 73.
83 “[W]hile journalists can use [technology] to track others down,” one British writer noted, “”it can be used to keep track of
journalists. Every time anyone goes online they may give away information about themselves, where they are and what they are
accessing.” Carole Fleming, “Journalism and New Technology,” Hugo de Burgh, Investigative Journalism, 193. See also Gary
Rodan, “Internet and Political Control in Singapore,” Political Science Quarterly, 74-6, 89.
84 David McGuire, “Civil Liberties Groups Oppose ‘Stealth’ Web Blocking,” Newsbytes, (18 May 2001), www.newsbytes.com.;

and Lucas D. Introna and Helen Nissenbaum, “Shaping the Web: Why the Politics of Search Engines Matters," InformationSociety 16 (Summer 2000), 169-85.
85 Gordon Graham, The Internet, 101.

20

Still, says Graham, no matter what new technologies the censor may create, “the invention of every such
device provides a stimulus to the invention of another device which will circumvent it.” Like America’s failed
war on drugs, there is little reason to believe that “the policing of illicit material on the Internet . . . would be
any different.”86
Yet there is another, equally important reason why repressive governments have not censored the
Internet more effectively: their desire for economic growth. “Authoritarian regimes are attempting to
reconcile their eagerness to reap the economic benefits of the Internet with maintaining control over the
information inside their borders,” notes Human Rights Watch.87 China, once again, is an instructive
example. Despite president Jiang Zemin’s crackdown on cyber-journalists, the Chinese leader
enthusiastically acknowledges “the tremendous power of information technology” which he want to
“vigorously promote” as an “engine for the development of the [Chinese] economy.”88 For the leaders of
other developing countries as well, the Internet’s threat of political upheaval must be balanced against its
promise of economic modernization.
This conflict between competing economic and political desires mirrors the larger, inherent conflict
between the Internet and the nation-state itself. After all, if the Internet is ”the ultimate globalisation,” as
one scholar put it, “[t]he state on the other hand depends on borders. . . . The more isolated and less
penetrated the state is, then the more it remains a sovereign, independent entity.”89 Or, as another Internet
scholar has pointed out:
The internationalism of the Internet lies not merely in the fact that it connects people across
nations, for many human devices and activities do this. The point is rather that the use and
exploration of the Internet is wholly indifferent to international boundaries. People who are
otherwise strangers are linked by common interests which have nothing to do with nationality. . . .
[W]hat this means is that there is a burgeoning sphere of contact and collaboration over which
states, even in concert, exercise little or no control . . . [creating] the potential for the Internet to
diminish the power of the state by creating spheres of activity indifferent to it. . . . By subverting
national boundaries it calls into question the power of the state as the dominant force . . . around
which human life has largely been structured for centuries.90
But if the Internet poses such a threat to national governments, why haven’t they done more
to control it? Perhaps the long-term political consequences appear relatively unthreatening. So far, the
Internet has served largely as the plaything of an affluent elite rather than a weapon of the discontented
86 Ibid., 114, 113.
87 Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net” (May 1996), 1-2.
88 A. Lin Neumann, CPJ, “Great Firewall,” 2.
89 Michael Taladay, “Preface,” in Jerry Everard, Virtual States, ix.
90 Gordon Graham, The Internet, 86-7, 38.

21

masses. After all, 80 percent of the world’s population have never even made a phone call, let alone
explored the global information super-highway.91 “The twentieth century is full of technological
breakthroughs that have yet to reach much of the world’s populace,” one scholar has noted, “from
telephones to air conditioners, jet planes to laser surgery.”92 But once again, the past need not be
prologue. “We know from other instances that popular technology can spread very quickly and make its
appearance in even poor places with surprising rapidity and extent,” Gordon Graham points out. “There
was a time, for instance, when expense limited the technology of the transistor radio to small areas of the
globe. Now, transistor radios are ubiquitous.”93 The same could one day be true of the Internet.
Perhaps the real reason authoritarian governments do not seem to have more fear of the Internet’s
(politically) revolutionary potential may be a belief that the technology will inevitably be tamed by corporate
control. After all, as one scholar has noted, “the greatest impact of the Internet so far has not been in
politics. Until now it has rather been upon business and commerce.”94 In the same way that the economic
ambitions of governments have tempered their political temptation to ban the Internet, so, too have the
economic ambitions of multinational communications firms tempered their desire to allow their new
technology to be used for political purposes.
Yet again, China is a good example. After authorities in Beijing complained, Yahoo agreed to censor
the Chinese language version of its popular website to eliminate critical news coverage by such
mainstream news outlets such as the Associated Press and Reuters.95 Similarly, media baron Rupert
Murdoch had to censor his news network’s coverage of China to insure access to its enormous—and
enormously profitable—audience.96
Such “voluntary” self-censorship by media corporations—working in tandem with the governments
whose approval they need to gain lucrative market access—is most likely the real future of the Internet.
One watchdog group calls this “privatised censorship” in which governments essentially outsource to
corporations the task of suppressing free speech: “It’s a more sophisticated means of achieving the same
goal. The backing is still state power and government threat, but the actual implementation and mechanics
of the suppression of material is delegated” to the corporation.97
91 Jerry Everard, Virtual States, 42.
92 Richard Parker, Mixed Signals, 1.
93 Gordon Graham, The Internet, 70.
94 Peter Ferdinand, Internet, Democracy, 2.
95 Philip J. Cunningham, “Coffee and Copy at Asian Internet Cafés,” Nieman Reports, 73.
96 Murdoch kow-towed to Chinese authorities who thought the BBC too critical of China by entirely eliminating BBC news

coverage from his broadcast signal in China. Murdoch also arranged business deals with Chinese partners—including an
Internet joint venture with China’s People’s Daily newspaper—and had his publishing company print what one critic called a
“fawning biography” of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, written by Deng’s daughter. Robert W. McChesney, Rich Media, Poor
Democracy, (New York: The New Press, 1999), 99, 115-6.
97 Global Internet Liberty Campaign, “Member Statement on ‘Impact of Self-Regulation and Filtering on Human Rights to
Freedom of Expression,’” 3, www.gilc.org/speech/ratings/gilc-oecd-398.html.

22

This indirect censorship is already taking place in North America and Europe, where corporate cybercensors use content filters to screen out pornography or otherwise “uphold public safety and morality.”98 In
Western Europe, this has led to censoring right-wing websites for distributing “hate speech.”99 In New
Zealand, a site for cigars was banned because of the country’s law against tobacco advertising.100
Compared to more brutish censorship in many authoritarian regimes, such “voluntary” restrictions by
corporations is relatively tame. But it is a disquieting counterpoint to the hope of an Internet “revolution” in
freedom of expression.
Equally discouraging are the apparent historical parallels to the Internet. According to
Robert McChesney’s seminal work, Rich Media, Poor Democracy, the inventions of radio and television
were also once heralded as revolutionary breakthroughs with staggering implications for democracy and
free speech; but in the United States, each medium was eventually taken over by commercial interests, the
idealistic dreams of earlier days smashed on the rocks of corporate takeovers and the next quarter’s
earnings statement.101 Indeed, it appears that over time all new forms of communication have been met
with censorship by corporations and governments, Kings and Popes. Even the dramatic breakthrough of
Gutenberg’s printing press in the fifteenth century, which helped undermine the Roman Catholic Church
and arguably helped usher in the Enlightenment, led to a Papal index banning the works of more than 500
authors.102 Perhaps the Internet will ultimately prove to be as notable a breakthrough as the printing press
and will be able to realize its revolutionary potential. But it would be premature to conclude that such an
end is inevitable.
Indeed, some experts fear that this new technology could eventually narrow rather than expand human
thought. “The danger of the Internet,” wrote one Internet scholar, “is that it threatens to overwhelm us with
so much information—too much information—so as to give the appearance of democratizing and enriching
our political lives while actually drowning us in irrelevancies.”103 While the Internet may expand quantity in
the marketplace of ideas, its ultimate effect may be to diminish the diversity of those ideas that actually
reach citizens. “Even as new technology gives individuals the ability to speak without fear of institutional
censorship,” Andrew Shapiro observes, “it gives all of us a new ability to avoid speech we don’t want to
98 Andrew Shapiro, The Control Revolution, 62, 67
99 Anthony Gauthier, “World Wide Worry,” News Media and the Law, Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press,

www.rcfp.org.
100 Kim Griggs, “Modify Site or No Cigar,” Wired (29 May 2000), www.politechbot.com/p01193.html.
101 Robert McChesney, Rich Media, passim.
102 Andrew Shapiro, Control Revolution, 5; Human Rights Watch, “Silencing the Net,” 6.
103 Or, as Neil Postman argued in Amusing Ourselves to Death, it is the difference between the differing dystopian nightmares

of George Orwell and Aldous Huxley: “What Orwell feared were those who would ban books. What Huxley feared was that there
would be no reason to ban a book, for there would be no one who wanted to read one. Orwell feared those who would deprive
us of information. Huxley feared those who would give us so much that we would be reduced to passivity and egoism. Orwell
feared that the truth would be concealed from us. Huxley feared that the truth would be drowned in a sea of irrelevance.” Beth
Simone Noveck, “Paradoxical Partners: Electronic Communication and Electronic Democracy,” in Peter Ferdinand, Internet,
Democracy, 23.
23

hear. The result, in the aggregate, is that the speech of certain individuals—especially marginal
speakers—may well be lost in cyberspace.” 104
If the freedom to speak is not coupled with the ability to be heard, then freedom of speech may be
effectively neutralized by freedom from speech. As the U.S. Supreme Court noted more than fifty years
ago, “[t]he right of free speech is guaranteed every citizen that he may reach the minds of willing listeners
and to do so there must be opportunity to win their attention.”105 But winning the attention of an Internet
audience—with literally millions of competing websites—may be an almost impossible feat. Robert
McChesney has even argued that by providing the appearance but not the reality of being heard, the
perverse result may be that dissidents who are ignored can simply be dismissed with the argument that
“they should shut up and start their own website or visit any one of the millions of obscure websites.”106
Even if Internet access could be guaranteed to all—a big if, clearly—equality of on-line opportunity
should not be confused with equality of condition. As Gordon Graham observes, “equal freedom of
expression for all citizens does not imply equal influence. The impact of . . . relative wealth shows itself on
the Internet as much as in any other medium.”107 Despite the equalizing promise of the Internet, the fact
remains that a sophisticated website established by a wealthy media corporation like AOL/Time Warner—
with jazzy visuals and multiple links to other sites—will inevitably draw more audience than a primitive
website put up by a lone independent muckraker. “Having a website does not mean many people will know
of its existence and therefore seek it out,” Robert McChesney points out.108 Even if the Internet could
guarantee everyone the ability to say everything they want on-line, the actual impact for freedom of
expression might still be negligible—no different, really, than the freedom to stand on a street corner and
hand out fliers one-by-one, only to see them automatically tossed in the trash without even being read.
“This leads to an interesting ‘If a tree falls in the forest…’ question,” Andrew Shapiro notes: if an on-line
dissident “speaks and everyone sets their filters so that they don’t hear him, is he speaking freely at all?
Certainly, such a situation does not help us, as a society, to achieve the broad democratic aims of free
speech.”109
In the long run, then, it would seem almost inevitable that only corporate media, with its requisite deep
financial pockets, will be able to have any real journalistic impact on the Internet. “And here,” notes Robert
McChesney, “the prospects are not encouraging,” especially for investigative reporting.

104 Andrew Shapiro, Control Revolution, 126.
105 Ibid., 207.
106 Robert McChesney, Rich Media, 183.
107 Gordon Graham, The Internet, 78-9.
108 Robert McChesney, Rich Media, 176.
109 Andrew Shaprio, Control Revolution, 128.

24

As a rule, journalism is not something that can be done piecemeal by amateurs working in their
spare time. It is best done by people who make a living at it, and who have training, experience,
and resources. Journalism also requires institutional support (and protection from commercial and
governmental attack) to survive and prosper. The corporate media giants have failed miserably to
provide a viable journalism, and as they dominate the journalism online, there is no reason to
expect anything different. Those who argue that the Internet may revolutionize mainstream
journalism for the better tend to downplay the commercial pressures that have produced the
present deplorable situation. They present no plausible explanation for why corporate media’s
Internet journalism will be qualitatively superior for democracy than what they currently produce
elsewhere. . . . At present the trend for online journalism is to accentuate the worst synergistic and
profit-hungry attributes of commercial journalism, with its emphasis on trivia, celebrities, and
consumer news. One observer characterized the news offerings on AOL, drawn from all the
commercial media giants, as less a ‘marketplace of ideas’ than ‘a shopping mall of notions.’”110
It is perhaps telling that the most famous example of on-line “investigative reporting” has been cybergossip Matt Drudge’s scoop of President Clinton’s affair with a White House intern. Drudge, who “spares
himself the drudgery of fact-checking,” in the words of the Economist, is viewed with derision by most
journalists. “The Drudge factor,” as Andrew L. Shapiro calls it, “—that is, the extreme disintermediation of
our information environment—means that responsibility for determining truth rests as much with those who
consume information as with those who produce it.”111 It is the ultimate corporate philosophy applied to
what once was the journalistic notion of a public trust: caveat emptor, let the buyer beware.
In the end, it is the very corporate nature of news media that more than anything else is likely to
undermine any potential journalistic revolution on the Internet. “[A]t times the media giants generate firstrate journalism,” McChesney has noted, “but it is a minuscule fraction of their output and often causes just
the sort of uproar that media firms prefer to avoid.” As we have seen, although Third World journalistic
heroes have used the Internet and other forms of media to challenge authoritarian governments around the
world

110 Robert McChesney, Rich Media, 176, 175.

McChesney is hardly alone in his critique of contemporary American
journalism. Martin Koughan, director of ICIJ’s global media project, found that “[n]ews operations controlled by conglomerates
are reluctant to rock the boat with investigative reporting because media increasingly functions as the marketing arm of the new
world economy. These companies speak first and foremost to individuals as consumers, not as citizens.” Another writer found
that “[e]nterprising journalism is . . . rare at the sites of large news organizations. . . . Today’s journalism has acquired a drive-by
quality, as it hits on a hot topic one day, then runs away from it the next, before anyone can digest the meaning. . . . The Internet
adds to the damage by creating drive-by news consumers who skip blithely from bulletin to bulletin while feeling they are keeping
up with things. To be sure, the World Wide Web in total offers an ever-growing array of news and information. But its hot-button
nature tends to emphasize the worst of journalism rather than the best.” Martin Koughan, “The Global Media Project: A
University of Southern California Annenberg School/Normal Lear Center Investigation of Declining News Standards Around the
World,” unpublished paper provided to author by Martin Koughan; and Arthur E. Rowse, “Taming Online News for Wall Street,”
Nieman Reports (Winter 2000), 21.
111 Andrew Shapiro, Control Revolution, 136. “Of course,” as Shapiro also rightly points out, “even without Drudge, news of
Clinton’s affair with Monica Lewinsky would eventually have broken.” Ibid. 135.

25

only in rare instances are these murdered and imprisoned journalists in the direct employ of the
media giants. . . [perhaps because] they lack what it takes to become successful in the brave (new)
world of commercial journalism. . . . [While] the global media system can be at times a progressive
force, especially as it enters nations that had been tightly controlled by corrupt crony media
systems . . . this progressive aspect of the globalizing media market should not be blown out of
proportion; the last thing the media giants want to do anywhere is rock the boat, as long as they
can do their business. The global commercial media system is radical, in the sense that it will
respect no tradition or custom, on balance, if it stands in the way of significantly increased profits.
But it is ultimately conservative, because the media giants are significant beneficiaries of the
current global social structure. . . . While the Internet is in many ways revolutionizing the way we
lead our lives, it is a revolution that does not appear to include changing the identity and nature of
those in power.112
Conclusion
So what does all of this add up to? In terms of receiving information (input), the Internet seems to have
made positive but not revolutionary changes for investigate reporters—both as a newsgathering tool and as
an instrument for journalistic collaboration across borders. In terms of sending out information (output), the
impact of the Internet is less clear. Certainly the potential exists for a global revolution of free expression in
general and investigative reporting in particular. Cyber-muckrakers in a handful of countries (Indonesia,
Serbia, Malaysia, and several Mideast nations) have used the Internet to get around censorship and make
brave, important contributions to truth-telling. But based on the available literature reviewed by the author,
far more countries (41) have found ways to punish or prevent on-line investigative reporting. So far, any
visions of an Internet revolution in global muckraking must be based more on hope than experience.
Still, when it comes to the Internet, the temptation is to seize on its promise rather than its actual
performance to date. To be sure, it is still very early in the Internet’s evolution, and only a psychic could
claim to know for sure where it is headed. But as Michael Schudson has argued, media scholars all too
often adhere to a “technological determinism . . . a tendency to reduce complex social phenomena to a . . .
technical cause.”113 Certainly technology matters—from Gutenberg to the World Wide Web—but in the
end, the Internet is only one more technological innovation among many, one more medium that, like all
others, ultimately depends on the individuals who run them. As Edward R. Murrow once said of television,
which was then the new cutting-edge technology upon which so many hopes seemed to ride: “This
instrument can teach, it can illuminate; yes, and it can even inspire. But it can do so only to the extent that
humans are determined to use it to these ends. Otherwise, it is merely lights and wires in a box.”114
Ultimately, the same must be said even of “this instrument” the Internet.

112 Robert McChesney, Rich Media, 114, 117, 100, 182.
113 Michael Schudson, “Toward a Troubleshooting Manual for Journalism History,” Journalism & Mass Communication
Quarterly 74 (Autumn 1997), 467, 470.
114 A.M. Sperber, Murrow: His Life and Times (New York: Freundlich Books, 1986), 540.

26

Perhaps I should have been able to anticipate all of this from my experience with Egyptian censors ten
years ago. Although I eventually found a way to smuggle our CNN videotapes out of Egypt—and although
I was ultimately able to broadcast our story115—I did not fully understand then what my research now also
suggests: the timidity of corporate media outlets like CNN. At the time, what surprised me most was not
the heavy-handed censorship of the Egyptians but the reaction of my bosses who ran CNN. Rather than
being outraged at the assault on their own staff and on free expression as a whole, they were mostly
concerned about protecting their relationship with the Egyptian government, whose blessing they needed to
maintain their news coverage in the country. The real focus of the corporate brass was ratings and profits,
not censorship. It was a response that should have told me all I needed to know.

115 Mark Feldstein, “Profiting from Poverty,” CNN documentary, Dec. 1991.

27

Appendix
Attempting to measure freedom on the Internet is at best an inexact science, but the non-profit group
Freedom House compiled the following country-by-country rating system for 131 nations worldwide. Based
on the number of ISPs and the per-capita use of the Internet during 2000—a somewhat crude although
quantifiable measurement—Freedom House rated countries as Most Restrictive, Moderately Restrictive,
and Least Restrictive in terms of freedom allowed on the Internet.116
FREEDOM ON THE INTERNET
Country
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo, D.R.
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba

Number of ISPs
2
1
2
n/a
217
3
709
35
2
3
3
3
1
51
n/a
n/a
5
2
197
20
750
26
3
13
1
2
4
1

116 Leonard R. Sussman and Kristen Guida, “How Free?

Number of
Users
n/a
20,000
12,000
2,000
900,000
30,000
8.42m
3m
8,000
15,000
37,500
6,000
10,000
2.7m
12,000
10,000
35,000
12,000
9.84m
20,000
13.3m
625,000
16.9m
600,000
500
150,000
100,000
60,000

% Population
n/a
0.06
0.11
5.5
2.44
0.9
43.94
36.9
0.1
5.09
5.96
2.19
0.1
26.4
4.82
0.16
0.43
0.76
5.7
2.57
42.8
4.12
1.34
1.51
0.02
4.04
2.14
0.54

Rating
Moderately
Most
Most
Least
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Most
Least
Most
Least
Moderately
Least
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Least
Most
Moderately
Most
Least
Least
Most

The Web and the Press,” www.freedomhouse.org.
28

Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Hong Kong (China)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, South
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi

5
35
12
n/a
1
8
31
1
6
1
2
36
128
5
625
2
23
1
7
49
13
14
3
24
1
14
23
219
6
357
8
83
47
11
2
n/a
n/a
11
19
1
13
6
3
8

80,000
35,000
2.58m
2,000
25,000
20,000
440,000
40,000
309,000
7,200
7,500
2.27m
9m
20,000
20.1m
20,000
1.33m
2,000
65,000
3.46m
650,000
144,000
4.5m
410,000
100,000
1.04m
1m
13.42
600,000
38.64
87,500
70,000
45,000
16.4m
100,000
10,000
2,000
234,000
227,500
1,000
95,000
30,000
8,000
10,000

10.55
3.4
48.37
2.8
3.5
0.15
0.65
0.65
21.59
0.01
0.9
43.93
15.26
0.4
24.28
0.2
12.42
2.24
0.51
6.38
6.38
52.1
0.45
0.18
0.5
27.5
17.12
23.29
2.26
30.53
1.92
0.42
0.16
34.55
5.02
0.21
0.04
9.73
6.39
0.08
21.72
1.47
0.05
0.1

Least
Least
Least
Least
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Most
Moderately
Least
Least
Moderately
Least
Moderately
Least
Least
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Least
Least
Least
Most
Most
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Most
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Moderately
29

Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia (Yugoslavia)
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan

8
n/a
n/a
4
167
2
n/a
27
1
4
n/a
70
60
5
21
1
26
3
2
4
15
93
161
20
n/a
30
83
6
1
6
n/a
8
15
6
58
49
4
1
1
2
29
115
n/a
15

1.5m
2,000
2,000
40,000
2.5m
36,000
3,000
120,000
15,000
9,000
190,000
7.28m
1.49m
100,000
2.36m
50,000
1.2m
45,000
2,000
20,000
400,000
50,000
2.8m
700,000
45,000
600,000
219m
300,000
30,000
80,000
2,000
1.85m
700,000
460,000
1.8m
5.49m
65,000
10,000
10,000
3,000
5m
2.4m
30,000
6.4m

6.88
0.06
0.06
10.21
2.49
0.6
0.11
0.4
0.08
0.55
0.9
45.82
39.03
0.08
52.6
2.04
0.85
1.6
0.04
0.36
1.5
0.62
7.25
6.97
6.22
2.68
1.8
1.4
0.3
0.07
0.04
44.58
12.94
23
4.19
13.72
0.34
0.03
2.32
0.28
56.36
33.05
0.12
28.84

Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Least
Moderately
Least
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Least
Moderately
Least
Most
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Most
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Least
Moderately
Most
Most
Most
Least
Least
Moderately
Least
30

Tajikistan
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela
Vietnam
Zimbabwe

15
12
5
4
24
1
35
1
364
7,600
5
1
11
5
10

2,000
1m
30,000
110,000
2m
2,000
500,000
400,000
19.98m
153.84m
300,000
7,500
400,000
100,000
30,000

0.03
1.65
2.55
1.16
3.05
0.04
0.1
17.06
33.58
55.83
11
0.03
1.7
0.13
0.27

Most
Moderately
Least
Most
Moderately
Most
Moderately
Moderately
Least
Least
Least
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately
Moderately

31

