,
\

-

639- FOIA Issues
LaFleru, Eisler

SAMPLE FOIA REQUEST

97

COMPANY LETTERHEAD
(Name, Title)
(Company, Agency)
(Address)
(City, State, Zip)

(Date)

Re: FOIA Request
Certified Mail, RRR#:

Dear XXXXXXX:
Thanks for taking time to speak with me yesterday about (THE PAPER'S) interest in obtaining
records on (GENERAL REFERENCE TO THE FILES AT ISSUE). Per our discussion, this is a
request under the federal Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C., Section 552.
Specifically, we request access to and copies of (MAKE YOUR REQUEST AS SPECIFICALLY
AS POSSIBLE). The records are maintained by (NAME OF CUSTODIAL OFFICE HERE)
under the supervision of (NAME OF PERSON WHO KEEPS THE RECORDS).
We ask that you waive search and copy fees because we are gathering information on a matter of
public interest. If you determine that reasonable duplication fees are necessary, please contact us
for authorization if the total costs are likely to exceed $50.00.
If any part of this request is denied, please justifjr the denial by reference to specific exemptions of
the FOI Act. Also, we expect you to release all segregable portions of otherwise exempt material.
We reserve the right to appeal your decision to withhold any materials or to deny a waiver of
fees. (IF THE FOIA REQUEST IS A FORMALITY FOR OBTAINING ALREADY AGREEDUPON RECORDS, YOU MAY WANT TO SKIP THIS GRAPH, WHICH MIGHT BE SEEN
AS CONFRONTATIONAL)
Because we are seeking this information for journalistic purposes and it is of timely value, please
don't hesitate to call me directly if you have any questions or comments regarding this request.
You can reach me directly at (PHONE NUMBER). Otherwise, we'll look forward to your reply
within 10 business days, as the statute dictates.
Again, many thanks for all your help on this. We really appreciate it.
Sincerely,
(NAME AND TITLE)

Peter Eisler, USA TODAY, 703-276-5822, peisler(@usatpoc,gannett.com

FOIA TIPS FOR ELECTRONIC RECORDS
(with a nod to Shawn McIntosh of The Dallas Morning News)

1. Run with the geeks. Search out the computer wonks in the bowels of your selected agency
and find out exactly what they have and what they can do with it. They're lonely, undervalued and
dying to talk to someone who appreciates their work. Then, when you go to the press person to
request your data, whack the flack with geek talk -- ASCII, EBCDIC, etc. -- and tell them you
can make their lives easier by working directly with the computer folks, who already know what
you want and how to provide it. This can help you avoid hassles and tailor records requests.
2. Know your law. Many states are revising public records laws to account for computerized
information. Time limits and costs are among the issues being addressed. For example, some
states now allow more time to respond to requests for electronic data. Under FOIA, the time limit
for responding for electronic records requests is 20 days, versus 10 days for conventional records.
As with any records request, a good grasp of the law can strengthen your arguments for access
and help you counter unfounded rejections.
3. Go for paper. If you expect a fight, ask for paper copies of some of the records you want. It's
tough for an agency to reject a request for electronic data when paper versions of those records
are public. If the paper versions are in the form of a computer printout, it also makes it hard for
the agency to argue that the computer can't dump the data you need without including nonreleasable or "confidential" material. If you're destined to lose the fight for electronic records, at
least try to get a "print file" of the data. Then, rachet up your argument for an electronic file.

4. Control your costs. Try to avoid paying a "per record" cost. Argue that it's more efficient for
the agency to provide you with a computer dump. Find out what your state or city information
services people pay or charge for CPU (Central Processing Unit) time and fight for that rate. If
they want to charge you $1,000 for a file, you can say, "Why so much? The tape costs $20 and
the dump shouldn't take more than two hours. I'll provide the tape, so, at your rate for CPU time
that should come to $60." Don't pay too much. It sets a bad precedent.

5. Watch for privatization. More and more public agencies are hiring private contractors to
maintain their data. Remember: these still are public records, and the state still is responsible for
ensuring access to them. Don't let them refer you to the company unless you believe it will work
to your advantage. Make the state get the records within the law's time constraints. And, if you're
forced to deal with the company, be sure they charge you no more than they would charge the
state for the same run (some contracts provide for virtually unlimited runs of standard data at the
state's request, in which case you shouldn't have to pay more than a minimal fee). The law is
evolving on this, but it's generally on your side. States can't contract out of responsibility.
6. Function over form. If the state is trying to charge you big bucks to convert data into a format
you can use, press for them to dump the information into an ASCII file -- overwhelm the flacks
with your knowledge of how easy that is in most cases. If you absolutely can't get them to give
you the information in a form you can use, take it anyway. Don't let them believe that's a way to
get off the hook. Usually, you can find a local data shop that will convert it for a fee. And the
local university often has hungry grad students who can do the conversion for you at less cost..

Peter Eisler, USA TODAY, 703-276-5822, peisler(a),usatpoc.gaimett.com

FIVE FOlA TIPS

1. Don't use FOIA unless you're sure it's necessary. In many cases, a few friendly phone calls
and some basic reporting can get you the records you need, while FOIA requests tend to trigger
all sorts of legal and administrative reviews. Find out who keeps the records you need, make a
case that you're entitled to get them and you may be pleasantly surprised.
2. Know the rules. If someone tells you that a particular record is off limits, ask them to cite the
applicable exemption in the FOIA or whatever state open records law you're using. Also, request
the same sort of citation in any written request you may file. A little knowledge goes a long way
in knocking down bogus efforts to deny you access to legitimately public records.
These are the nine exemptions to the federal Freedom of Information Act:

* National security: Documents classified pursuant to a presidential executive order.
* Internal agency rules: Personnel rules that are predominately internal in nature.
* Information exempted by another federal statute: Mandatory nondisclosure provisions,
such as those written in the tax code for tax returns.
* Trade secrets: Financial or commercial information that, if disclosed, is likely to impair
the agency's ability to obtain information in the hture or cause competitive injury.
* Internal memorandums: This protects the decision-making process, but not the factual
contents of documents concerning how a decision was made.
* Personal privacy: An agency must show that the public's interest in disclosure is
outweighed by any resulting invasion of privacy.
* Investigatory records: Law enforcement records that could hinder enforcement or court
proceedings, expose a confidential source, or disclose secret investigative methods.
* Financial institution records: Certain records prepared as part of the regulation or
supervision of financial institutions are off limits.
* Oil well information: An arcane exemption that's almost never used.
3. Don't overpay. You set a dangerous precedent by overpaying for records. Pay 25 cents a page
for 10 pages this time, and you'll regret it when you have to fork over the cash for 3,000 pages
down the road. If you think you're getting suckered, make the agency justie its charges. They
can't charge more than it costs them to do the work; arguing that 25 cents per page is what they
charge at the library won't be good enough.
4. Never give up. Again, you don't want to set a bad precedent. Even if an agency stalls you until
the story is dead, make a point of forcing them to cough up the records anyway. You may get
something interesting, and you'll let them know that stalling won't get them off the hook.
Remember, the FOIA gives them 10 days to provide the records, unless they have a compelling
legal excuse (such as an unusually burdensome request). Be tenacious. It'll be easier next time.

5. Call the lawyers. Most papers like to press open records cases. If your request is rejected, it's
best to consult a lawyer in preparing an appeal, which should cite 5 U.S.C. $552 paragraph (a)(6)
of the FOIA and specifically note legal flaws in the agency's reasons for rejection. Do the same if
an agency is stalling and you don't buy their explanation. If your paper won't help you press your
case, consult with an outside group, such as The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press.
Peter Eisler, USA TODAY, 703-276-5822, peisler(dusatpoc.gannett.com

Some Handy Resources for FOIA and Public Records Questions
Organizations1 Web Sites:
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press:
Publishes usehl 50-state guides on access to public records, including a separate guide to
accessing electronic records. Web site reviews recent developments in public records law. They
also can answer public records questions and provide some legal advice.
202-466-63 13
http://www.rcfp.org/rcfp/:
Freedom Forum First Amendment Center:
Web site lists recent news and legal decisions relating to public records access, as well as text of
all Supreme Court rulings on First Amendment issues.
615-321-9588
http://www.fac.org/
Society of Professional Journalists, First Amendment Center
Web site offers sample FOIA request letters, practical advice, etc.
3 17-653-3333
http://town.hall.org/places/spj/
The Reporters Network
Web site offers media directories, bulliten boards and other networking information for reporters.
http://www.reporters.net/
Public Citizen, Freedom of Information Clearinghouse
Offers practical guides on how to access public records and other information.
202-588-1 000
P.O. Box 19367, Washington, D.C. 20036.
Freedom of Information Center, University of Missouri
3 14-882-4856
http://www.missouri.edu

Publications:
Access to Electronic Records, Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
This 50-state guide, available for a small fee, is incredibly usehl. It's one of several handy
publications published by RCFP.
The Sourcebook of State Public Records, BRB Publications, Tempe, AZ 800-929-381 1
This comprehensive guide lists information on custody and access for virtually all public records
in each state. It's very, very handy, especially for reporters who work in multiple states.
Peter Eider, USA TODAY, 703-276-5822. peisler(~~isatpoc.gannett.com

"E-FOIA" allows electronic access to records, expedited processing of requests
Prepared by The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
110 1 Wilson Blvd., Suite 1910, Arlington, Va. 22209
A new law enacted in early October guarantees that the federal government's electronic records
will be public to the same extent that their paper counterparts would be, and that the public can
enjoy the same benefits from the federal government's electronic recordkeeping that government
agencies themselves enjoy.
But reporters may be more interested in another section of the same law: Reporters who
demonstrate a "compelling need" for the federal records they request under the Freedom of
Information Act will be entitled to expedited access -- a faster processing of their requests than
that of rank and file requesters.
The Electronic Freedom of Information Act passed by Congress in late September and signed by
President Clinton in early October requires that agencies must make a determination whether or
not to grant a request for expedited access to records based on the requester's showing of a
compelling need.
Agencies will grant the faster treatment when failure to obtain records can pose an imminent
threat to an individual's life or physical safety or "with respect to a request made by a person
primarily engaged in disseminating information, urgency to inform the public concerning actual or
alleged federal government activity."
The enacted "compelling need" standard was introduced in the House version of the bill which
was then adopted by the Senate.

An earlier Senate version had allowed expedited access when delay would affect public
assessment of governmental actions that are the subject of "widespread, contemporaneous media
coverage," an expedited review standard the Department of Justice has followed since early 1994.
In testimony before the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, the Reporters
Committee in June suggested that an expedited review standard should apply to "enlighten the
public on matters where public concern is strong, and not just for those areas that are already the
subject of fervent media attention."
The House report states that the "urgency to inform" standard requires that information requested
"should pertain to a matter of a current exigency to the American public and that a reasonable
person might conclude that the consequences of delaying a response to a FOIA request would
compromise a significant, recognized interest. "
The report cautions however that "unduly generous" grants of expedited processing would
unfairly disadvantage other requesters.
A quick summary of other interesting sections of the bill:
EXPANDED DEFINITION OF ACCESSIBLE "RECORDS"

E-FOIA includes a definition of "records" covered by the
Act to address electronically stored information. While there
is little debate that the FOIA covers all government records
regardless of storage medium, this definition explicitly
includes "any information that would be an agency record
subject to the requirements of this section when maintained
by an agency in any format, including an electronic format."
ELECTRONIC ACCESSIBILITY
Records created on or after November 1, 1996, which an
agency must make available for inspection or copying under
current law (including agency opinions and policy
statements), must be made available on-line as well as in
hard copy within 180 days of the law's enactment. If an
agency does not have on-line capabilities, E-FOIA requires
that the materials be inade available by some other
electronic means (eg: CD-ROM or diskette).
GREATER ACCESS TO PRIOR RELEASED INFORMATION
Agencies will be required to affirmatively make publicly
available all records which have been released in response
to other FOIA requests and which the agency determines
are likely to be the subject of future requests. The effect of
this provision, which also takes effect 180 days after the
enactment of the law, is to allow access to prior released
materials without the need for a repetitive formal FOIA
request.
rNDEXrNG
Agencies must create a general index of prior released
material, and that index must be inade available on-line by
December 3 1, 1999.
HONORTNG FORM OR FORMAT REQUESTS
Agencies must supply the record in any form or format
requested if that record is readily reproducible in that form
or format. Requestors should be able to receive electronic
copies of databases or database queries under this
provision, which takes effect 180 days after enactment of
the law.
IMPROVED DATAEIASE SEARCHES
Agencies must make reasonable efforts to search for
requested records in electronic form, except when a search
would significantly interfere with agency operations. Under

current law, an agency is not required to create or make
available documents that do not exist There had been some
question as to whether computer programming necessary to
search a database was considered creation of a document.
E-FOIA expands the definition of "search" to include
"review by automatic means of agency records for the
purpose of locating those records which are responsive to a
request." In short, programming created to facilitate a
database search does not amount to the creation of records.
This provision takes effect 180 days after enactment of the
law.
MULTI-TRACK PROCESSING OF REQUESTS
Agencies will be allowed to develop multi-track processing
policies. Instead of dealing with requests on a
first-come-first- served basis, agencies may process
requests according to their complexity. Agencies would be
permitted to provide requesters with the opportunity to
amend or simplifL their requests in order to qualify for
processing under a faster track. This provision takes effect
one year after enactment of the law.
EXTENDED STATUTORY RESPONSE TIME
E-FOIA increases the time in which an agency must
respond to a request. An agency will have 20 days (rather
than the 10 days under the current law) to determine
whether it will grant or deny a request. This provision takes
effect one year after enactment of the law.
EXTENDED RESPONSE TIME FOR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
lJnder the current law, an agency could extend the statutory
processing time by an extra 10 days in "unusual
circumstances". E-FOIA allows the agency to hrther
extend the response time by either providing the requester
an opportunity to limit the request so that it can be filled
within the statutory time or arranging with the requester an
alternate time-frame under which the request may be filled.
Note however, E-FOIA explicitly states that this
"exceptional circumstances" time extension will not be
allowed for agency back-logs or "delay that results from a
predictable agency workload of requests. " This provision
takes effect one year after enactment of the law.
COMPUTER REDACTION
Portions of records that are exempted (not open to the

public) may be deleted. However, E-FOIA requires that an
agency show the amount of information deleted in any
released copy of a record unless that indication would harm
the interest protected by the exemption. In other words, if
polrtions of an electronic document are redacted, the fact
that there are missing portions must be readily apparent to
the requester. This provision takes effect 180 days after
enactment of the law.
REPORT TO CONGRESS
Agencies must publish an annual report to Congress which
includes, but is not limited to: reasons and justifications for
denials of requests, appeals, number of days required to
process requests, number of backlogged requests and
arnount of fees collected. This provision takes effect 180
days after enactment of the law.

TEN KEY POINTS IN ESTABLISHING MEANINGFUL
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION LEGISLATION
1. Knowledge and government accountability are essential ingredients of "free consent,"
the sine qua non of a true democracy. Meaningful freedom of information laws are of
great value to citizens in securing these ingredients.
2. For freedom of information laws to be meaningfid, they must confer broad rights of
access to information (including information in electronic form); they must contain
limited and narrowly drawn exceptions to the rule favoring disclosure; and they must
establish an independent and powerfid enforcement mechanism. It is highly desirable
that such laws be constitutionally predicated.
For example, Section 1-19(a) of the Connecticut General Statutes provides:
"Except as otherwise provided by any federal law or state statute, all
records maintained or kept on file by any public agency, whether or not
such records are required by any law or by any rule or regulation, shall
be public records and every person shall have the right to inspect such
records promptly . . . or to receive a copy of such records...."
Similarly, Section 1-21(a) of the same statutes provides: "The meetings of all public
agencies, except executive sessions as defined . . ., shall be open to the public."
Some admirable freedom of information laws are found not only in the Connecticut
General Statutes, Section 1-15 et seq., but also in The Freedom of Information and
Protection of Privacy Act, Revised Statutes of Ontario [Canada] 1990, c. F.3 1, and in The
Access to Information Act, Revised Statutes of Canada 1985, c. A-1. Note particularly
that each of these jurisdictions has established a different type of independent
enforcement office. Connecticut employs a multimember, quasi-judicial administrative
agency; Ontario has a single information.privacy("data protection") commissioner with
both investigatory and order-issuing powers; and the Canadian national government has
opted for separate information and privacy commissioners with ombudsman-like
investigatory and reporting powers. For an excellent example of a constitutional
provision guaranteeing Freedom of Information rights, see Article I, Section 24 of the
Florida Constitution.
3. Because it is often impo+nt to know the reasons behind the adoption or rejection of
governmental decisions, freedom of information laws ought to cover the deliberative
and meeting processes within government as well as access to its records.
For example, as a candidate for the President of the United States in 1992, Mr. Clinton
advocated affordable universal health care for all Americans. After his election, there
seemed to be a strong national consensus behind this goal. He therefore appointed his

$"

wife to head the group that would pro se the necessary legislative reforms. Using a
loophole in the national "Governmen in the Sunshine" laws, she closed virtually the
entire deliberative process. The
of the group's extensive deliberations was a
highly complex and convoluted
that most legislators and observers, having been
left out of much of the internal
did not comprehend or could not evaluate.
Consequently, it had little
support, and was not enacted. From a
to pass such reform legislation had
political point of view,
probably closed for the
4. Freedom of information laws oug t to cover all levels of government. Most citizen
contact with government occurs at th local level. Although regional and national
governments are ordinarily more re ote fiom people's everyday lives, they nonetheless
often involve higher stakes, such as Tational security interests or the potential for massive
invasions of personal privacy.

b

5. It is essential that fieedom of info@ation laws broadly cover all police institutions
because such institutions often pose fie greatest threats to a democratic form of
government.
rather than static, the basic values at play in
clearly established.

6. Because societal values are
freedom of information laws

These laws should strive to achieve ;an appropriate balance between competing values
such as accountability versus nation1 security interests or individual privacy ("data
protection") rights.
best drafting, however, tensions between the
competing values
ought to be addressed periodically.

7. Governments disseminate infornjation they believe the public ought to know. The duty
of government to disseminate info*ation must not be confused with, or take precedence
over, the duty of government under(freedomof information laws to disclose information
requested by members of the publid and news media.
Both the dissemination and discloske fhctions of government can be facilitated and
made less expensive by computeri4ng as much government information as possible.
Computers connected to governmefit databases ought to be provided for general use at
public institutions, such as librarie ,archives, schools and community centers. Kiosks
located at public places (such as c rnmercial buildings), containing computer terminals
with which citizens can transact bdsiness with, or obtain information about, their
government, have also proved to bh very useful.

4

8. No law should define what the dews media are, and the media should not enjoy greater
rights under law than ordinary citihens. This has become even more germane today with
I

the advent of facsimile telecommun~cationdevices ("fax" machines) and the enormous
growth in the use of the "Internet," which virtually anyone can become a journalist by
merely sending newsletters via fax +r "e-mail," or by posting reports and opinions on
electronic bulletin boards.
:
9. Freedom of information laws are (notthe exclusive province of the news media. They
effectuate the public's right to knoq - a right the media also serve as the public's
surrogate. Although designed prim 'ly to help citizens gain information about their
government, such laws also enable eople to gain government information about
themselves, as well as statistical, sc entific and other general information government
collects for a variety of reasons and purposes. Thus,experience has shown that freedom
of information laws are used more $y non-journalists than by journalists.

r

10. Constant vigilance is essential t maintaining effective freedom of information laws.
The very nature of information as source of power will ensure that public officials and
gnaw away at such laws and their implementation.
government bureaucracies will
reestablishing the importance of these laws. In
Periodic scandals often seem
the lessons of history with respect to
the absence of really juicy
taught and re-learned in perpetuity.
unjustified government

,"

-s
s

FOIA Is$ues: 1997 NashCAR Conference

Good News on Acdess To Federal Computer Records
An amendment expanding the Freedo of
Information Act to cover electronic rec rds was
passed by the House and Senate witho t
opposition, according to a recent articld in the
Washington Post.
The amendment requires that comp er-based
information kept by federal agencies subject
to disclosure. And if a requester wants receive
the records in electronic form, via com$uter
diskette, CD-ROM or the Internet, for e/xample,
then the agency must comply if it
can.

1

-

$

It also encourages speedier responses where
there is compelling need, limits the excuses an
agency may use if challenged in court over
delays, and encourages better management of
records and inquiries, including an index of
released information and separate handling of
simple and complex requests.
FOIA does not cover the federal courts or
Congress, and court rulings have excluded
certain presidential staff and advisory units as
well. The amendment leaves those exclusions
intact.

More information about FOIA Available
Freedom of Information Center:
http://www.miuouri.edu/-foiwwwl

The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the
Press is a nonprofit organization dedicated to
providing
free legal help to reporters and news
organizations.

Center is open 8 am. to 5
Edwards, Manager at
jourke@muccmail.missouri.edu
Reporters Committee for Freedom of $ Ress:
http://www.rcfp.org

Special Sample FOIA'
Letters Included!

Society of Professional Journalists, Northern
California Chapter's Freedom of Information
Committee: Co-chairs are: Dan Borenstein of the
Contra Costa Times 5 10-943-8248 and Elizabeth
Pritzker at the First Amendment Project in
Oakland 5 10-208-7744.
Jennifer LaFleur
Database Editor
San Jose Mercury News

Sample FOIA letters:
Government Agency
Freedom of Information Act Request
Dear FOIA Officer:
Under the provisions of the Freedom
recent (or, if different, specify) IRS

Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, I am requesting copies of the most
filings of the following organization:

Ed's Association
100 Main Street
If there are any fees for searching for, r copying, please supply the records without informing me if the
fees do not exceed f25; otherwise, ple se inform me before you fill the request.

I am requesting this information as a n wspaper reporter for a general circulation newspaper, the San Jose
Mercury News, with a daily circulatioi of approximately 290,000. The information obtained through this
request will be of significant interest ct the newspaper's readen.
As you know, the act pennits you to rt Iuce or waive fees when the release of the information is likely to
contribute significantly to public unde ;tanding of the operations or activities of the government. I believe
that this requests fits that category and 1 therefore ask that you waive any fees.
If all or any part of this request is deni d, please cite the specific exemption(s) which you think justifies
your refusal to release the information and inform me of the appeal procedures available to me under the
law.

I would appreciate your handling this :quest as quickly as possible, and I look forward to hearing from
you within 10 days, as the law stipulat S.
Sincerely,
Betty Scribner
Reporter
Smith Valley Times

