Investigating sexual harassment and misconduct
By Marisa Kwiatkowski, The Indianapolis Star

Start with public records
What public records might be available that could shed light on the situation? Check retention
schedules to get an idea of the types of documentation might have been generated. Some
common types of records that might be helpful:
- Police records
- Local, state and federal court records
- Lawsuits
- Coroner records
- Day care, nursing home or group home inspections
- Disciplinary action records
- Complaints
- Local, federal, state criminal and civil court records
- 990s
- News reports
- Public lists of individuals accused of wrongdoing
It’s helpful to take a few minutes to brainstorm and write a list of potential records and sources.

Keep in mind this reworked version of the fraud triangle:
How is the process supposed to work?

How does it actually work?

Where could it/ does it
break down?

Interviewing sensitive sources
Whenever possible, try to find an intermediary — someone who knows about the allegations
and might be willing to connect you to the survivor. This may be an attorney, victim’s advocate,
detective, prosecutor or loved one. It’s very important that you be sure that individual knows
about the allegation. You don’t want to reveal it to someone who doesn’t know. If there is no
one you can reach out to, contact the individual yourself.

Before you ask a single question:
- Overcommunicate. Explain what you’re doing, why you want to talk and gauge the
individual’s comfort level.
- There’s a difference between what I believe and what I can report.
- Explain why you have to ask detailed questions.
- Discuss the individual’s willingness to be named.
- What questions do you have for me?
Let them guide the conversation, but don’t forget the questions you need answers to.
After the interview:
- Continue to communicate.
- Check details.

Breaking confidentiality barriers
Ask the individual to sign a waiver of confidentiality that would allow you access to their
records. In general, using the waiver also means the records won’t be redacted when they are
provided. It is better to get records directly from agencies or organizations, whenever possible.
-

Child welfare documents
Education records
Medical records
Mental health records
Social service records
When all else fails, ask them for their own records.

Staying organized
-

Use a file share program to manage and organize large volumes of information.
Build topical databases.
Scan important documents through an OCR program.
Familiarize yourself with all information.

Let pushback aid your reporting.
Share all of your findings with the subject of your investigation.
-

Do they dispute the findings? How? Do they have evidence to support that challenge? Is
there more information you need?
What criticism do they have?
Sometimes criticism can help you bulletproof an investigation.

Fact checking
-

Determine the standard that must be met for publication. Consult with editors and legal
counsel.
Ensure fact checking is at the end of the process.
Go line by line. Make sure the entire team is involved. Challenge assertions.

